 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
01 JULY 2020 
 
 
DAY 228 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757 
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 253 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
01 JULY 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 3 of 253 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 1 JULY 2020 
CHAIRPERSON: Good morning Mr Soni, good morning 
everybody.  Are we ready? 
ADV SONI SC:  We are ready.  DCJ I must apologise and so 
does the witness Mr Botes he came from Pretoria but he just 
lost his way. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  And he apologises most profusely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no, no that is fine.  I thought that 
maybe the commission did not give him the correct address 
10 
because I heard that he seems to have gone to the old 
venue. 
ADV SONI SC:  That is what seems to have happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  Okay, no that is fine.  We are 
happy that he is here.  Thank you Mr Botes.  Yes Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Soni before I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson before we start may I put Mr 
Botes’ evidence in context and then we can swear him in so 
that we know that the purpose of his evidence is and it can 
20 
be directed at those issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No you can do it but maybe let us start 
with him being sworn in so then you can put his evidence in 
context. 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please Chairperson. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 4 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then we – you – we begin ja.  Thank 
you. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
ADV BOTES SC:  Francois Weideman Botes. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection taking the 
prescribed oath? 
ADV BOTES SC:  No I do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
ADV BOTES SC:  Yes I do. 
10 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth if so please raise your right hand and say, so help me 
God. 
ADV BOTES SC:  Yes I do, so help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much Mr Botes.  Once 
again thank you for coming to give evidence.  The file that I 
have got here has it got his affidavit? 
ADV SONI SC:  It is right – it is the last one Chairperson in 
Bundle G. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I have got Bundle H.  I have now been 
given Bundle G.  Is Bundle G the correct one?  I have now 
been given Bundle G I had Bundle H. 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh I am sorry.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Ja okay. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 5 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Botes’ affidavits appear at – as SS17 and 
at – they start from page 1 Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  From page? 
ADV SONI SC:  So it is a separate document.  Chairperson 
the way this file has been prepared is because there are 
short witnesses which short affidavits, they decided to put 
everything into one file. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SONI SC:  I do not know if they have put dividers into 
file Mr Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I am not sure what that means.  Are 
you – do you mean that the files have not been paginated in 
the 
way 
they 
– 
they 
are 
supposed 
to 
be 
paginated 
sequentially from page 1 up to the last page? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  DCJ part of the problem was and I was 
not involved in it was that what we would have is a person’s 
affidavit starting at page 15 or in this case it would be 100 
and something and it was thought that it would be better to 
have them start with page 1 of the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no remember we talked it was it on 
20 
Monday. 
ADV SONI SC:  I know it is Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Because we just need to consistent. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It helps when I pick up a file to know what 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 6 of 253 
 
I am expecting. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If I am looking for page 50 or 250 I must 
not find that there are two 250’s. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If I am looking for page 20 I must not find 
that there are three page 20’s you know in the bundle. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it is a simple thing it has been done all 
along.  It is – will you just prevail on those who do this 
10 
because in the end… 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is the evidence leader that takes 
responsibility for this. So when they do it just check that they 
have done it properly. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We do not have a choice now because Mr 
Botes is here we have to continue. 
ADV SONI SC:  He is here yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it is not satisfactory. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We now need to be able to say on all the 
bundles the pagination is from page 1 up to whatever. 
ADV SONI SC:  No sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Even if there are different statements 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 7 of 253 
 
inside.  If they are in the same bundle the pagination covers 
everything sequentially. 
ADV SONI SC:  You want it from page 1 to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  Okay so how do I get to Mr 
Botes affidavit on this bundle? 
ADV SONI SC:  It is marked Exhibit SS17. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV SONI SC:  I again apologise to you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay alright.  They must just fix the one 
we discussed – was it Monday. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If they have not fixed it and then they must 
sort this one out afterwards. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  DCJ before I lead the evidence of the 
witness because perhaps, I should place on record the 
background against which Mr Botes is being called because 
the matters that are contained in the documents before you 
are much wider than what the commission is dealing with.  
20 
But there is a significant part of Mr Botes’ affidavit and 
statement to the Pretoria Bar Counsel that contains matters 
that are of interest to the commission.  But I will just give the 
background Mr Chairperson.   
You will recall Chairperson that Ms Ngoye gave 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 8 of 253 
 
evidence that in regard to the Siyaya matters there – the 
matters had been in court and they had been referred to 
arbitration.   
There were five matters that had been referred to 
arbitration.  And the arbitrations we are going go on and then 
– and this now is the perspective from the PRASA Legal – 
the internal legal team.  And they – they were told that the 
Chair – the newly appointed Chairperson Ms Makhubele now 
Judge Makhubele was going to be dealing with the matter 
and you will recall that they said that when they contacted 
10 
PRASA’s attorneys PRASA’s attorneys said to them PRASA’s 
attorneys had been instructed not to communicate with the 
internal legal team.   
Then they found out that the matters had been 
settled and that there was going to be an application to court 
to make the arbitration awards and orders of court.  When 
they found out about that they then approached their firm of 
attorneys different from the ones that had initiated the 
settlement or had concluded the settlement to have those 
orders rescinded.  Eventually it was rescinded.   
20 
So that is the perspective from the PRASA internal 
legal team.  We are now going to deal with the perspective 
of communications between Ms Makhubele and the lawyers 
for the liquidators in the matter.  Mr Botes was counsel for 
the 
liquidators 
in 
the 
matter 
and 
at 
issue 
was 
a 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 9 of 253 
 
communication that Ms Makhubele had made to him saying 
that the attorneys who were applying for the rescission 
application had no authority to do so.   
At 
issue 
again 
to 
put 
Mr 
Botes’ 
evidence 
in 
perspective is that when this application was made Mr Botes 
was surprised having regard to the fact that in a previous 
communication Judge Makhubele had said to him the matters 
are settled and the matters in fact were settled.  So he 
asked her by way of a Whatsapp message: 
“Are you bringing the application?” 
10 
And it is that message that she sent to him to say 
those lawyers have no authority that is in issue in these 
proceedings because what it did was there was massive 
publicity around the issue at that time and Judge Makhubele 
then laid a complaint against Mr Botes for revealing in court 
and through his attorneys a communication she had sent to 
him.  So there is no dispute about the communication as I 
understand it.   
There is a dispute about whether Mr Botes should 
have revealed it at all.  In Mr Botes’ response to the 
20 
complaint laid by Ms Makhubele to the Bar Counsel he 
revealed how the communications on this issue started 
between him and Ms Makhubele and it is for that reason that 
we are going to call – we are calling Mr Botes.  So it is a 
very narrow issue as far as the commission goes as between 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 10 of 253 
 
Mr Botes and Ms Makhubele there are other issues but with 
respect Chairperson they do not concern the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine.  I think that it is important 
also to mention other features that you might not have 
mentioned that make the commission to be interested in the 
interactions between the then Chairperson of the PRASA 
Board and Mr Botes.  Namely that PRASA is one of those 
SOE’s in respect of which for many years they have been in 
the public domain all kinds of allegations of serious 
corruption and maladministration.  And except for what we 
10 
heard from Mr Popo Molefe who was Chairperson of the 
Board of PRASA at a certain stage except for the attempts 
that his Board tried to do it appears that not much has been 
done by anybody to deal with those allegations of corruption 
at PRASA.   
And the former Chairperson of the Board now Judge 
Makhubele her assumption of duty and her appointment to – 
as 
Chairperson 
of 
the 
Board 
also 
happened 
under 
circumstances that are quite unusual. She appears to have 
been appointed sometime in October I do not know if it was 
20 
the 19 October. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes it was the 19t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  2017.  Prior to that she had been 
nominated for appointment as a Judge of the High Court and 
I think early in October I do not know if it was the 2 October, 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 11 of 253 
 
she had been interviewed by the JSC for the position of – of 
a Judge.  Now – so there are questions about why she 
allowed herself to be appointed when she would have known 
either that she was about to be appointed to – as a Judge or 
that there was a very good chance she would be appointed 
as Judge.   
I mean I am one of those people who know a lot 
about what happens in the JSC because I have been 
interviewed probably about six times over the past 23 years.  
Very u – I mean very often when you have been interviewed 
10 
by the JSC you get told either by the same day or within the 
next day or two whether the JSC will advise the President to 
appoint you.  And the role of the JSC and the President also 
is such that the President – the general view is that the 
President is bound to go along with the advice of the JSC.  
But even if it was said what the JSC does as strong 
recommendation over the past 20 or whatever years I think it 
would be difficult to find any case where the JSC advised the 
President to appoint a person as a Judge and the President 
did not appoint.   
20 
So there are questions about why would she have 
accepted appointment as Chairperson of the Board when she 
would have known that in all probability beginning of the 
year 2018, she would be expected to assume duty.   
So there are those questions and then of course part 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 12 of 253 
 
of the evidence of Ms Ngoye if I recall correctly was that 
after she had arrived as Chairperson of – she had arrived at 
PRASA as Chairperson of the Board her interest for 
purposes of settlement was on Siyaya matters even though 
according to Ms Ngoye there were a lot of other matters with 
even larger amounts involved. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  She only showed interest in that one.  So it 
is against that background that the commissions wants to 
see what role she may have played and then the exchanges 
10 
that she might have had with Mr Botes.  You know that is the 
context. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I thought I must just mention because 
also I think it important the public should just have as good 
background as possible. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  May I in fairness to Ms Makhubele 
Chairperson say that she has asked to consult with the 
commission? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  So that she could answer those very issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh well that is what she said to me in a 
telephone conversation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 13 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Last Saturday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  So – but Chairperson those are matters that 
will obviously have to be raised. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  With her. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  But – but we would respect that is the full 
background against which Mr Botes’ evidence must be 
assessed. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, no she definitely has recently 
indicated that she will co-operate and she makes herself 
available to be interviewed by the commission’s legal team. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the legal team has been in touch with 
her. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And certainly, her side of the story will be 
heard.  I do not know whether Mr Soni you want to say 
anything about a request for investigations – forensic 
20 
investigations? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Mr Chairperson as I understood what 
Ms Makhubele said is that because Mr Botes’ evidence – 
well communication to the commission was based on some 
Whatsapp messages between him and Ms Makhubele his 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 14 of 253 
 
phone had been subjected to a forensic analysis by the 
commission and she wanted the same in respect of her 
phone. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Hm. 
ADV SONI SC:  We indicated that we would have a person 
from the commission’s forensic team at the interview – at the 
consultation with her and if it was necessary then those 
investigations or the inquiries would be made.  But she 
would have to indicate what is it that is in dispute between 
her and Mr Botes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Hm.  She is aware of course and she 
note that Mr Botes is going to give evidence this morning? 
ADV BOTES SC:  I told her on Saturday and I called her 
again last night. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Chair after we had finished Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  So I did tell her that – and she asked if her – 
Mr Botes’ evidence could be deferred until she gave 
evidence and I pointed out to her that that is not how the 
20 
commission operates.  It is in fact very seldom if it has ever 
happened that when a person who is called by the 
commission gives evidence that the person so called 
implicated person is immediately called.  But I did indicate to 
her that Mr Botes will be called today. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 15 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine.  I am sure that she 
will feel free to pursue if she believes she needs that 
forensic investigation to do so. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  My understanding of what she really wants 
to be revealed by the forensic investigation because I have 
seen the correspondence.  I have read an affidavit she has 
deposed to.  My prima facie view is that the issue that she 
wants to be revealed is an issue that does not appear to me 
to be relevant to the issues that the commission is looking 
10 
at. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But that is not her final decision.  She 
should feel free to persuade me that it is relevant and then if 
I am persuaded then we can look at that. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And she did mention about – I think she 
did mention something about wishing to cross-examine Mr 
Botes but you know you – everyone applied for Leave to 
Cross-examine. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And there are certain requirements that 
need to be met.  One of which obviously will be whether the 
cross-examination will be on issues that are relevant to what 
the commission is looking at or not. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 16 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So she can bring that application or move 
that application in due course if leave is granted, I have no 
doubt Mr Botes would make himself available after that. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I think we – I think we have put 
everything on record properly but if there is something, I 
have left out you can indicate. 
ADV SONI SC:  No Chairperson just – just to point out that 
we will point all of these matters out when we consult with 
10 
her next. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  Okay thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Botes just if I can ask you – you have 
submitted 
to 
the 
commission 
two 
affidavits 
and 
your 
response to Judge Makhubele’s complaint against you to the 
Bar Counsel – to the Pretoria Bar Counsel, would that be 
correct Mr Botes? 
ADV BOTES SC:  Thank you very much Chairperson.  Thank 
you 
very 
much Advocate 
Soni. 
 
Yes 
I 
provided 
the 
commission with one affidavit that is the affidavit that 
20 
appears on Annexure SS17 on page 57 58, 59 and at the top 
of page 60 that is my signature which appears on that 
affidavit.   
That is the so called – I see it is marked the second 
affidavit and the report that – the second or the first affidavit 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 17 of 253 
 
is the affidavit that the commission – Mr Commissioner will 
find SS17 that is the first page, page 303 up until 06 and 
that is my signature which appears right on the middle of the 
page and the whole purpose of these affidavits were to 
introduce the response to the complaint that was lodged by 
the Honourable Justice Makhubele against me and that 
response Chairperson will find from FWB08 right until the 
end and that will be page 24 and right at the end of the 
document I have signed it on the 17 May 2019. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.  Mr Soni I thought you 
10 
should start by getting Mr Botes to tell us who he is? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He is an advocate and which bar, for how 
long he has been in practice those preliminaries just get 
them out of the way before we go into the affidavit. 
ADV BOTES SC:  Chairperson I have studied at the 
University of Pretoria obtained the degrees BLC and LLB. I 
joined the Pretoria Society of Advocates in 1996. I did 
pupillage, past pupillage and I commenced practice in 1997, 
the 1 December 1997.  Sorry I did pupillage in 1997, past 
20 
pupillage then commenced practice on the 1 December 197.  
I remained a member of the Pretoria Society of Advocates. I 
am still a member of the Pretoria Society of Advocates.  I 
was elected to the Bar Counsel in 2005. I was elected as the 
Deputy Chairperson of the Bar Counsel during this period 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 18 of 253 
 
which is relevant for purposes of this commission.  I served 
as the Chairman of the Pretoria Bar Counsel two years ago 
and I received – I was recommended for senior status in 
2013 and the President, the former President Zuma signed 
my letters patent in September 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you I think that is the background 
that I wanted us to deal with first ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now Mr Botes the – do you know Ms 
Makhubele? 
ADV BOTES SC:  Chairperson I know Judge Makhubele very 
10 
well.  I know her since I have commenced my practice in 
1997.  We were members of the Bar Counsel for many years 
and allow me we have developed a very, very good 
relationship.  A very cordial relationship.   
I always encouraged her jokingly and seriously that she is 
ready to be appointed.  She is ready to grace the bench and 
whenever I saw her, I said to her, but come on, come on you 
must do it now, the time is right.  And we – we really, really 
established a very, very good relationship based on integrity, 
based on trust. We were never opponents in matters.   
20 
We were never involved in – in litigation and – but we 
really, really got along very, very well.  And I knew that she 
was about to – about to be interviewed by the Judicial 
Services Commission.  I also knew then that in October – 
early October 2017 that the commission sat, Judicial 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 19 of 253 
 
Services Commission and I also knew because in our society 
when one of our members receives news the day, on the day, 
the evening or the day thereafter that they have been 
recommended it spreads like a veld fire in our society and 
we also proud of it.   
We pride ourselves to make our members available to – to 
do Judicial service and I was very pleased.  I did 
unfortunately not phone her at the time I was little bit busy 
with – with other issues and when I received her call early in 
November I was in my vehicle travelling from or to a 
10 
destination. I had her cell phone number on my cellular 
telephone and when the phone rang and it said Nana 
Makhubele my first reaction was to congratulate her.  I said, 
Nana this is now a very pleasant call congratulations upon 
your appointment.   
My submission was it was overdue but I wish you a very 
pleasant, a very prosperous career on the bench and my 
words were still hopefully we will see you in higher echelons 
and 
maybe 
an 
appointment 
in 
the 
SCA. 
And 
Judge 
Makhubele was extremely friendly like she always is.  She is 
20 
a friendly person.  I have never experienced any animosity 
between us and yes so that is how the conversation started.  
I was totally unaware of her being appointed as the 
Chairperson of the interim Board of PRASA.  It was never 
brought to my attention.  I was simply totally unaware of it 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 20 of 253 
 
and when she informed me that she was appointed as the 
Chairperson of the interim Board it did not come as a shock 
it just came as a surprise.   
I said, oh well that is – that is good, good to hear.  I did 
not know what the purpose of the interim Board was, I do not 
know how long her tenure would have been.  I do not know 
what the background was, that was the first time that I have 
learnt about her appointment.   
I thought that well now that she is appointed in that 
position maybe the purpose of the phone call is to engage 
10 
my services in some manner or another and I ask her, how 
can I be of assistance Judge Makhubele and she said to me 
that she was appointed as the Chairperson of the interim 
Board by the former President who deployed her there and I 
ask 
her 
but 
for 
what 
reason 
and 
she 
said 
to 
me 
unequivocally and in no uncertain terms to sort out the mess 
at PRASA and to clean up.  Those were her words.   
She then mentioned to me that it came to her knowledge 
that I am involved in pending litigation where Siyaya 
Consulting Engineers is or was the plaintiff.  I said to her, 
20 
yes but before you go any further PRASA is represented by 
senior counsel Advocate Kennedy Tsatswane who is the 
current Chairperson of Johannesburg Bar Counsel who I 
know very well and who I have a very, very, very good 
relationship with and this matters there were five matters.  
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 21 of 253 
 
These matters have a history.   
It is not something that just came about.  We are literally 
Chairperson engaged in high, high profile litigation.  If I just 
can go back – back one step.  I got involved in the five 
matters during 2017 and that was when all these matters 
were set down for hearing in – on the same day in Pretoria 
High Court and at the call of the roll before the Deputy 
Judge President is Judge Ledwaba that was on the 30 May 
2017.   
The liquidators for Siyaya and PRASA’s team of attorneys 
10 
led by Advocate Kennedy Tsatswane SC decided, let us 
consolidate all five of the matters and refer it for arbitration.  
Because the issues Chairperson were crisp.  There was one 
– there were two primarily issues.   
1. Did Siyaya do the work that are reflected and contained 
in the invoices?  If that is so the next question is: 
2. What should the quantum be? 
That – that was the litigation.  We then prepared draft 
orders.  We provided the court with those draft orders and 
we then subsequently decided to engage retired Judge Fritz 
20 
Brand who retired at the Supreme Court of Appeal to hear all 
these 
matters 
by 
way 
of 
arbitration. 
 
We 
made 
an 
appointment here in Sandton at the Chambers of Advocate 
Tsatswane SC to meet with Judge Brand.  We ironed out the 
– the formalities and the procedure.   
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 22 of 253 
 
There were definite time lines that we agreed upon.  
Went to discover further particulars, experts etcetera.  When 
– how many days we – we had in mind for the arbitration to 
be conducted etcetera.  And of all that fell in place like we 
have arranged and how it was agreed upon.   
However, Chairperson this arbitration never got out of 
the blocks.  This kite did not get into the air for various 
reasons.  One of the reasons were that further particulars 
from our side were not forthcoming.  We were struggling to 
get information but be that as it may Judge Brand was 
10 
always available.  He said to us, when you guys have sorted 
out your – your internal housekeeping, phone me I am in 
Stellenbosch we can make an arrangement, we can – we can 
arrange dates and we can let this arbitration get on its way.   
So that is – that is the background to my involvement 
in the matter.  But also, noteworthy Chairperson there were 
two attorneys, firms of attorneys involved on behalf of 
Siyaya.  It was not only Siyaya there were two companies.  
Siyaya Consulting which were in liquidation and another 
company which were not in liquidation.  So the attorneys who 
20 
dealt with this matters from the inception I only got involved 
shortly before the trial – before – ag in – in May 2017.  That 
was Mr Tshepo Mathopo he is a well-known attorney in 
Johannesburg and Mr Mathopo and I went through all the 
pleadings, all the documents Chairperson.   
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 23 of 253 
 
The discovered documents were literally thousands 
and thousands of pages.  90% of it totally irrelevant but be 
that as it may and also Mr Johan Crouser from Crouser 
Incorporated he was in Pretoria and he also played a role 
because it was not only Mr Mathopo’s correspondent in 
Pretoria but he was actively involved in these matters.   
Be that as it may Judge Makhubele just to turn back 
to our – to our conversation, our telephonic conversation I 
said to her, Nana PRASA is represented by Mr Madimpi 
Mogashoa from Diale Mogashoa Attorneys.  He is a very 
10 
senior attorney and PRASA is represented by senior counsel 
and junior counsel.   
Why are you phoning me?  And she said to me, I do 
not trust the internal legal department of PRASA.  I do not 
trust what is being conveyed to me.  The attorneys, she used 
the word is captured and she feels that she is being 
undermined.  And I said to her, but why me?  Why do you 
phone me?  She said, no I want to establish the true facts.  
What is going on in this litigation?  What is the status of this 
pending litigation?  I said to her, summonses were issued, 
20 
pleas were filed, initially bare denials, later on amendments 
were effected.   
I told her about the pending arbitration before Judge 
Fritz Brand and she asked me if I can give her more 
information.  I said Nana what I can give you is the 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 24 of 253 
 
pleadings, the summonses in each of these matters, the 
pleas, there was an insolvency enquiry Chairperson that was 
conducted over a period of five days in September.   
The Commissioner prepared a very, very thorough 
report.  I was in possession of that report.  I can provide you 
with that report and there was also a transcription made of 
the insolvency enquiry.  Just to put you in the picture, why 
did we decide to initiate an insolvency enquiry?  Mr Mathopo 
and the liquidators at the time thought it was prudent to 
decide or determine for once and for all are we chasing a 
10 
ghost or is there genuine merit in these matters?  For good 
reason because the – the estate did not have the funds to 
litigate ad infinitum and just to waste money.   
There were claims by former employees and creditors 
and Mr Mathopo and the liquidators view was, we do not 
have that luxury of a war chest worth of millions that we can 
litigate rather err on the side of caution that was also my 
advice.  And we then decided Chairperson rather spend 3, 4 
or 5 days in the insolvency enquiry.   
Call these witnesses from PRASA who was personally 
20 
involved in these projects and to find out from them was the 
work done, is the monies due, what is the problem?  And if 
their evidence is, listen your – the liquidator or the plaintiff, 
the liquidated company or the plaintiff did not do the work or 
there was fraud or whatever then we would have known how 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 25 of 253 
 
to advise the liquidators so that they can report back to the – 
to the creditors, the concursus creditorum.   
So having said that that is exactly what we did but I 
made the decision to inform Mr Mogashoa and to invite 
Advocate Kennedy Tsatswane to be present at the insolvency 
enquiry.   
I said to them, guys be present, here you can hear 
with your own ears what these witnesses are going to testify 
to and then you can also decide how you want to go about.  
If they decide or if their evidence under oath is detrimental 
10 
towards the plaintiffs well then so be it.  And vice versa 
because we cannot carry on like this and just waste 
hundreds and hundreds of thousands of Rands in litigation.  
Both Mr Mogashoa and Advocate Tsatswane SC accepted my 
invitation, they were present.   
We called witnesses Chairperson, witnesses who 
were personally involved in these matters and they testified.  
I asked them questions, listen this project, what was done 
etcetera, etcetera?  All of them had no reservation to testify 
in front of the Commissioner and their evidence was – was 
20 
proper presented.   
I 
also 
provided 
Advocate 
Tsatswane 
SC 
an 
opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses that is on record.  
I said to him, Kennedy you are welcome cross-examine the 
witnesses.  He said, no it is not necessary to do so they 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 26 of 253 
 
received their rights.   
So what Mr Kruger, he was the Presiding Officer in 
the insolvency enquiry he prepared a report.  To cut the long 
story short Chairperson I made myself available.  I took it 
upon myself and I said to Judge Makhubele, Nana what I will 
do is I will make copies of all the pleadings, the summonses 
and the pleas, the insolvency, a copy of the transcript of the 
insolvency enquiry and Mr Kruger’s report.  So that will give 
you a clear indication of what the status of the – of the 
matters are.   
10 
She asked me, what is your – what do you think?  
What is your view?  I said, the evidence that was led in the 
insolvency enquiry I am not convinced that the quantum has 
been addressed.  I think that is an enquiry for another day 
but that some of the work was done.  Yes it seems like it.  
There was one witness Chairperson who said that he still 
wanted to go and do a quantification.  He was not hundred 
percent sure and we allowed him that opportunity.   
Be that as it may Judge Makhubele then asked me 
will I then collate those documents which I did and I then 
20 
after our – our conversation Chairperson I immediately like 
the next telephone call alerted both Mr Mathopo and Mr 
Crouser because having regard to the ethical rules I was 
extremely, extremely I will not say nervous, I will not say 
anxious, I was worried and I informed them.  I said, guys it is 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 27 of 253 
 
very important that our approach in this instance and 
specifically what transpired now we must either continue on 
this path or we must terminate this communication because 
this can lead to – to big problems.   
We then took the decision assist the Judge.  Judge 
Makhubele was appointed as the – as the Chairperson of the 
interim Board of PRASA assist her insofar as we can but 
remain alerted.  Do not go into the arena.  Do not do 
anything 
that 
is 
unethical. 
 
And 
very 
important 
we 
communicate with each other.  Me communicating with the 
10 
two sets of attorneys and me communicating with Judge 
Makhubele, everything was transparent.   
I then prepared the bundle.  I indexed the bundle.  I 
paginated the bundle and I made an appointment to meet 
with Judge Makhubele at the offices of PRASA and that 
happened on the – on the 14 November 2017.  Judge 
Makhubele explained to me where PRASA’s headquarters 
were judge... uh-uh, Chairperson.  Um, I have lived in the 
vicinity as a... as a student because it is in the heart of the 
student um, community. 
20 
 
I made my... I attended the... the uh, building.  I was 
taken up to the top floor, very impressive, and I was made... 
I was invited into a big boardroom and I was... I sat there 
and I was armed with my bundle of documents. 
 
Judge Makhubele um, entered the room.  Once again, 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 28 of 253 
 
very friendly.  Very cordial.  Um, very humble.  She is a 
humble person.  And she discussed the various matters with 
me. 
 
I 
told 
her 
what 
the 
bundle 
of 
documents 
consist...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  But I want to interrupt you Mr Botes.  I am 
very sorry. 
ADV BOTES SC:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe it is not so serious.  I wanted to tell 
earlier.  In uh, either... in her affidavit, she also says here 
you... you are... you are a very good person.  I think you 
10 
said you are charming. [laughs] 
ADV BOTES SC:  [laughs]  I am not going to.. [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs]  She... she... she may days apart 
where she says uh, you know, you... you... you are very... a 
very good person.  You know each other quite well and uh, 
you know, you are friendly and so on.   
 
So I just thought because you have been uh, you know, 
saying very good things about her.  I must just tell you that 
she also has...[intervenes]  
ADV BOTES SC:  Thank you. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...good thing to say about you. 
ADV BOTES SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I interrupted you I am sorry. 
ADV BOTES SC:  Thank you.  No, Chairperson I do not want 
to delve into... into matters which are irrelevant.  The long 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 29 of 253 
 
and the short is.  I have provided her with the documents 
and I also said to her: 
“Take these documents.  Take it whoever, the board.  
Study these documents.  Make up your mind.  But we 
must 
somehow 
or 
another 
get 
the 
arbitrations 
finalised.  It is not in the interest of justice to let 
these matters just grown old”. 
 
And that in essence, that was it.  Then... and allow me 
Chairperson.  Judge Makhubele and I communicated via 
WhatsApp and telephone calls regularly thereafter. 
10 
 
All of those WhatsApp’s, all of those communications I 
revealed to the investigators of this Commission.  I had no 
objection whatsoever for them to make copies of my cell 
phone.   
 
They made a mirror copy of my cell phone and my iPad 
which I have with me.  I have got absolutely nothing to hide 
and there is nothing absolutely nothing untoward what... 
what happened. 
 
Then it culminated into a settlement.  In December, 
Chairperson, 
Judge 
Makhubele 
and 
I 
um, 
during 
our 
20 
discussions, she then informed me that PRASA’s board was 
satisfied that the work was done, the money is due and 
payable, and that these matters should be settled. 
 
And I said: 
“Very well.  If that is the decision.  Well, then that is 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 30 of 253 
 
the decision.  Inform your attorneys as such so that 
we can get um, the boat or the train out of the 
station”. 
 
Madimpe... Mr Madimpe Mogashoa then prepared a 
formal tender in terms of Rule 34 of the Uniform Rules of the 
High Court and that tender entailed Chairperson, the capital 
amounts in all these matters.   
 
I then informed Mr Mathopo and Mr Crouse that is not 
how 
I 
understood 
the 
communication 
between 
Judge 
Makhubele and I because she also mentioned interest. 
10 
 
And there is also a letter to that effect which PRASA’s 
interim board despatched to their attorneys in which they 
instructed the attorneys, like the tender and provide for the 
capital plus interest but not legal costs. 
 
So 
then 
there 
was 
a... 
there 
was 
communication 
exchanged and eventually, their letter came back and said: 
“Sorry, we made a mistake.  It is the capital plus the 
interest.  The interest must be calculated.” 
 
And I prepared then a draft award because the... the... 
the plan was to inform Judge Brand: 
20 
“Do not spend any more time on... on these matters.  
We have reached the settlement.  What we will do is, 
we will approach you and then you can make the 
settlements and award”. 
 
And I took it upon myself Chairperson to prepare those 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 31 of 253 
 
awards.  Those awards are attached to my affidavit.  And I 
despatched the awards to Mr Madimpe Mogashoa.  He took 
instructions 
and 
he 
was 
satisfied. 
 
There 
is 
also 
correspondence to that effect. 
 
Judge Brand was coincidentally busy with an arbitration 
in Pretoria and the offices of Adams & Adams Incorporated in 
Brooklyn Bridge.   
 
He then communicated to us.  He said: 
“Guys, if you are on the same page, I can make 
myself available in a lunch hour.  Um, whenever it is 
10 
convenient for you, come and then I will make uh, the 
awards... awards of the arbitration”. 
 
But Judge Brand asked me and Mr Mogashoa both to 
present because he wants to be satisfied that this is a 
proper settlement.  His words to us um, were: 
“I do not want to come back here”. 
And that is exactly what we did.  I prepared the um, draft 
awards.  We then um, made an appointment and we saw 
Judge Brand at the offices of Adams & Adams on the 
7t h of February... 
20 
 
I just want to get the exact... lay my hand on the exact 
date. 
 
Uh, 
Chairperson, 
that 
was 
on 
the... 
ja, 
7 t h of February 2018.  And Judge Brand made all these 
awards, awards of the arbitration in my presence and in Mr 
Mogashoa’s presence. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 32 of 253 
 
 
We were all satisfied the settlement was reached.  And 
that is pretty much when the communication between myself 
and Judge Makhubele also stopped because there was 
nothing more to communicate about.  Everything was settled.   
But Chairperson, money was not forthcoming.  Money 
did not flow.  There was provision made where the money 
should be paid into um, into Mr Crouse’s um, trust account.   
And what subsequently transpired, but I did not play 
a role in that, is that the attorneys then decided to um, bring 
an application for these awards to be made orders of court in 
10 
accordance with the provisions of the Arbitration Act and I 
became involved. 
 
Then I prepared all the applications.  The notice of 
motions, the founding affidavits with the annexures and all 
those applications were properly served on Mr Madimpe 
Mogashoa’s office and they were set down for hearing in 
Pretoria on the unopposed motion court roll for Friday, the 
9t h of March 2018. 
 
In that week, the attorneys for... for... for the liquidators 
started receiving correspondence from Bowman Gilfillan.  
20 
Correspondence to the affect that their... their instructions to 
oppose these applications. 
 
Mr Mathopo, Mr Crouse and I, Chairperson had various 
discussions and our biggest challenge was, what do we 
about this?  Should we say to them, “Very well.  We are 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 33 of 253 
 
going to remove the matters and allow him an opportunity to 
file affidavits. 
 
Or, are we going to persist with these matters?  And we 
then decided, let us rather give them the benefit of the doubt 
and ask them to produce authority in accordance with the 
provisions of Rule 7 of the Uniform Rules of Court. 
 
Unfortunately, they could not.  They could not provide us 
with uh, board resolution on a piece of paper which 
emanated from PRASA’s board that they are duly appointed 
as PRASA’s attorneys to oppose these matters. 
10 
 
We then said to ourselves: 
“Well, if they... they are unable to do so let us... let 
us proceed with these matters.” 
 
On the 9 t h, Friday the 9 t h, three applications were the 
unopposed motion court roll before one judge.  Both acting 
judges.  Acting um, Judge John Holland-Muter and acting 
Judge Petersen.   
 
Bowman Gilfillan, on the instructions from, I assume, 
PRASA’s legal department, instructed counsel who was at 
court with the whole team.  I think Ms Lata(?) [00:09:05] 
20 
Mabuya was also there.   
 
Uh, another gentleman whose name also appears on 
the papers, Mr Fani Dingiswayo.  He was also present and 
that... and we started... we started interacting with these 
people.  They are colleagues. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 34 of 253 
 
 
And I said to them: 
“But guys, how on earth can you oppose these 
applications without a mandate?” 
 
And they... Chairperson, they persisted.  They said: 
“But we have a mandate.  We are entitled to be here 
and to oppose these applications”. 
 
And my response was: 
“But what on bases?  We have settled it.  There is 
the awards.” 
 
And they said: 
10 
“Listen, we were not consulted with all of this.  We 
want an opportunity to ventilate the disputes and to 
put...” 
 
I took it upon myself, Chairperson.  This is where the 
dispute emanated from what I did.  I then despatched a 
WhatsApp or an SMS to Judge Makhubele and I asked her: 
“Does Bowman... or did PRASA’s board instructs 
Attorneys, Bowman Gilfillan or counsel to oppose 
these matters which have been set down in this 
court?” 
20 
 
And her response form part of the correspondence in 
which she unequivocally answered that to me and she said: 
“No, they do not have that authority.  They do not 
have instructions on behalf of PRASA”. 
 
And Chairperson, I was satisfied with that message on 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 35 of 253 
 
my cell phone that we were right.  We were entitled to 
persist in the applications and to ask for judgment.   
 
We then uh, by my colleague and I, on behalf of PRASA, 
under the instructions of Bowman Gilfillan, approached 
Judge Petersen and said to him: 
“We... we... we do not think it will make sense for two 
courts to hear exactly the same sets of facts.  It is 
the unopposed motion court.  They are going to... or 
PRASA is going to apply for a postponement so as to 
give them an opportunity to enter into the... into the 
10 
litigation.  Can we not take the two or the three files 
with him and transfer it to Court-2A to Judge Holland-
Muter and then we can make our submissions before 
Judge Holland-Muter?” 
 
He allowed us to do so.  And when I stood up eventually 
after all the unopposed matters were entertained, I directed 
um, Judge Holland-Muter’s attention to what we are dealing 
with.  What... to the whole background and the history.  And 
I also said to him: 
“Our learned friends are here today because their 
20 
instructions are to oppose and to uh, prevent these 
matters from proceeding today”. 
 
And Judge Holland-Muter asked me: 
“Do you know on what basis?” 
 
And I explained that to him. So then the arguments 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 36 of 253 
 
commenced before Judge Holland-Muter in um, in open 
court and Judge Holland-Muter quite correctly said to me: 
“But Mr Botes, it is either they have instructions.  
There is such a decision by the board or there is 
not.  I mean, if there is such a decision, I am not 
going to give judgment to the tune of more than 
R 45 million if the opposition is bona fide and 
genuine”. 
 
And I said: 
“But of course not.  I agree hundred percent with 
10 
you.  So all that I can present you with M’Lord, is my 
cell phone.  There is Exhibit A.  This the question 
and there the answer comes”. 
 
And Judge Holland-Muter took it into consideration and 
Chairperson, when he read it, he said to my opponent: 
“But is there anything better?  I mean, you... are you 
going to present me with something better than I 
have in front me?” 
 
And they said no.  And on that basis judgment um, was 
granted and each and every of these matters, as applied for 
20 
in the notice of motion.  And what transpired then is Mr 
Mathopo and Mr Crouse instructed, armed with these 
judgments, applied for a writ to be um, issued by the 
registrar in Pretoria. 
 
And then instructions were given to the sheriff in 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 37 of 253 
 
Pretoria, Pretoria East, Ms Lana Burger to attach the funds 
in PRASA’s account.   Chairperson, do not keep me to it but 
it was in excess of R 16 million.  Or just below sixteen or 
just in excess of 16 million but it was a substantial amount 
of money. 
 
And the sheriff um, executive those writs, attached the 
monies in PRASA’s bank account.  It was withdrawn and 
kept in her trust account for the, I think the 14-day period or 
the 15-day period to um, expire so as to give PRASA an 
opportunity to do whatever they deemed prudent in the 
10 
circumstances. 
 
That... and that is what Advocate Soni referred to.  That 
must be met with an urgent application.  Actually, two 
urgent applications.  One in Cape Town which is irrelevant 
for purposes of this inquiry and one application in Pretoria 
where PRASA asks for interim relief, pending an application 
to have those awards made by Judge Brand on the 
7 t h of February 2018 to have that reviewed and set aside. 
 
All that they ask for interim relief for the sheriff not to 
pay over the funds to um, to the liquidators pending this 
20 
process.  I was not involved in the application because I 
had other commitments in Umtata but the um, liquidators 
briefed senior counsel uh, from Johannesburg to attend to 
the application. 
 
The application came in the urgent court before his 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 38 of 253 
 
Lordship, Mr Justice Ranchod and Judge Ranchod’s view 
was a proper case has been made out for interim relief.  
There was a prima facie case and so um, he granted an 
interim order.  
 
And eventually Chairperson um, the matter became uh, 
there was a return day.  The return day came before the 
Honourable Mr Justice Neil Tuchten. 
 
There was no opposition and our stance was, we had to 
decide, are we going to oppose this application?  But 
Chairperson, regard being had to the serious allegations.  
10 
The serious allegations that were made by PRASA’s legal 
department in their papers. 
 
Um, my view was and my... my... my advice to the 
liquidators um, was: 
“Listen guys, one... if half of this true... I mean, 
there is... there are serious problems.  And some... 
somebody is... is playing with fire.  And secondly 
um, how we are going to rebut it?  We do not know.  
I mean, we are simply standing outside in the cold.  
We got now an idea what the internal mechanisms 
20 
and workings are.  I would advise anybody to throw 
good money after bad money and to oppose these 
applications.  Rather, allow them an opportunity, set 
it aside.  Set the uh, awards also aside but go back 
to Judge Brand and start afresh with these um, 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 39 of 253 
 
arbitrations”. 
 
And that is exactly what happened.  Unfortunately, or 
fortunately, Judge Tuchten had all the documents before 
him.  He did not have any opposing affidavits before him but 
Chairperson, he correctly, in my view, deemed it prudent to 
prepare a prober judgment which he did. 
 
He considered all the facts before him and he made 
certain remarks pertaining to the manner in which these 
matters were attended to and conducted.  
 
He mentioned Judge Makhubele’s name in... in his 
10 
judgment and that led to two... to two issues.  One, the 
complaint that Judge Makhubele initiated against Judge 
Tuchten. 
 
Um, I read the complaint.  I had the um, opportunity to 
read his response and that was referred to the Judicial 
Services Commission and he was um, subsequently found... 
the Judicial Services Commission under the chairmanship of 
the Honourable Justice Goliath then found that there were no 
merit in the complaints against Judge Tuchten. 
 
But similarly, there was no this complaint against me 
20 
and the veracity of the complaint Chairperson was that the 
communication 
between 
Judge 
Makhubele 
and 
I, 
she 
regarded as personal and as privileged.  That is what she 
said in her complaint. 
 
And she was extremely upset because I have provided 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 40 of 253 
 
the court with this specific message and she, in her view, 
that was untoward.  That was not the manner in which she 
thought 
that 
the 
matter 
is 
going 
to 
be 
dealt 
with 
notwithstanding earlier messages which are also canvassed 
and provided for in my report which since the inception of 
our communication, she sent me a WhatsApp and she said to 
me: 
“Francois, it is of paramount importance that we are 
transparent.  We play open cards.  We are above 
board.  We do not want to become embroil in a 
10 
situation, he says she says or, there is something 
unethical”. 
 
And that is also contained in this.  And I was very 
comfortable with that.  Judge... ag uh, Chairperson when I 
received the complaint... ag, like all of us are, you... you... 
you are disappointed. 
 
Uh, the complaint was filed in a Lever Arch file.  I think 
it was more than a hundred, a hundred-and-fifty pages and I 
literally had to sit and to work through this because a lot is 
at stake. 
20 
 
Um, I am Deputy Chairperson of the Bar Council.  Um, I 
am the Chairperson of the Financial Committee of the 
Pretoria Bar.  I am a senior counsel.  I have been acting 
various as various things in Pretoria. 
 
Um, this is serious and I prepared a very comprehensive 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 41 of 253 
 
um, answer or response which then served before the 
Ethical... Professional and Ethical Committee of the Pretoria 
Bar Council.   
 
Chairperson, I believe that invitation was extended to 
Judge Makhubele to reply to the allegations.  My... my 
response Chairperson um, was approximately 55-pages 
because I realised that I have got one opportunity to tell my 
whole story.  Exactly which I did. 
 
Um, I believe that Judge Makhubele then decided not to 
reply to the allegations that I made and I was down this year. 
10 
 
That the recommendation by the Professional and 
Ethical Committee to the bar council was that they have 
thoroughly investigated the complaint and there was no um, I 
was not... I did not make myself guilty um, towards any um, 
unprofessional or unethical conduct. 
 
And then I received a letter Chairperson from the bar 
council on the 22 nd of May this year that the bar council has 
also decided to vindicate me from the charge. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Thank 
you 
very 
much 
Mr 
Botes.  
Uh...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...I think Mr Soni, he did not have to... 
[laughs] 
ADV SONI SC:  I... I... this was expected...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  To... to less... of course... of course he 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 42 of 253 
 
knows exactly what uh [laughs] what the issues are. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes and...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  And he... he has been very involved.  I... I 
am... obviously, if there are something that you want 
to...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...cover or clarify. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But that was quite comprehensive.  Thank 
you Mr Botes. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  And... and I did not want to interrupt. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, no, no. 
ADV SONI SC:  While he told the whole story. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, it was fine.  It is... it was quite 
comprehensive.  I doubt if I have any questions but let me 
allow you to ask if there is anything to ask. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes but it is more housekeeping for the 
purposes of record.  Now, your uh, response to Judge 
Makhubele’s complaint against you uh, I have not called the 
judge because at the time this happened, she was not a 
20 
judge although she had been appointed.  So perhaps I 
should call her judge. 
ADV BOTES SC:  Correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  Is at... it starts at page...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  What... well, the appointment was to in 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 43 of 253 
 
actual fact the following year. 
ADV BOTES SC:  Correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So... so technically when she started 
communications uh, she was not a judge yet. 
ADV SONI SC:  Ja, I.. I accept that Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  She... she had been recommended for 
appointment.  She became a judge when the appointment 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...took effect. 
ADV SONI SC:  Took effect.  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
That 
is 
my 
understanding 
of 
how...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...uh, how these things go. 
ADV SONI SC:  I... I... I must accept that uh-uh Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV SONI SC:  But in an application in Cape Town, unite 
behind... 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV SONI SC:  And that is the complaint before the uh, uh, 
Judicial Conduct Committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.   
ADV SONI SC:  Saying that as soon as the pronouncement 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 44 of 253 
 
is made, she becomes a judge. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] 
ADV SONI SC:  I... I... just make the point Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  And that is why ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, no, no.  Uh, they... uh, they... it 
is fine.  They have put that. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We have our own understandings. 
ADV SONI SC:  [laughs]  Yes.  Yes, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Uh, when uh... when I was appointed as an 
acting judge in 1997, I think I got the letter of appointment 
uh, early in January and my acting appointment was to start 
on the 1s t of February 1997.  Between the time when I got 
the letter and the time and the 1s t of February, I did not go 
around saying I am judge, an acting judge. 
ADV SONI SC:  Ja.  [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs]   
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:  And my colleagues in the profession did 
20 
not start calling me a judge. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs]  But um, I am just saying how... 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I understand it.  Yes.   
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 45 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Uh, Mr Botes.  So you... you have filed... uh, 
you made this affidavit uh, at the request of Mr Oellerman 
from the Commission on the 14t h of October. 
ADV BOTES SC:  Correct Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now, it... uh, again, it is not to test anything 
there but to the affidavit you attached your response to the 
complaint by Judge Makhubele and that is marked X.  Is that 
correct? 
ADV BOTES SC:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:  And then to that complaint you also... ah, 
10 
sorry to that response, you also attached a few documents. 
ADV BOTES SC:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:  One document that you attached is this 
letter that contains the communication that became the 
source of controversy if I can put it that way. 
ADV BOTES SC:  That is correct Chairperson.  That is the 
letter...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:  One ...[intervenes]  
ADV BOTES SC:  ...dated 8 March 2018.  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  So this is the letter on the 
20 
8t h of March.  This was written by your attorney but uh, uh, I 
just want to point out that Judge Makhubele takes offence or 
she is unhappy that you communicated it to your attorney 
and I am going to deal with that in a moment but I just want 
to put into perspective. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 46 of 253 
 
 
That is the importance of this letter.  Would that be 
correct? 
ADV BOTES SC:  That is how I also understand it 
Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:  And then you also annexed as B the report 
of the liquidator. 
ADV BOTES SC:  No, that is the report of the Commissioner. 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh, sorry.  The Commissioner.  Sorry. 
ADV BOTES SC:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
10 
ADV BOTES SC:  He had to report to the master of the high 
court.  What the uh, status of the inquiry was because the 
inquiry was then postponed sine die on the last day. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Now in regard to this document.  In her 
communications internally to the PRASA’s legal team, Judge 
Makhubele says that this is the document that persuaded her 
that PRASA has no defence.  I am... I am just placing that on 
record. 
 
But did you give her this document before she made up 
her mind.  I think you have met on the 14t h of November at 
20 
the PRASA building. 
ADV BOTES SC:  Uh, Chairperson, the reason why this was 
provided to Judge Makhubele on that very first meeting, you 
will see that if you turn to Annexure B, if you turn the page 
and you see there is a two.  That is my handwriting.  That is 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 47 of 253 
 
my... I paginated the whole bundle. 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh, I see. 
ADV BOTES SC:  And it started on page 1 and this was the 
first document in this bundle of... of... of um, documents 
which I provided Judge Makhubele with when I saw her for 
the first time at PRASA’s office, and attached to this, was 
the um, pleadings in the various matters which were 
pending. 
ADV SONI SC:  And... and then you attached as C the... a 
further communication by Judge Makhubele to you and this is 
10 
a... a WhatsApp message. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:  And what is the relevance of this? 
ADV BOTES SC:  The relevance of this document was to 
demonstrate 
that 
all 
communication 
between 
Judge 
Makhubele and I were open, were transparent and there was 
no 
suggestion 
by 
either 
her 
or 
myself 
that 
we 
are 
communicating within a privileged space. 
 
In 
other 
words, 
we 
should 
not 
disclose 
our 
communications to any third parties, especially not bring it 
20 
into the open public domain because it is between two 
counsel who communicate and attend, and may I add, a very, 
very serious attempt to settle all these matters. 
 
And I took it upon myself from the first day that we have 
communicated with each other, to share Chairperson, each 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 48 of 253 
 
and every WhatsApp, each and every email, each and every 
SMS to Mr Mathopo, to Mr Crouse and also to those um, who 
then formed of our team. 
 
Nothing was swept under the carpet.  Nothing was um, 
was... was kept in secrecy.  Everything was properly um, and 
transparently disclosed to those concerned. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Soni? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes? 
CHAIRPERSON:  When Mr Botes was giving evidence, I did 
not have to look at documents.  Uh, I focused on listening to 
10 
him.  Uh, now I have to look at them because you are 
referring to this. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Uh, just tell me again where you are how 
this works? 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Page? 
ADV BOTES SC:  It is page 45 Chairperson, SS17. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Uh... 
ADV BOTES SC:  Page 45. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Page 45.  Uh... oh, is that the one that has 
got a “see”? 
ADV SONI SC:  That is... that is the one Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
ADV BOTES SC:  That is “see”.  Ja, that was... that is only 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 49 of 253 
 
to see to my response...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV BOTES SC:  ...to the bar council. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV BOTES SC:  That is where Judge Makhubele said to 
me: 
“I would forward the letter to PRASA with instructions 
to enquire from Mogashoa if he received this and to 
forward 
same 
asap. 
 
Our 
instructions 
were 
transparent.  Hence, I have forwarded a copy to you.  
10 
The intention was to have an open discussion with 
you and our attorneys but due to your unavailability, 
we instructed him to engage with your clients.  I think 
the correctness of the calculation of interest will be 
verified 
by 
PRASA 
finance. 
 
The 
principle 
is 
acceptable and those were the instructions”. 
 
The... the... or the suggestion Chairperson that was... 
how we understood it from PRASA’s legal team is that the 
Board of PRASA was not aware of what was happening here. 
 
This somebody was on his or her own frolic and the legal 
20 
department was kept in the dark.  So was the other um, 
members of PRASA’s board also kept in the dark. 
 
And why I decided to attached this document to... to um, 
my 
response 
to 
the 
bar 
council. 
 
Mr 
Mogashoa 
in 
correspondence took exception to one communication that I 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 50 of 253 
 
have forwarded to him. 
 
And I have alluded to it a little bit earlier on.  You will 
recall that I testified that Mr Mogashoa tendered to pay the 
capital of the three or the four matters.  
 
I did... and he... he directed an email to me to that effect 
and I responded and I was naughty because I said to him 
“no, that is not your instructions.  Your instructions are to 
tender capital plus interest”. 
 
And he then said to me “but how do you know what my 
instructions are?”  I say, “Well, there is the email.  I received 
10 
the... the chairperson when she despatched your instructions 
to you, she copied me into it”. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So, of course, you... you would uh, uh, 
[laughs] you would know that uh, it... it... it would be quite 
surprising to the attorney on the other side if he was 
unaware ...[intervenes]  
ADV BOTES SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...of the communication.  So how... how... 
how do my opponents know what my instructions are?  But 
uh... but... but what you are saying and with reference to this 
20 
uh, email or was it your email...[intervenes]  
ADV BOTES SC:  The WhatsApp Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  WhatsApp.... WhatsApp message. 
ADV BOTES SC:  The WhatsApp Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Is 
you... 
you 
are 
putting 
it 
up 
to 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 51 of 253 
 
substantiate 
what 
you 
were 
saying, 
namely, 
your 
communications with the chairperson of the board were 
transparent.  Were meant to be open and transparent and 
that is why you felt quite free to say to mister...[intervenes]  
ADV BOTES SC:  Mr Mogashoa. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...Mogashoa that this... those are not your 
instructions because I know your... what your instructions 
and uh, the chairperson of the board did not in turn that like 
keep it secret. 
ADV BOTES SC:  Chairperson, quite correctly.  If you just 
10 
turn the page to Annexure D on page 46? 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV BOTES SC:  That is the... the... the letter that was 
despatched 
to 
Mr 
Mogashoa 
by 
the 
Group 
Company 
Secretary of PRASA at the time.  Um, Chairperson, you will 
find that at the foot of page 48.  It was signed by Lindikaya 
Zide, 
Group 
Company 
Secretary 
on 
the 
15t h of December 2017. 
 
I was copied in this document.  That is how I got hold of 
it.  And this is also the document that form part of when we 
20 
had the four unopposed motions um, set down on the 
9t h of March 2018 before uh, the Honourable Justice Holland-
Muter. 
 
I took... I had this document in my possession and I 
gave it to my opponents.  I said to them:   
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 52 of 253 
 
“There is the instruction.  You must verify the 
correctness of this because this is not sent under the 
hand of the chairperson”.   
 
I got the impression, right or wrong, is that that 
represented the board um, resolution.  That is the reason it 
was signed by the Group Company Secretary.  But I could 
not take it further Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   Mr Botes, just on that point …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Soni, I see we are at half 
past – actually nearly twenty five to twelve. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   Oh, I am so sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are long past quarter past eleven but 
what is important is how much more time do you need with 
Mr Botes? 
ADV SONI SC:   I am going to need at least 15 minutes to 
be fair to Judge Makhubele’s side. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   That I can put what – she has now 
responded by way of affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   And I just need to put that …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   To put her side of that, ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   And then, of course, her affidavit will 
come at a different time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 53 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:   But I did undertake to her that I will put 
her version to Mr Botes for him to respond. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
No, 
no, 
that 
is 
fine. 
 
My 
own 
understanding is there seems to be very – the issue - , 
disputes which is very narrow, very limited. 
ADV SONI SC:   Limited. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   In fact, I could do it in about five or ten 
minutes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   And it may be better because then you 
can release Mr Botes for one.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   But then we start with something new 
when we come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no, that is fine, but I think let 
us take the tea break now.  Let us make it 15.  I was 
thinking of making it ten but we might rush too much.  15 
minutes, so we will resume at ten to twelve. 
ADV SONI SC:   As you please. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then with the aim that we should 
finish about 12 o’clock, or five past twelve or thereabouts. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 54 of 253 
 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us proceed.  Put on your mic, 
Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:   Sorry, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not know why you always forget. 
ADV SONI SC:   I am sorry.  Annexure D to your response 
to Judge Makhubele’s complaint.  Where did you get it 
from? 
ADV BOTES SC:   Chairperson, I got this – sorry, page 46, 
Chairperson, page 46. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   46, okay. 
ADV BOTES SC:   Yes.  This document I have received 
electronically via email from Judge Makhubele.  
ADV SONI SC:   That was about the time that the letter 
was written which would be around the 15 October. 
ADV BOTES SC:   Chairperson, it was either 15 December 
2017, it was either the same day or the day thereafter.  
Just be mindful, the 16 t h was a public holiday.  I have 
every reason to believe I received it on the 15 t h. 
ADV SONI SC:   And then annexures E, F, G and H are in 
20 
fact the awards, the arbitration awards issued by Judge 
Brand.   
ADV BOTES SC:   Quite correct, Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now I take it these are all the documents 
– the only documents you submitted to the Bar Council. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 55 of 253 
 
ADV BOTES SC:   This was – these documents and my 
response were the only documents that I have provided the 
Bar Council with, quite correct, Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   And the Bar Council then effectively 
exonerated you, they said that there was no merit in Judge 
Makhubele’s complaint against you. 
ADV BOTES SC:   Just before that, how our internal Bar 
affairs work, once there is a complaint, especially if it is a 
complaint from a judge or minister that is referred to, the 
Professional Ethical Committee, Chairperson, if it is a 
10 
complaint against the senior member, what we normally do 
is we constitute a committee comprising of more than one 
senior member to investigate and to have regard to all the 
evidence, so to speak.  In this specific instance there was 
more than one silk who investigated it, I do not know who 
comprised of the entire committee but I was informed 
subsequently that the decision of that committee was 
unanimous in to make recommendation to the Bar Council 
because the subcommittee only make a recommendation to 
the Bar Council and the Bar Council can still decide 
20 
whether it accepts that recommendation or not because the 
same papers serves before the Bar Council and that is 
what emanated in the letter of the 22 May 2020 that I was 
exonerated by the committee and by the Bar Council. 
ADV SONI SC:   Chairperson, just for the record that letter 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 56 of 253 
 
from the Bar Council appears at page 62, Chairperson. 
ADV BOTES SC:   That is the last letter in this bundle, 
quite correct, that is page 62. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I see it, thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now after you submitted your first 
affidavit you were asked to make a further affidavit and 
that is the second affidavit that you have already referred 
to which you made on the 20 May this year. 
ADV BOTES SC:   That is quite correct, Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now I just want to confirm again that what 
10 
is contained in the two affidavits you made is true and 
correct. 
ADV 
BOTES 
SC: 
 
 
Yes, 
Chairperson, 
I 
take 
my 
responsibility and my duty, not only as an officer of court, 
but also as a citizen of the Republic of South Africa 
extremely – it is important for me that we should get rid of 
what should not – what is not supposed to be in society, so 
I am a very serious person if it comes to the values 
enshrined not only in the Constitution but also in all the 
legislation. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   Now, Mr Botes, I want to get to the last 
part.  In both the affidavits you refer to your response to 
Judge Makhubele’s complaint. 
ADV BOTES SC:   Correct, Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   And you confirm the correctness of what is 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 57 of 253 
 
contained in the response as well. 
ADV 
BOTES 
SC: 
 
 
Unconditionally 
and 
irrevocably, 
Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   I just want to now come to the nub of the 
dispute between you and Judge Makhubele as contained in 
her affidavit.  There are two areas of dispute and I will just 
put them to you.   
The first is, she says that it is not you who initiated 
– it is not she who initiated the communication in relation 
to the Siyaya matters but it is you.   
10 
Now you deal with that in paragraph 11 of your 
affidavit and you have already given evidence on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I must just check something, Mr Soni, 
you might have read her affidavit much more thoroughly 
than I did.  At some stage when I was reading it, I was not 
sure whether she comes out categorically that Mr Botes 
initiated the discussion.  I seem to get the impression that 
she was not committing herself but she was saying I want a 
forensic investigation to be done on my cell phone as well 
to determine who initiated without her saying he initiated 
20 
or I initiated.  I know that what I am certainly true in regard 
to maybe other things but I am not sure.  So I am just 
checking whether it is something that you had a look at 
carefully that she does say he initiated.  
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 58 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if you are sure that is fine. 
ADV SONI SC:   Mr Chairperson, let me – I perhaps looked 
at the affidavit, if I may put, jaundiced eyes, because it 
was informed by my conversation with her.  In my 
conversations with her. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   All my conversations. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, she is quite clear. 
ADV SONI SC:   She has – she is adamant. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   That that is the nub of the dispute. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay, no, that is fine.  I mean, 
when I was looking at it, I was saying – at least, on the 
impression that I had, I was saying well, she needs to put 
up her version first. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that we know if there is a dispute. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There is an issue, before we can have 
an inference in this stage because there is no point, she 
20 
having a forensic investigation if there is no issue. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or no dispute on the issue.  But I think 
put it to Mr Botes because …[intervenes] 
ADV SONI SC:   I will certainly put it. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 59 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   And it is just for his – so that when she 
comes, we can say that we have put it to Mr Botes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   Mr Botes, you have heard that and I just 
want to say to you in paragraph 11 you respond to what 
you point out in paragraph 10, namely her allegation that it 
was the liquidators who approached her through yourself 
around the second week of November in regard to this 
dispute and what is your reaction to that?  And I ask purely 
10 
for the – I know what your evidence was but I am just 
asking as a response. 
ADV BOTES SC:   Chairperson, to put Mr Soni’s statement 
to me in perspective, that is what one of the complaints 
were 
that 
Judge 
Makhubele 
laid 
and 
that 
was 
the 
allegation.  May I just direct your attention to page 11 of 
the bundle and that is paragraph 10 of my response in 
which I verbatim clarified what Judge Makhubele said in 
paragraph 9.1, Chairperson, of her statement.  That was 
the complaint that she laid, she says: 
20 
“The liquidators approached me (first through Adv 
Botes SC on or about the second week of November 
2017) followed by a letter (towards the end of the 
month) to intervene in a dispute that had ensued 
with regard to whether there was a need to proceed 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 60 of 253 
 
to arbitration in view of the evidence at the inquiry.” 
And premised on that, Chairperson, I then put the correct 
facts into perspective in paragraph 11 of this document.   
 
To answer your question, Adv Soni, one, I was 
totally, totally unaware of the fact that Judge Makhubele 
was at PRASA.  I laboured under the apprehension that 
she 
was 
recommended 
by 
the 
Judicial 
Services 
Commission and that her appointment was imminent as a 
Judge. One.  That is the first aspect that I want to clarify. 
 
And secondly, I will never in my life, especially not 
10 
in the light of the various judgments of the SCA pertaining 
to various applications for advocates whose names were 
removed from the roll.  The name of Adv Seth Nthai comes 
to mind.  I will never approach my opponent’s client in 
order to solicit some of a settlement or some sort of 
intervention, Chairperson.   
I think that is the biggest atrocity in the legal 
fraternity that one can come across and that is when – 
especially when senior counsel decides well, I am going to 
shoot over the heads of everybody and I am going to the 
20 
client directly.   
No, Chairperson, the answer to this dispute, this 
crisp issue, is simple and straightforward, you take my 
itemised billing – and may I add, Chairperson, I do not 
have a landline.  I do not practice in my office from a 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 61 of 253 
 
landline, I do not use a landline, I have taken my landline 
out years ago because it just distracts you.  If attorneys 
want to get hold of me it is on my cell phone or on my 
iPad, so there is no suggestion that I could have phoned 
her on the landline.  I only use my cellular telephone, that 
is all I use, to take my itemised billing, to take her itemised 
billing for the month of November 2017 to compare it.  It 
will be a matter res ipsa loquitur. 
ADV SONI SC:   Because that will tell you who initiated the 
call. 
10 
ADV BOTES SC:   Of course it will. 
ADV SONI SC:   And that will put an end to that. 
ADV BOTES SC:   Common sense and logic dictate that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  I wonder whether any forensic 
investigation is needed to establish that, but …[intervenes] 
ADV SONI SC:   It does not look like, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   As Mr Botes correctly points out. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   It is simply looking at receives calls and 
20 
calls made. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I mean, if she accepts that the first 
discussion that she had with Mr Botes on the matter was 
on the phone, then – and if she accepts that Mr Botes 
could not have spoken from a landline then he could only 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 62 of 253 
 
have spoken to her on his cell phone so therefore Mr Botes 
says here is my cell phone, whoever wants to check 
whether there was any call I made to her between that time 
and that time, here is the phone. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then she can provide her own to 
say, you know, let us have a look. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am not sure that you need a forensic 
investigation.  But again, as far as this Commission is 
10 
concerned, on the face of it there does not appear to be an 
important issue to the Commission but she might persuade 
me when she gets a chance that there is something 
relevant in regard to who initiated.  Okay, alright, yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   The second issue and in a sense, Mr 
Botes, it seems to be tied to the first issue, is that you say 
she initiated the call, you congratulated her and it is at 
that time that she pointed out the circumstances or the 
purpose of her appointment as Chairperson of PRASA’s 
interim board. 
20 
ADV BOTES SC:   Correct, Chairperson, as I have alluded 
to earlier, I was surprised that she was deployed as intern 
or Chairperson of PRASA’s interim board and I specifically 
asked her whether – what the reason was for that 
deployment because it is not ordinarily done in that fashion 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 63 of 253 
 
and she then confirmed to me that she was deployed by 
the former President so as to clean up the mess and to 
sort the mess out and what I understood, Chairperson, and 
she also said to me there was numerous litigation and 
matters that were outstanding and I got the impression she 
wanted to wrap all of it up and see which of the matters 
can she dispose of, which there is really no real disputes 
or there is no aspects which should go to trial. And the 
others, to streamline it so to make them trial ready or not.  
That is the impression that I got.  But we have not 
10 
discussed that. 
ADV SONI SC:   Can I – and to get past this point, Mr 
Botes, can I take it what you recorded at paragraph 11 in 
your response, that is 11 – the whole of paragraph 11 is 
what really happened and we can accept that that is your 
version. 
ADV BOTES SC:   Chairperson, you can accept it 
irrevocably 
and 
unconditionally, 
yes, 
that 
is 
how 
it 
transpired. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now in response the question of 
20 
deployment – so she said to you I have been deployed by 
former President Zuma.  She may not have used the word 
former President Zuma. 
ADV BOTES SC:   Right. 
ADV SONI SC:   He was not former at that time. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 64 of 253 
 
ADV BOTES SC:   No, she used the words – I remember, 
recall the words, I was deployed by the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I also wanted to ask on that but I 
think you have made it quite clear because she denies that 
and the actual use of the term deployed, is that the term 
she used or is it your term of – that you used in terms of 
what you understood her to be saying?  Do you recall 
whether she used that term or she may have used another 
terminology but you understood it to be deployment? 
ADV BOTES 
SC:   Chairperson, I cannot recall if 
10 
specifically the word deployed was used, it was definitely 
made – I was definitely informed by Judge Makhubele that 
the purpose of her presence at the interim board of PRASA 
was at the insistence of the President and that her function 
and her role was to clean up the mess and to sort things 
out. 
 
In Afrikaans they say nuwe besems vee skoon and 
that is the impression that I got.  This was new broom and 
she had to clean up the stage. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   So this is where, Chairperson, I am going 
to – I have read her affidavit and it does not seem as if she 
says categorically she did not say this but what she say is, 
I do not know Mr Zuma and so on.  But I am going to put 
two versions to you , Mr Botes, just for the purposes of not 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 65 of 253 
 
having to recall him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, that is fine.  My understanding 
of her affidavit – but again, one might need to double-
check and you can ask questions to Mr Botes on your own 
understanding 
of 
Judge 
Makhubele’s 
affidavit. 
 
My 
impression was that she was denying that she told Mr 
Botes that she had been deployed by President Zuma.  And 
that is one. 
 
And two, she certainly did say she had never met 
former President Zuma before her appointment to the 
10 
PRASA, I think, but she does say subsequently and in 2019 
she was within the presence of President Zuma at a 
function at the University of Limpopo in a graduation 
ceremony or something. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I think she says she had never 
spoken to him or something like that. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So but put it as you understand it.  I was 
not sure whether she was denying using the word deployed 
20 
as opposed to appointed but she does she was appointed 
by the minister. 
ADV SONI SC:   That is right, she does. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So put it the best way you can to 
put her version. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 66 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:   Mr Botes, she will come and explain but I 
just want to put two possibilities to you.  She seems to say 
at one level that she was not appointed or deployed by the 
President, that she had never spoken to him.  Now by 
implication she seems to be saying that she did not tell 
you.  What is your response to that? 
ADV BOTES SC:   First of all, Mr Commissioner, I did not 
read 
Judge 
Makhubele’s 
affidavit, 
I 
confirmed 
unconditionally 
that 
she 
informed 
me 
that 
she 
was 
deployed or appointed as PRASA’s – as the Chairperson of 
10 
PRASA’s interim board by the President, not by the 
minister. 
ADV SONI SC:   And she gave you at that time the purpose 
of that appointment/deployment. 
ADV BOTES SC:   That is what appears in paragraph 11 of 
my response to the Bar Council, yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now she also seems to say that she did 
not mention President Zuma in the conversation.  I am – as 
I say, I am not entirely sure, but whatever her version is I 
would like you to sort of respond to all possibilities as 
20 
appears from the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I am sure the answer has been 
given. 
ADV SONI SC:   It has, no sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 67 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:   Finally, Mr Botes, I just want you, in 
fairness to you, because she is likely to come and make 
this allegation.  She says in her affidavit that in 2018 you 
tried to approach her to resolve a dispute that Siyangena 
had with PRASA.  Can you recall that? 
ADV BOTES SC:   Yes, I can, it was shortly before 
Christmas.  Mr Johan Crouse, who was one of the 
attorneys together with Mr Tshepo Mathopo.  They were 
also involved in a separate dispute, Chairperson, where 
Siyangena featured.  Senior counsel deals with that matter, 
10 
I have got no idea what that matter consist of.  Judge 
Makhubele is hundred percent correct, during one of our 
conversations I mentioned to her that I spoke to Johan 
Crouse and he mentioned to me that the Siyangena matter 
– apparently, Mr Chairperson, I have not seen the papers 
or the documents, I think the quantum exceeds R1 billion.  
They asked me – and in the light of the effective manner 
that we were able to settle Siyaya, I mean it was in the 
open public domain that this – there was not one shot fired 
and we settled it very, very easy, so to speak.   
20 
 
And Mr Johan Crouse did approach me and he said 
to me that the manner in which this matter with Siyaya was 
settled reached the ears of other litigants who have 
matters against PRASA.  It seems that you and Judge 
Makhubele is on the same – you are on the same line and 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 68 of 253 
 
you are singing from the same hymn book, what will your 
attitude or your response be if we engage you, Botes, in 
that other matter as well?  Surely it will also assist the 
parties to come to a settlement. 
 
And yes, I did mention it to her.  I said to her, Nana, 
I believe that there is also pending litigation between 
PRASA and Siyangena, what is happening there because I 
did not know what has happened there and her response 
was, that is a matter which is much more complicated than 
what we are dealing with, there is – that quantum is 
10 
something else and we simply did not pursue it. 
ADV SONI SC:   She – just again for context, she puts it 
on the basis that she is saying because you initiated the 
Siyangena with her you must have also initiated the 
Siyaya.  That is what her affidavit – because I will just put 
that so that it is not out of context.   
She is saying I am mentioning the question of Mr 
Botes’ approach to me to settle this Siyangena matter, she 
says I am mentioning all this as a basis to rebut the 
allegation that I initiated the settlement of Siyaya claims 
20 
and that I told Adv Botes that I have been deployed to 
settle the matters.  I just put that to you. 
ADV 
BOTES 
SC: 
 
 
Chairperson, 
the 
attorneys 
for 
Siyangena, Mr Gert van der Merwe, did approach me.  He 
phoned me and he asked me whether him and his client 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 69 of 253 
 
can – I think it is Mr Mario Ferreira, make an appointment 
with me so I can become involved in that matter ’s counsel 
as well.  I declined, I said Gert, listen, Nic Maritz SC, 
Werner Lüderitz SC, that is a big, big heavy silk team that 
you guys have on board.  There was a review application, I 
understood, Chairperson, that exceeds 3000 pages and 
that they approached the Deputy Judge President for the 
allocation of a special court to deal with it and I did not at 
the time had the appetite to concentrate on a matter of that 
magnitude.  
10 
The counsel that was appointed at that stage I think 
is some of the best legal minds that money can buy.  So 
no, I did not pursue it at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:   Just finally on that point and perhaps in 
terms of your evidence, Mr Botes, she says that in regard 
to this, in January 2018 you sent her letter.  Can you recall 
that? 
ADV BOTES SC:   No, Chairperson, I did not send any 
letters, I saw that that was something that was mentioned.  
20 
If I did communicate, and that is my style, I communicate 
very 
often 
on 
WhatsApp 
and 
SMS 
for 
one 
reason, 
Chairperson, you have a paper trail.   
And secondly, yes, I did communicate with Mr 
Mogashoa via email.  There was a lot of emails that was 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 70 of 253 
 
exchanged between us.  All explained – and the one email 
there and the reason being, Chairperson, one of the – 
there was a postponement of the arbitration and then a 
dispute ensued, who is liable for the costs occasioned by 
the postponement?  And Judge Brand did not want to hear 
submissions on it.   
My proposal was that it should be cost in the 
arbitration. 
 
Mr 
Mogashoa’s 
client 
insisted 
that 
the 
liquidated company should pay the cost and that is actually 
where the correspondence ensued. 
10 
I then sent Mr Mogashoa a very harsh-worded email 
and I said to him Madimpe but that is not what transpired, 
these are the facts and this is what transpired because he 
started communicating with me directly via email and all of 
that culminated and they filed heads, we filed heads of 
argument.  At the end Judge Brand said he could not – he 
cannot determine who is at fault and I think costs were – 
the award was each party to pay its own costs. 
 
So to answer your – the statement or what you put 
to me, Mr Soni, no, I did not initiate, I did not write letters 
20 
it is not my function, my authority or my – I do not have 
locus standi to write letters.  Letters were exchanged 
between Mr Mathopo and there are various letters and also 
Mr Crouse.  I did not write letters, no.  
ADV SONI SC:   Chairperson, those are the questions. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 71 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much.  Thank you very 
much, 
Mr 
Botes, 
for 
coming 
to 
give 
evidence, 
we 
appreciate it and you are excused. 
ADV BOTES SC:   Thank you very much, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, thank you so much, Mr Botes, on 
behalf of the Commission’s legal team. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I want us to adjourn for a few minutes 
and I would like to see you Mr Soni and Mr Nkatha. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  We adjourn 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes Mr Soni?  Your mic. 
ADV SONI SC:   Chairperson I have noticed you’re having 
difficulty following the numbering in the bundles and they 
are not – they have not been done in the usual manner.  
We would ask if we could be given leave to put the bundles 
right and ask if we could take an early lunch adjournment 
so we can sort that out and we could start again at two 
20 
o’clock and go through the witnesses thereafter.  I 
apologise again, but it is not fair to you especially because 
we may be familiar with the documents but I noticed you 
were struggling to keep up with the witnesses and tally 
what was said, what is contained in the documents. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 72 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, we will adjourn early for lunch and 
I will give you a little bit more time.  There are two ways of 
doing this, one is to paginate this bundle afresh, even 
manually, so that in the bundle I know that the pagination 
starts from page one and goes up to the last page and the 
sequential.  At the moment the problem is that different 
sections of documents in the bundle are paginated on their 
own. 
ADV SONI SC:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So if you say to me page 20 I have got 
10 
to ask page 20 of which section, whereas if you do it the 
way it is normally done, if you say page 20 on this bundle, 
I know there is only page 20. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I can find it easily. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There are two ways of doing it, the ones 
that I have just said or you could take out of this bundle Mr 
Botes’ documents and make them – put them into a 
separate bundle and then you keep the numbering that is 
20 
on his – I am assuming that, ja you keep that numbering 
and then later on you go on record, to place on record that 
it has been taken out of this bundle is now on its own and 
we give a separate exhibit number and confirm that the 
numbering that was used, the page numbers that were 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 73 of 253 
 
used to refer to various documents during his evidence 
remains the same. 
ADV SONI SC:   The same, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  And then you then come to this 
bundle which would then be minus Mr Botes document and 
then paginated from page 1 up to the last document. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And prepare an index as one would do, 
which would be at the beginning and then it retains the 
same bundle number and the same exhibit number, but the 
10 
pagination is sequential. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, it is now nearly twenty five to one, 
so I think we will resume – we will adjourn and resume at 
two, it gives you I think enough time to attend to this and 
to have lunch and then to the extent that it may be 
necessary we will sit until latish to try and finish as many 
of the witnesses as possible, obviously we will check their 
availability if we go beyond, when we go beyond four 
o’clock but from my point of view we could go even up to 
20 
six. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But we will talk and if tomorrow – 
tomorrow we are meant to have only one witness or how 
many? 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 74 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:   Two witnesses. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Two, but both of them are short?   Or 
one is longer? 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes., 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Dingiswayo 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it, and then ja okay so let’s see how it 
goes.  Okay we will then adjourn and resume at two 
o’clock. 
ADV SONI SC:   As you please. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni is everything ready now?   Your 
mic.   Your mic, turn it towards you otherwise you’re sitting 
far from it. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, yes, we hope it is Chairperson, we 
have tried and we have done as you liked it to be, and as it 
should be, starting with the – the first page being 
numbered one and then continuing, sequentially, until the 
20 
end of that bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   Chair we are on Bundle G, we have 
removed affidavit of Mr Boulters from that bundle and we 
will put it in a separate bundle. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 75 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV SONI SC:  And then ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay and you will deal with that at some 
stage to place on record what we will call that bundle. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, or do you want to deal with that 
now? 
ADV SONI SC:    Yes, so as you have suggested DCJ the 
numbering will be the same, it will just be a different 
bundle number. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, now what I mean is we will need for 
purposes of the record to say what bundle it is and what 
exhibit it is so that somebody who reads the transcript will 
not look for the number that was mentioned earlier and 
would not look for it in this bundle. 
ADV SONI SC:   No indeed, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright. 
ADV SONI SC:   We will try and do it by tomorrow so it will 
save time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that is alright.   Okay. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   Chairperson our next witness is Mr 
Nicholas Johannes Loubser.  May he be sworn in. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Please 
administer 
the 
oath 
or 
affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 76 of 253 
 
MR LOUBSER:   Nicholas Johannes Loubser. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR LOUBSER:   No. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you swear that the evidence you will 
give will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing else but 
the truth?  If so please raise your right hand and say so 
10 
help me God. 
MR LOUBSER:   So help me God. 
NICHOLAS JOHANNES LOUBSER:  (d.s.s.) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, you may be 
seated.   You may then continue Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:   As you please Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:   Chairperson may I take ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you just want to mention where I 
find Mr Loubser ’s affidavit. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   Page 106 in Bundle G Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, we’re using Bundle G, which is – 
and the Exhibit for his affidavit is SS16. 
ADV SONI SC:   SS16. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, and it is page 106? 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 77 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:   106 Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well the covering note starts at 104 and 
then there is an index at 105 and then the actual affidavit 
starts at 106. 
ADV SONIC SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay for purposes of this bundle see we 
normally when we refer to page numbers, we normally refer 
to the red numbers on the pages, so let’s announce for the 
purposes of those who will read the transcript that – how 
this one is.   Is it the handwritten numbers, pagination that 
10 
we follow from the beginning to end or is there a mix of red 
numbers and the handwritten numbers? 
ADV SONI SC:   It is the handwritten numbers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Throughout? 
ADV SONI SC:   Throughout. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay in this particular bundle the 
pagination for the purpose of the record well it can’t be Mr 
Soni because I see Mr Mogashoa’s affidavit doesn’t have 
handwritten pagination. 
ADV SONI SC:   Chairperson what we intend doing here is 
20 
we will handwrite that as well so there’s consistency and 
people are not looking in different places.  So just those 
numbers will be the same but they will be handwritten as 
well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I can’t say that we will follow the 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 78 of 253 
 
handwritten numbers until everything is handwritten, so I 
won’t say anything about the pagination because it means 
it is not consistent, okay, but for purposes –so for present 
purposes there are – there is pagination that is read and 
pagination that is handwritten, is that right? 
ADV SONI SC:   That is so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the red pagination will – you will 
paginate by hand but the numbers, page numbers will be 
the same. 
ADV SONI SC:  Will be the same for Mr Mogashoa’s 
10 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I just wish somebody had just done 
the whole thing from the beginning to end and we could 
announce 
before 
we 
start 
using 
it 
that 
this 
is 
the 
arrangement, because all the other bundles the pagination 
is – we tell the witnesses look at the red numbers, that is 
the pagination, so here we have got to say handwritten, but 
now if I say handwritten then that is not correct for the 
other one, so we will say handwritten for – or maybe we 
won’t say anything we will just say we know that for his 
20 
affidavit and documents it is the handwritten ones and then 
later on somebody will then do the earlier ones. 
ADV SONI SC:   Do the Mogashoa affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.   You may proceed. 
ADV 
SONI 
SC: 
 
 
Chairperson 
may 
I 
just 
give 
an 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 79 of 253 
 
introduction to the evidence of Mr Loubser, because one 
needs to indicate what his – what the nature of his 
evidence is going to be. 
 
Mr Chairperson you would have known that in 
respect of the property deals that Ms Ngoye dealt with in 
her affidavit and we canvassed quite extensively, even 
yesterday, a person whose name features quite prominently 
is Mr van der Walt and you would know that the allegation 
is that he was at some stage or the other an attorney for 
Siyangena and the context is that Siyangena which had 
10 
that major contract or contracts with PRASA amounting to 
four odd Billion Rand. 
 
Now Mr van der Walt is no longer in the country, he 
was an attorney in the firm Loubser, Van der Walt 
Incorporated.  He left in 2019 and we understand presently 
he is in Austin in the Texas in the United States.  We have 
received the cooperation of his former partner, Mr Loubser, 
who then kindly made certain documents available to us 
and is here to explain what he knows about some of these 
transactions, but you – he will explain why his knowledge 
20 
in this matter is somewhat limited. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I don’t know whether for purposes 
of enabling those who are listening and those who are 
maybe viewing the proceedings on television or elsewhere 
whether it is not necessary to mention the property 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 80 of 253 
 
transactions to say this is what appears to have been done 
and this is how the law firms appears to have been 
involved, or Mr van der Walt to have been involved and 
then so that when they hear Mr Loubser ’s evidence they 
can see where it fits in. 
ADV SONI SC:   As you please Chairperson.  Now 
Chairperson you will recall that in regard to Mr van der 
Walt and why Ms Ngoye in her founding affidavit, and 
replying 
affidavit 
in 
the 
Siyangena 
matter 
says 
the 
Siyangena contract with PRASA is tainted.  She says there 
10 
were four property transactions involving Mr Montana and 
Mr van der Walt, or is company which is called Precise 
Trade and Investment 02 Pty Limited. 
 
The first Mr Chairperson is a property that Mr 
Montana owned and which his own banker had valued at 
about R3.5million in 2012.  In 2014 Mr van der Walt bought 
that 
property 
from 
Mr 
Montana 
for 
R6.8million, 
he 
effectively made a profit, Chairperson, of more than 
R3million on the estimated value of the property. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You mean Mr Montana made a profit of 
20 
about…[intervenes].  
ADV SONI SC:   Mr Montana made a profit yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   The second property that is in question, 
Chairperson, is a property in Waterkloof in Pretoria and 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 81 of 253 
 
we’re hoping to have a witness, the owner of the property, 
to come and give evidence this afternoon, who will indicate 
that the property was – the first person to express an 
interest in the property was Mr Montana and then gradually 
he withdrew from the scene and Mr van der Walt, through 
Precise Trade became the owner of the property and that 
property was in the region of R11million Mr Chairperson.  
The third property is a property in Sandhurst and the 
estate agent who sold the property is here, he will be 
giving evidence on that property, he sold that property for 
10 
R13.9million, having entered into a contract originally with 
Mr Montana but then again Precise Trade entered into the 
scene and they became – the property was transferred into 
its name.  the fourth property, Chairperson, is a property in 
Hurlingham which Mr Montana bought and that was in the 
region of R13.5million and that property, they attempted to 
transfer into the name of Precise Trade but the owner 
would have nothing to do with it and you will see from 
documents, as to why that was the case…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON: That’s the owner of the property?   
20 
ADV SONI SC:   At Hurlingham yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not the owner of Precise Trade?  
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, and eventually the property was 
transferred to Mr Montana.  Now the evidence that is 
available in respect of the payment of the properties, 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 82 of 253 
 
Chairperson, is that it does not appear as if Montana – Mr 
Montana paid any money for any of these properties.  Now, 
we accept that he sold one and two were transferred into 
the name of Precise Trade but the fact of the matter is, Mr 
Chairperson, he bought a property in his own name, it 
transferred to his own name, thirteen odd million rand but 
the documents that we have which show payment for these 
properties doesn’t reflect that he, himself,  paid even a 
cent for these properties.  So, that is the value of Mr 
Loubser ’s evidence because although he can’t give first-
10 
hand information, they confronted Mr van der Walt about 
this, he and his partner, Mr van Wyk…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And Mr van der Walt was not just a 
partner in the law firm, namely Loubser van der Walt but he 
was the sole Director, is it, of Precise Trade? 
ADV SONI SC:   That is so Chairperson yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, okay. 
ADV SONI SC:   And what we will also show through Mr 
Loubser is, that when they confronted him, Mr van der Walt 
gavel Mr Loubser and Mr van Wyk a set of documents 
20 
which contain some of these property dealings but more 
importantly the funders for these property dealings and 
there are three main individuals who are the funders.  We 
will go through them, perhaps I must just mention them 
now, there’s a Mr Clansey, there’s a Mr Plimental and there 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 83 of 253 
 
is an organisation which you’ve heard of already, TMM 
which had entered into a contract, TMM and Mr Ferreira 
had entered into a contract with Mr van der Walt to have 
joint ventures in property matters and in respect of some of 
the payments, payments were made into Precise Trade’s 
account and soon thereafter withdrawals were made to pay 
for some of these property transactions but that will be 
shown via a bank statement that Mr van der Walt gave to 
Mr Loubser.  So those are the matters I’m going to lead Mr 
Loubser on Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that’s fine, you may proceed. 
ADV SONI SC:   As it pleases Chairperson.  Mr Loubser, 
sorry you’ve heard the introduction. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   Can I just ask you, are you still practicing 
as an attorney? 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   And how many partners are in your firm at 
the moment? 
MR LOUBSER:   Presently just two. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   That’s you and Mr…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry Mr Loubser, although he’s 
asking the questions, you tell me the answer so you look 
towards me most of the time and then you can just raise 
your voice.  
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 84 of 253 
 
MR LOUBSER:   Sorry Chairperson, there’s currently – 
there’s only two Directors in the firm, myself and Mr van 
Wyk. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I don’t know whether it’s the aircon, 
please just repeat that, the aircon made your voice not to 
be clear, just repeat what you have just said. 
MR LOUBSER:   Sorry Chairperson, presently it’s only 
myself and Mr Robert van Wyk as Directors of the firm. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now Mr Loubser your firm is still called 
10 
Loubser Van Der Walt. 
MR LOUBSER:   No, it’s not – following Mr van der Walt’s 
resignation and the sale of his shares, we changed the 
name to Loubser van Wyk as it is presently. 
ADV SONI SC:   Alright, now how long had you and Mr van 
der Walt and Mr van Wyk been in partnership? 
MR LOUBSER:   Mr van der Walt and I started a firm in 
2000 and about three years later Mr van Wyk joined us, 
first as an article clerk, then professional assistant and 
later became a Director. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Look at me Mr Loubser. 
MR LOUBSER:   Let me repeat that then. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja please repeat that. 
MR LOUBSER:   Myself and…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe what you can do as you speak, 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 85 of 253 
 
come a little closer to the mic or bring it a little closer ja, 
okay. 
MR LOUBSER:   We started a firm in 2000…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s much better ja. 
MR LOUBSER:   Myself and Mr van Der Walt started a 
firm, we were the only two Directors and about three/four 
years later Mr van Wyk joined us, first as a candidate 
attorney, then as a professional assistant and later on 
became a Director in the firm. 
ADV SONI SC:   And after – sorry when did Mr van der 
10 
Walt left? 
MR LOUBSER:   Sorry? 
ADV SONI SC:   When did he leave? 
MR LOUBSER:   He left in June/July 2019.   
ADV SONI SC:   Now before he left though, there were 
concerns that you and Mr van Wyk entertained about 
certain dealings that Mr van der Walt appeared to be 
having and that had received adverse publicity, would that 
be correct? 
MR LOUBSER:   That’s correct. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   Would you tell the Chairperson the 
circumstances of that? 
MR LOUBSER:   We – myself and Mr van Wyk became 
aware of newspaper reports that mentioned Mr van der 
Walt and his company, Precise Trade and Invest. There 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 86 of 253 
 
were certain allegations made against Precise Trade and 
Invest, never really, it involved the firm, the law firm and 
then in – I think it was in September/October 2015 there 
appeared certain newspaper articles which, once again, 
makes reference to the company Precise Trade and Invest 
and then mentions the – and his law firm. Mr van der Walt, 
Precise Trade and Invest and his law firm.  At that stage, 
Mr van der Walt at all times maintained that Precise Trade 
and Invest is his company it’s got nothing to do with 
anybody else but we were concerned that the law firm, 
10 
even though the name was not mentioned specifically, but 
Mr van der Walt and his law firm by association our name 
is being tarnished and we were placed in a difficult 
situation.  At that stage we decided to call a meeting with – 
there was speculation, allegations in the newspapers and 
stuff which we don’t have personal knowledge of and we 
decided to have a meeting and explain to us exactly who is 
Precise Trade and Invest what properties they bought, he 
bought.  So, it was the first meeting we had and we 
addressed a letter to him, in writing, following that meeting 
20 
which he responded to. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now, just to put it on record you’ve 
described all these matters in an affidavit which you made 
on the 18 t h of June, is that correct? 
MR LOUBSER:   That’s correct. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 87 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   18 t h  of June 2020? 
ADV SONI SC:   2020, yes Chairperson and in this 
affidavit, 
you 
attach 
a 
number 
of 
documents 
which 
Mr…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe for the sake of – I don’t know if 
you already mentioned but that affidavit appears at page -
from page 106 to 113 that is the affidavit of Mr Loubser in 
Bundle G. 
ADV SONI SC:   As it pleases Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   Now, you confirm the correctness of 
what’s stated in our affidavit? 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   Okay so you say you confronted Mr van 
der Walt. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   And following that confrontation, what 
happened then? 
MR LOUBSER:   He explained certain things to us and we 
said – we agreed that  we will pose these questions in 
20 
writing to him to explain which we then drafted the letter 
which we addressed to him by myself and Mr van Wyk and 
asking to confirm in writing what he’d told us in a meeting 
or provide more clarification. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, sorry so…[intervenes]. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 88 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry Mr Soni, let’s start with this. First 
you became aware of certain allegations in the media, in 
the newspaper relating to Mr van der Walt or Precise Trade 
or both but also those allegations or those articles or that 
article mentioned your law firm in whatever they were 
saying, is that right? 
MR LOUBSER:   That’s correct, they didn’t mention the 
firm by name but…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But it said Mr van der Walt and his law 
firm, ja. 
10 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What was your impression of what was 
being said about Mr van der Walt or Precise Trade that 
made you concerned and want to confront him? 
MR LOUBSER:   There appeared to be – he always 
maintained that Precise Trade and Invest, is the sole 
Director – ja sole shareholder and Director of the firm and 
he bought properties and we heard that he’s previously 
also involved in other property transactions but there was 
some allegation about his law firm and we wanted to know 
20 
is there any truth in certain allegations made, explain to us 
who is Precise Trade and Invest and which properties did 
you acquire…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Were there allegations of some wrong 
doing made in the media about Mr van der Walt and/or 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 89 of 253 
 
Precise Trade which you were concerned people could 
associate with your law firm because the reference to his 
law firm was a reference to your law firm as well? 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes, there was mention made of money 
paid by his law firm to somebody. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But it give the reader, did the article 
give the reader the impression of some wrong doing, 
allegations of wrong doing or not, why were you concerned 
about what was said in the media about him and the law 
firm? 
10 
MR LOUBSER:   It was by association, we didn’t know 
anything specifically but because the law firm is mentioned  
and there was mention made of monies paid by his law 
firm, we were concerned about, was there money involved 
through the firm. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay what I’m trying to understand is, 
whether you were prompted to confront him simply because 
from what you read in the newspapers it appeared that 
there may have been money that, according to the article, 
was either paid to the law firm or was paid by the law firm 
20 
to buy some properties without your knowledge irrespective 
of whether there was wrong doing or not or whether the 
impression you got on reading the article or articles was 
that, whatever Mr van der Walt or Precise Trade was 
involved in or was allegedly involved in, was having a – 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 90 of 253 
 
may have a negative impact on the law firm.  It created the 
impression that the law firm might be involved in wrong 
doing, precisely what made you say, look, we must confront 
him about this.  Is it simply because there might have been 
some money transactions involved in the law firm that you 
knew nothing about, even if there was nothing wrong about 
them or was there – did there appear to be allegations of 
wrong doing of one kind or another? 
MR LOUBSER:   Chairperson we were more concerned 
about monies that was paid through the law firm, because 
10 
the rest was allegations in the newspaper with – we didn’t 
deal with that aspect we were more concerned about 
monies that was, somehow, through our law firm and it was 
not – the meeting was not a confrontational meeting it was, 
explain to us this, where – who’s Precise Trade and Invest, 
did these transactions flow through our firm, that was our 
concern.  Not the allegations that he had some wrong 
doing we were more concerned about the firm. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja but was the – were the allegations or 
was the impression you got from the article that some 
20 
monies had allegedly been paid from the law firm to buy 
some properties that you knew nothing about or was the 
allegation or was the impression that some monies were 
paid in to the law firm without your knowledge in regard to 
some properties, which exactly…[intervenes]. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 91 of 253 
 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes we were – there was mention made of 
money that was paid by or from or from our law firm which 
we were not aware of, myself and Mr van Wyk were not 
aware of. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:   Just to give some context to this, you 
wrote to Mr van der Walt on the 14 t h of October right, and 
that appears at page 120, that’s Annexure NLJ2 to your 
affidavit – sorry NJL2 to your affidavit, would that be 
correct, if you look at the bottom…[intervenes]. 
10 
MR LOUBSER:   I see it as page 119. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja it starts on 119. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes, and your signature and Mr van Wyk’s 
signature is at page 120, is that right? 
MR LOUBSER:   That’s correct. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, and it’s dated the 14 t h of October? 
MR LOUBSER:   That’s correct. 
ADV SONI SC:   Can I ask you just to turn back to an 
Annexure before that which is NJL2? 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   On what page? 
ADV SONI SC:   Sorry page 117 Chairperson.  Is this the 
nature of the article, because I see you say in your 
affidavit you couldn’t find the article in question but you 
give a – there is a summary of the article which you 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 92 of 253 
 
Annexed to your affidavit, is this the nature of the article 
that was written? 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes we couldn’t find the original article it 
appeared, I think it was in the Rapport and City Press, we 
couldn’t find the article anywhere on the internet but we 
managed to find – Mr Ollerman asked me if I can refer to 
the article and this was – this seems to be a synopsis of 
what was said in the newspapers. 
ADV SONI SC:   And the date of this News24 article is the 
4 t h of October 2018, is that right? 
10 
MR LOUBSER:   That’s correct. 
ADV SONI SC:   So that’s – two things, the articles or the 
media reports start early in October and you confront him 
about two weeks later, is that correct? 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
ADV 
SONI 
SC: 
 
 And 
if 
you 
– 
this 
is 
what 
the 
Chairperson…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry…[intervenes]. 
ADV SONI SC:   This is what the Chairperson was asking 
about, the nature of the article.  Would you just – you don’t 
20 
need to read the whole article but would you just read the 
headline of the article as it appears on page 117. 
MR LOUBSER:   It says 
“Lawyer 
forks 
out 
R25million 
for 
Montana’s 
mansions”. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 93 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:   And if you could just read the first 
paragraph of that article…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before that, Mr Soni, have you indicate 
from what publication this article comes? 
ADV SONI SC:   Chairperson you – sorry I should – Mr 
Loubser you’ll see under that headline the end is blotted 
out but it seems to be a News24 article, is that correct?  If 
you just look at the headline and under that on the left-
hand side, do you see that? 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes, under the headline, “Lawyer forks out 
10 
R25million for Montanan’s mansion”, it says News24. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV 
SONI 
SC: 
 
 
Right 
could 
you 
please 
just 
read…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And – I’m sorry, I see on the right-hand 
side there, I see the name Pieter-Louis Myburgh and then I 
see Rapport.  Do we know whether the article was written 
by Pieter-Louis Myburgh or we don’t know? 
ADV SONI SC:   It would be written by him and it would be 
a News24 report, based on what was contained in Rapport. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:   So, if you could read the first paragraph 
of that article. 
MR LOUBSER:   “A lawyer of close ties to a company that  
won large tenders from Passenger Rail Agency 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 94 of 253 
 
South Africa, when Lucky Montana was at its helm 
bought 
Montana 
two 
upscale 
properties 
worth 
almost R25million and paid for it in cash”. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now, is the name of the lawyer mentioned, 
if you look at the second page of that article? 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes, it’s mentioned on the second page. 
ADV SONI SC:   And…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well maybe he could read a few more 
sentences. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
10 
MR LOUBSER:   “The lawyer, Riaan van der Walt, from  
Pretoria, strongly denies that his shelf company 
acted as a proxy for Montana”. 
ADV SONI SC:   And then just so that your concern is 
noted, what does the next paragraph read? 
MR LOUBSER:    
“Van der Walt’s law firm has in the past represented 
a 
company 
featured 
in 
a 
Public 
Protector ’s 
Madonsela’s recent report on PRASA following an 
irregular tender worth billions of Rands”. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   And then the article gives a synopsis of 
some of the matters that they had uncovered…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think, Mr Soni, it’s fine he can just 
read and finish that article ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   As it pleases. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 95 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON: Just read and finish it Mr Loubser.   
MR LOUBSER:   Ja then it gets to a paragraph that starts 
– it says, 
“Vander Walt’s law firm paid a deposit of R5million 
towards the Sandhurst transaction and confirmed in 
a letter that the house new owner was Montana.  
The purchase agreements for both properties were 
ultimately altered to reflect Precise Trade and 
Invest 02 as the legal owner, whilst Montana 
himself took possession of the property keys.  
10 
Montana said he wished not to comment, van der 
Walt maintained that his shelf company was, in no 
way, related to Montana or any other third party”. 
ADV SONI SC:   Mr Loubser…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry…[intervenes]. 
ADV SONI SC:   There’s a paragraph that you didn’t 
read…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja I think so too, I thought – the 
paragraph that starts, “Van der Walt’s shelf company”. 
MR LOUBSER:   My apologies, 
20 
“Van der Walt’s shelf company, Precise Trade and 
Invest 
02 
paid 
R13.9million 
for 
a 
house 
in 
Sandhurst Johannesburg and R11million for a house 
in 
Waterkloof 
Pretoria, 
November 
2014 
and 
February this year respectively.  Both properties 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 96 of 253 
 
were paid for in cash, however, early 2013 Montana 
himself signed a contract of sale to buy the house 
in Waterkloof.    In October 2014 he signed an offer 
to purchase the house in Sandhurst”. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:   And then the last paragraph – the second 
last paragraph, about van der Walt’s relationship with Mr 
Montana, what does he say about it, according to the 
Rapport? 
MR LOUBSER:   “Van der Walt maintained his shelf  
10 
company was in no way related to Montana or any 
other third parties”. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, and then it says the full report 
appears in Rapport and City Press. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes, 
 
“And a full report, Rapport and City Press”, 
 
It’s a bit – some of the page is a bit cut-off. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, now you confront – well perhaps I 
should – you raise the issue with Mr Montana, is that 
correct, after this article or after the Rapport article? 
20 
MR LOUBSER:   No, we did not raise the issue with Mr 
Montana…[intervenes]. 
ADV SONI SC:   Sorry with Mr van der Walt. 
MR LOUBSER:   Van Der Walt yes, we raised the issue 
with Mr van der Walt regarding this shelf company, Precise 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 97 of 253 
 
Trade and Invest…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Look on this side again Mr Loubser.  
MR LOUBSER:   We raised the question of the company 
Precise Trade and Invest, we wanted to know more details 
of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you had a meeting with Mr van der 
Walt? 
MR LOUBSER:   Just enquiring, who’s this Precise Trade 
and Invest because it was not known to us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now that meeting that you had with Mr 
10 
van der Walt, yourself, Mr van der Walt and Mr van Wyk, 
it’s very important that I get as much of what was 
discussed there as possible.  It may be that it was a short 
meeting because it was agreed that you must put your 
request in writing but I want to hear the full discussion but 
if there is not much other than that you put the question 
and you said, put your questions in writing, just talk more 
to me about that discussion. 
MR LOUBSER:   I can honestly not recall the exact nature 
but it was brief and it was agreed that we will – base our 
20 
concerns in writing and give him an opportunity to respond. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:   So just taking up the theme, is it because 
you wanted it to be – you wanted there to be something in 
writing so there’s no dispute about what the real facts are 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 98 of 253 
 
or did he ask you for more time or did you say, give us time 
to prepare a proper enquiry to you? 
MR LOUBSER:   Sorry I don’t understand your question. 
ADV SONI SC:   Okay so let me put…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright who asked that there be a 
written request for information, did you and Mr van Wyk 
say to him- to Mr van der Walt, we will give you something 
in writing to tell you what we would like you to deal with or 
did he, that is Mr van der Walt, say to you, please send me 
something in writing then I will respond in writing. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   Once again I cannot recall but I’m pretty 
sure that we – I cannot recall who raised whether it should 
be 
in 
writing 
or 
not, 
I 
cannot 
recall 
but 
I 
assume…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well if you can’t remember it’s fine but 
in the end, it was agreed that you would put your request 
in writing, request for information. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes, that’s right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he would respond in writing? 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes, that’s right Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:   Mr Loubser why I asked that is, you are 
three partners and it would be unusual where you have a 
partnership of lawyers, for one partner to say, put it in 
writing or another partner to say, I will put it in writing.  It 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 99 of 253 
 
looks like there were concerns about what the real facts 
are or am I wrong, am I just speculating? 
MR LOUBSER:   No there was not concerns about the real 
facts we just wanted to – we were – at that stage we were 
three Directors and there was two other attorneys involved 
in it and we all run our own departments and each of us 
had a couple of hundred piles that we deal with and I don’t 
really know what Mr van der Wyk deals with or one of my 
PA’s deals with or what Mr van der Walt deals with.  So, it 
was not a thing of accusations we wanted to – who is 
10 
Precise Trade and Invest and exactly how – it was more an 
enquiry than saying there was something untoward. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes okay, anyway that meeting is held on 
the 12 t h and then on the 14 t h you send…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that 12 t h October? 
ADV SONI SC:   12 October 2015 Chairperson and one 
finds that in the first line of – in NJL3, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What page? 
ADV SONI SC:   Page 119. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Right, first line? 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, now under the heading “van 
vergadering gehou op 12 Oktober.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   There’s an English translation isn’t it? 
ADV SONI SC:   There isn’t an official, Mr Ollerman made 
…[intervenes]. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 100 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I thought some of these documents that 
were in Afrikaans there was some English translation 
provided? 
ADV SONI SC:    Mr Ollermann provided an informal 
translation for us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who provided it? 
ADV SONI SC:   Clint Ollermann. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay, well if it’s accepted as correct 
then that’s fine, I don’t know if Mr Loubser has seen it, that 
translation. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   No, he hasn’t Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it not here? 
ADV SONI SC:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh it’s not here. 
ADV SONI SC:   It’s not part of the record no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, alright well my Afrikaans is 
much worse than it was when I was at school, it was much 
better when I was at school, that’s centuries ago, so it 
would help if we could have, maybe, an official translation 
unless Mr Loubser is happy, later on to just provide an 
20 
English translation, I think he’s fluent in English.  Mr 
Loubser is that something that would be easy to do or you 
would rather we should have an official translation? 
MR LOUBSER:   No that’s fine I’m happy…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You can provide, yes okay. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 101 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:   Of this – of all four letters Mr Loubser. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes, obviously I will just want insight into 
to confirm whether it is a correct reflection of the record. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, what of course, you can do today, 
is when a reference is made to a letter that is in Afrikaans 
you can tell us what you were saying in English because 
it’s your letter you know it. 
MR LOUBSER:   Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   So just on that theme, Mr Loubser, would 
you tell us, more or less what – well summarise the 
10 
contents of NJL3. 
MR LOUBSER:   In the first paragraph we refer to the 
meeting…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry. 
ADV SONI SC:   That’s still page 119 Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are talking about NJL3? 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, that’s the letter of the 14 t h of October 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I don’t have anything written NJL3 at 
page 119. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   I think…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it the red writing? 
ADV SONI SC:   No, it’s the black writing above the red 
writing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well that looks like an odd – an O6 NOL3 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 102 of 253 
 
to me.  Why don’t you just use the pagination number.  
ADV SONI SC:   As you please, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Ja 
because 
– 
I 
think 
today 
…[intervenes]. 
ADV SONI SC:   Has not been the best of days. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Has not been the best of days. 
ADV SONI SC:   I’m sorry Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. I think just repeat the 
question to him. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Now if you could please summarise Mr 
10 
Loubser what this is? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your letters starting at page 119. 
MR LOUBSER:  The first paragraph referred to a meeting 
and just introductions or requests.  Second paragraph is 
physically asked him to confirm which immovable properties 
are currently registered in the company Precise Trade and 
Invest.  And then ask him if there is any properties 
registered in her name, provide us with exact details of the 
property.  Copies of the purchase agreements and how and 
when the purchase price was paid for the properties so 
20 
acquired.   
 
We continued to ask him whether the – if there was 
money paid by Precise Trade and Invest was that money that 
it flow through our trust account and if the money was 
through our trust account specify who paid money into the 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 103 of 253 
 
trust account and to whom those monies was paid because 
they are going to ask him to confirm who the current 
shareholders were in Precise Trade an Invest.  And then on 
page 120 there was a general question about a statement 
from I think it was a Mr – from the reporter. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Myburgh. 
MR LOUBSER:  Myburgh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR LOUBSER:  I do not know if should I repeat that – the 
statement which was made by the reporter.  The reporter – 
10 
maybe just – reporter basically stated that Mr Van Der Walt 
visited Mr Mario Ferreira at the offices of TMM Holdings 
frequently through 2014 sometimes twice a week.  These 
meetings occurred at about 6:30. Also learnt the documents 
were free to be taken from TMM Holdings to Loubser Van Der 
Walt Incorporated where Loubser Van der Walt’s receptionist 
took possession of such envelopes.  When I asked him about 
this allegation by the reporter.  Final question posed to him. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now that letter was written on the 14t h. 
MR LOUBSER:  That is correct. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Did he respond to that letter? 
MR LOUBSER:  He responded to that. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR LOUBSER:  And on page 121. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 104 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry before that.  The unofficial 
translations that Mr Oellerman had prepared are they 
available? 
ADV SONI SC:  I can make it … 
CHAIRPERSON:  [Indistinct 00:03:23] because if they are 
available I would like them to be unofficially sent to – 
handed up to me so I can… 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I can have a look at them as he deals with 
the letters that are in Afrikaans.  Because I did have hard 
10 
copies earlier on that were given to me.   
ADV SONI SC:  I just want to see if my hard copies are there 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because if I had known they were not here 
I would have conditioned myself to reading Afrikaans and try 
and resuscitate my knowledge of Afrikaans. 
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson can I do this?  I have a copy of 
Mr Van der Walt’s responses in English. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SONI SC:  So I have got translations of his responses.  
20 
Can I hand those up? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay that is fine ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  I am sorry I left the other two. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  In chambers. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 105 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine.  Okay.  But in the 
meantime, we can continue. 
ADV SONI SC:  So Mr Van Der Walt Ms Loubser responded 
on the 20 October, is that correct? 
MR LOUBSER:  That is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  And his response appears from page 121? 
MR LOUBSER:  That is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  Is that correct?  Now again very briefly could 
you just for the record indicate what his response was? 
MR LOUBSER:  He personally indicated he listed paragraph 
10 
1 and paragraphs 1.1 to 1.5 of the letter he listed the 
properties that was currently registered in the company 
Precise Trade and Invest.   
He then attached copies of the purchase agreements 
which we requested him to do so and he attached a bank 
account – a bank statement reflecting the monies received.  
Well it is bank account statement from Precise Trade and 
Invest indicating which monies was paid into that account 
and also paid.  That is at paragraph 3.  At paragraph 4 he 
say that that money paid into Precise Trade and Invest 
20 
account was paid by three entities.  One entity namely TMM 
and then two other persons, America Pimentel and Mark 
Clancy.   
Then to that he attached certain agreements between 
himself personally and TMM himself personally and Pimentel 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 106 of 253 
 
self personally and Mark Clancy.  He attached those 
agreements to that to explain why the money was paid into 
Precise Trade an Invests account.   
Then in the second paragraph he confirmed that he is 
the sole director and shareholder in Precise Trade and 
Invest.  The following paragraph he confirmed that over a 
period of eight years at various occasions and at various 
times sometimes as early as six o’clock in the morning and 
after hours he consulted together with advocates, with TMM, 
ESS, TMM Rental and Siyangena Technologies. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR LOUBSER:  Then – ja he continues he mentions a 
number of names of persons that he consulted with. 
ADV SONI SC:  Could you just read those names please? 
MR LOUBSER:  Okay, right I will do so.  He mentions then 
Ronel Wardalg, Karel Sanchez, Ray Ferreira, Mario Ferreira, 
Sheila Dos Santos, Tom Dubek, Alwin Wilsnach, Mannie 
Marx, Martino Marx, Anton Verster, Jacques Verster, Jacques 
Van Jaarsveld etcetera. On different occasions over a period 
of eight years consulted by Loubser Van Der Walt. Due to the 
20 
fact that Loubser Van Der Walt through Tanya Kruger and 
Dina Boshoff were responsible for various conveyancing 
transactions for TMM Rental.  They were the conveyancers 
of – for TMM Rental.  Further various allegation matters 
were 
dealt 
with 
by 
Loubser 
Van 
Der 
Walt 
and 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 107 of 253 
 
documentations was delivered to TMM Group or delivered to 
them through the offices. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
I 
see 
that 
in 
that 
letter 
or 
that 
correspondence Mr Van Der Walt’s style or tone of writing 
seems to be very official and he does not seem to be just 
writing as himself or maybe it is out of habit when you write 
a letter on behalf of your law firm to other people.  I see that 
in paragraph 9 he says, we – ons plaas [indistinct 00:10:07] 
deur die skrywer en die aangehegte dokumentasie bla, bla, 
bla.  And in the next paragraph wrote and says:  Ons vir – 
10 
ons versoek.  So this we makes me think he is being very 
official. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that right or it might be out of habit of 
writing like that when he writes [indistinct 00:10:35]. 
MR LOUBSER:  It seems to be because of the requests is 
also all together it formalised that my request is in writing 
and your responded in writing as per habit almost you draft a 
legal document which you do and provide it exact clarity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  It is not a reflection of any tension 
20 
that these issues that you raised caused among the 
partners? 
MR LOUBSER:  I do not – I do not know what he… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR LOUBSER:  What he perceived. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 108 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  What he might have said ja. 
MR LOUBSER:  Perceived my request were meant to be. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  So in – attached or annexed to that lettr 
were a number of other documents. 
MR LOUBSER:  That is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  Right.  I – I am more interested in some of 
them and Chairperson I do it purely in the interest of time 
not all of them concerned the matters raised in the 
Siyangena and I just want to concentrate on those matters 
10 
that are there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SONI SC:  If there is something else it will come up on 
a – at a later stage. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja that is right. 
ADV SONI SC:  Just in the interest of time I thought I would 
just deal with those matters that are of concern to us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no that is fine. 
ADV SONI SC:  I also – I should also say that if I do not 
mention for example certain transactions involving these 
20 
properties it is because they will be dealt with when the 
transactions as a whole are being dealt with.  The purpose of 
referring to these documents here is to indicate the – the 
importance of the documents to the matters that we are 
dealing with in the commission. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 109 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I did not hear an earlier sentence.  You 
said you do not – I do not know whether you said you do not 
mention the properties or something? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  So for example, Chairperson he deals 
– if you look at page 123. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SONI SC:  That is the first annexure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SONI SC:  He deals with a property being sold by Mr 
Isaac Roy Mogojane to Precise Trade.  Now that is not a 
10 
matter that has been mentioned in the Siyangena matter or a 
matter appearing to involve Mr Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, obviously we only interested … 
ADV SONI SC:  That is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In only certain matters and those are the 
ones that involve Mr Montana. 
ADV SONI SC:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As well as Siyangena. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or any company that might be related to – 
20 
in one way or another to Siyangena. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  So I just refer Mr Loubser to those. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  And bring it to your attention. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 110 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Can I then ask you to look at page 138 
which is an offer… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Soni I wonder because he referred 
earlier on to TMM and maybe whether from now on it should 
be made clear who TMM is. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that the viewer and listener can 
connect as the evidence proceeds. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Mr Loubser do you know who TMM is? 
MR LOUBSER:  Yes they were a client of ours which we 
have – is a – is a – I think it is TMM group and which I 
understood Mr Mario Ferreira to have been the head of that 
TMM group and existed.  He had – Mr Ferreira had different 
entities but we did work for all of them.  Any – any – the 
contact person where he worked was always a Mr Mario 
Ferreira.  We had a relationship with Mr Van Der Walt so any 
20 
work that Mr Ferreira had either personally or through one of 
his entities Mr Van Der Walt was the attorney that dealt with 
all those transactions.  So I do not know all these entities.  
The only one I knew is TMM Rentals because we – there is 
some of the properties that they sold we were responsible 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 111 of 253 
 
for the transfer of those properties and also collect rentals, 
arrear rentals if they had tenants which did not pay. 
ADV SONI SC:  Talking about transfer of properties was at 
that time Loubser Van Der Walt Incorporated involved in any 
of the transfers of these properties? 
MR LOUBSER:  All these properties mentioned? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes by Mr Van der Walt. 
MR LOUBSER:  I – I am not sure but I am – I believe so. 
ADV SONI SC:  You do not believe so. 
MR LOUBSER:  No I believe so. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  You were – oh okay. 
MR LOUBSER:  I was not personally involved in it but from 
what later came to hand it appears that we were in some of 
them we were the conveyancers. 
ADV SONI SC:  You were the conveyancing. 
MR LOUBSER:  We were the conveyancers yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Would you be able to identify those?  The 
properties. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I was thinking Mr Soni whether seeing that 
Mr Van Der Walt in his letter that Mr Loubser read mentioned 
20 
certain names at page 122 and two of the people he 
mentioned there are Ferreira’s.  I wondered whether he 
could say whether the Ferreira that he is talking about is one 
of these or not and whether also other names that are there 
if any… 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 112 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You would know whether they have any 
relevance. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To.. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes that is as you please Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I see and Mr Tom Dubek. 
ADV SONI SC:  Dubek yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  So before we move away from this 
letter I would like that to be clarified. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  So at page 122 Mr Loubser – are you 
there? 
MR LOUBSER:  Yes I am. 
ADV SONI SC:  Okay remember we asked you to read the 
names of those people. 
MR LOUBSER:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now the one you have already mentioned Mr 
Ferreira. 
MR LOUBSER:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now he you say was associated with the 
20 
TMM Group. 
MR LOUBSER:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Which is a group of companies which 
included TMM Rental. 
MR LOUBSER:  Yes. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 113 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Now what other companies to your 
knowledge was Mr Ferreira associated with? 
MR LOUBSER:  I – I do not know.  There is TMM Rental and 
I do not know exactly how the TMM Group was structured 
who was all.  I will – yes – I know – what I know is a 
company ESS I know Engineering Systems Solutions we did 
work for them as well and I know Mr Ferreira was also – I do 
not know if he was the head of that but I know he has an 
involvement in a company called ESS or I know the company 
SAU that knew them.   
10 
ADV SONI SC:  And Siyangena? 
MR LOUBSER:  Siyangena I did not know at that stage 
personally I did not know who Siyangena was or how they 
were involved with Mario Ferreira.  I did not know that at that 
stage so… 
ADV SONI SC:  At that stage and now? 
MR LOUBSER:  Subsequently it appears that he was also 
involved 
somehow 
as a 
director or a 
shareholder 
of 
Siyangena. 
ADV SONI SC:  Who – when did you discover that? 
20 
MR LOUBSER:  I cannot say for certain.  Through the media 
and through time I cannot put a specific date on that.  It is 
difficult to know.  I still do not know hundred percent sure 
whether Mr Ferreira was involved in that company Siyangena 
but through reports it just came to my attention but I know 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 114 of 253 
 
company docket or documents or anything can confirm that 
but I assume through what I have heard read that he was 
involved in – somehow involved in that company Siyangena 
and … 
ADV SONI SC:  And Mr Tom Dubek? 
MR LOUBSER:  Mr Tom Dubek I also knew him as the – was 
the – I think he was the accountant for the – for TMM.  That 
is how I know – I have met him, Tom Dubek and I – I was 
made to know that he was involved with TMM.  I think he was 
the accountant, general accountant. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes we saw an affidavit yesterday and I am 
just checking this with you which he deposed to in which he 
described himself as the CFO of Siyangena.  Do you – does 
that ring a bell? 
MR LOUBSER:  I did not know – I knew him as the – as the 
– he could have been the CFO of TMM but I did not know 
that he was CFO of Siyangena.  I – all I knew that he was 
the CFO or accountant for TMM. 
ADV SONI SC:  TMM yes.  The only two names that appear 
to ring a bell. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  In … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine.  Just to recap what 
does Mr Van Der Walt say in that paragraph 7 about the 
people that he mentions there including the two Ferreira’s 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 115 of 253 
 
and Tom Dubek? 
MR LOUBSER:  He said that he consulted with them over a 
period of eight years due to the fact that Loubser Van Der 
Walt through Tanya Kruger she was a conveyancer [indistinct 
00:22:16] 
stage 
and 
Dina 
Boshoff 
who 
was 
also 
a 
conveyancer at a stage responsible for various conveyancing 
matters on behalf of TMM Rental and some of the transfer 
documents was delivered to their offices or from their offices 
to our offices.  And he further mentions that various litigation 
matters were dealt with and affidavits was delivered by 
10 
various employees of the TMM Group to Loubser Van Der 
Walt. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV SONI SC:  So among the documents that Mr Van Der 
Walt handed to you and Mr Van Wyk together with his letter 
of the 18 October I would like you to look at page 138 
please.   
MR LOUBSER:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now what is that document if you could just 
describe it? 
20 
MR LOUBSER:  It is an offer to purchase entered into by Mr 
Montana and Precise Trade Invest for the purchase of a 
property described as Erf 359 Portion 0 Township Parkwood 
for a purchase price of R6.8 million. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes and the street address of that property 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 116 of 253 
 
you will see it at paragraph 1.2. 
MR LOUBSER:  10 Newport Road, Parkwood, Johannesburg. 
ADV SONI SC:  And that set out – sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I am sorry Mr Soni.  So this relates to 
this 
so 
called 
Parkwood 
property 
or 
the 
property 
in 
Parkwood. 
ADV SONI SC:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  And this is the one Chairperson you will 
recall that Mr Montana sold to Precise Trade. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Okay.  So it is the Parkwood 
property. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay thank you proceed. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson in an effort to save time 
because we are going to deal with these matters when we 
deal with each of the properties. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR LOUBSER:  I am just going to refer to the documents so 
that we can identify Mr Van Der Walt as the source of the 
20 
documents, what they mean and their role in the picture we 
are trying to paint will be presented when those transactions 
are dealt with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but what – what needs to be done and 
that is why I was checking that it relates to the Parkwood 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 117 of 253 
 
property. 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh sorry yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that we mention we associate the 
document with the property concerned. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  This one is relevant to the Parkwood 
property. 
ADV SONI SC:  Property yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Another one will be relevant to another 
property. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  No sure yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  And then can I ask you to look at the 
next document it appears at page 145 and what is that 
document? 
MR LOUBSER:  It is headed Addendum to Offer to Purchase 
entered into between Sipho Lucky Montana and Precise 
Trade Invest and on the second page it continues. 
ADV SONI SC:  So… 
MR LOUBSER:  It is an addendum to an offer to purchase. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  So this is an addendum we reading the two 
documents together to the Parkwood. 
MR LOUBSER:  I just want to refer back to the previous one 
because in the addendum it says addendum to an offer to 
purchase the 5 May and if I refer back to the previous 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 118 of 253 
 
document it seems to be an amendment to the Parkwood 
sale – property. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the document appearing at pages 145 
to page 147 relates to the Parkwood property? 
ADV SONI SC:  The Parkwood property. 
MR LOUBSER:  Yes it is an addendum to the real one. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now I just – I ask you this because it is a 
matter that intrigues me.  Mr Montana sells the – and I am 
not asking you to – to tell me what it means but tell me what 
10 
your view is about this.  Mr Montana sells the property to Mr 
Van Der Walt for R6.8 million in May.  In June they sign this 
amendment and the amendment at paragraph 2.1 requires 
Montana – Mr Montana to effect certain improvements and 
installations into the property.  Would that – is that your 
reading of that? 
MR LOUBSER:  But that is what it says. 
ADV SONI SC:  Ja.  Does that sound usual to you? 
MR LOUBSER:  I cannot comment on that I do not know why 
they – there was a subsequent addendum.  I was not a party 
20 
to the agreement and I do know how – why they put it in that 
way. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is the date of the offer to purchase? 
MR LOUBSER:  It was in May 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh then… 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 119 of 253 
 
MR LOUBSER:  The addendum. 
MR LOUBSER:  June – the addendum is June. 
ADV SONI SC:  Was six weeks later Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MR LOUBSER:  Ja May almost six weeks later yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The transfer had not taken place at the 
time of the addendum? 
MR LOUBSER:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV SONI SC: Then the – sorry. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am – I am reflecting on your impression 
that is strange. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I thought that was because – that was 
because the addendum was done after the transfer had 
taken place.  But if – if it was before the addendum had 
taken place why would it be strange, I just want to make sure 
I can follow? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Even for later witnesses. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes, no, no I understand.  Chairperson A 
sells to B something for R5million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  It is a property or whatever it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 120 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:  That is a binding contract.  B must take the 
property and pay a R5million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR LOUBSER:  The effect of the amendment is to say that 
before I take the property, I am going to reduce the amount I 
am going to give you because this – these are the 
improvements you are going to make. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SONI SC:  And A willingly agrees to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Well I – I can imagine that – you 
10 
mean he agrees to that without saying let us adjust the 
purchase price?  You know so I am thinking that if that – the 
buyer could considerably sell to the seller; I know we have 
agreed the price but for maybe I have just become aware 
that the condition of the kitchen is actually quite bad.  I had 
not seen it properly.  I know that I have already signed and 
you have no obligation but you know what I gave you a very 
good price. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Can you not just fix – agree to fix this. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It will mean a reduction on the price on 
what you will get on your profit. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I gave you much more than a normal 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 121 of 253 
 
profit. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that might be the explanation. 
ADV SONI SC:  No, no I understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  But what – or the point I am making 
Chairperson is it calls for an explanation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no that is fine but I wanted to 
make sure whether… 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I can follow it. 
ADV SONI SC:  No sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja because I had thought it was strange 
but I think my thinking was that it happened after the transfer 
which is not correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  No of course. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  The next document is an offer to 
purchase made by Precise Trade to Mr Kohler in respect 119 
Empire place, Sandhurst, is that correct?  It appears at page 
20 
148. 
MR LOUBSER:  At page 148.  That purports to be yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry 148? 
ADV SONI SC:  148. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 122 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay now all the documents that you are 
going to refer to as you ask Mr Loubser questions is it 
documents that were furnished to Mr Loubser and Mr Van 
Wyk by Mr Van Der Walt? 
MR LOUBSER:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alight. 
ADV SONI SC:  And Chairperson can I just again for your 
own orientation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR LOUBSER:  This is the Sandhurst property. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay that is important ja.  This – the 
offer to purchase at page 148 relates to the Sandhurst 
property. 
ADV SONI SC:  The Sandhurst property yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:  The next document is an offer to purchase 
made again by Precise Trade to on [indistinct 00:32:19] 
guest house, is that correct Mr Loubser? 
MR LOUBSER:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What page is that? 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh sorry page 154 Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  154. 
MR LOUBSER:  Yes it appears so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To which property does this one reflect? 
MR LOUBSER:  This is the Waterkloof property Chairperson. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 123 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Waterkloof property.  Okay that is the 
document 
– 
offer 
to 
purchase 
– 
purchase 
and 
sale 
agreement from pages – from page 154 up to… 
ADV SONI SC:  File 163. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SONI SC:  163. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh there.  Well the agreement goes up to 
159 but maybe there is an annexure? 
ADV SONI SC:  They all annexures to the same document 
Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay up to 163. 
ADV SONI SC:  163 yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please Chairperson.  Then Mr 
Loubser can I ask you to look at page 164. 
MR LOUBSER:  Yes I do have it in front of me. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now when you were explaining what Mr Van 
Der Walt said because he said that he had entered into 
contracts with certain people who provided funds for the 
property, is that right? 
20 
MR LOUBSER:  Yes in his response he said he – Precise 
Trade Invest was funded by certain investors. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR LOUBSER:  He mentioned GMM, Pimentel and Clancy. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 124 of 253 
 
 MR LOUBSER:  Investors. 
ADV SONI SC:  So this is one of the investors? 
MR LOUBSER:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Pimentel? 
MR LOUBSER:  Pimentel yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  You will see Mr Loubser and I just want to 
correct something that this is an agreement between Mr 
Pimentel and Precise Trade. 
MR LOUBSER:  That is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  And the reason it is important is I will show 
10 
you a difference in a moment with a different contract. 
MR LOUBSER:  Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  And in terms of this contract if you look at 
paragraph 2.1 Mr Pimentel agrees to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is 2.1 at page 165. 
ADV SONI SC:  165 Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Pimentel undertakes to invest a maximum 
of R20 million in this joint venture. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Over a period of twelve months. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Over a period of twelve months.  Sorry.  Is... 
is... is that? 
MR LOUBSER:  I see that, yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now the next document which appears at 
page 170... oh, sorry.  Can I just make one other point?  You 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 125 of 253 
 
do not need to go to it.  It is... this document is dated the 
3rd of November.  Is that correct? 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the year, when? 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh, sorry.  2014 Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR LOUBSER:  Can I... 
ADV SONI SC:  If you look at page 169, you will see the 
date of... of... 
MR LOUBSER:  The 3r d of... 
ADV SONI SC:  3r d of November. 
10 
MR LOUBSER:  Ja, the handwriting is... 
ADV SONI SC:  [laughs]  So it is your partner. 
MR LOUBSER:  So, let... let us assume. 
ADV SONI SC:  [laughs] 
MR LOUBSER:  November ...[indistinct] fourteen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] 
MR LOUBSER:  Okay.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
ADV SONI SC:  May I just ask you?  Who is Callitz? 
MR LOUBSER:  Uh, the secretary.  Ja. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  At your firm? 
MR LOUBSER:  At our firm, yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Is she still there? 
MR LOUBSER:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Uh, just to mention.  When you ask Mr 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 126 of 253 
 
Loubser about who Calitz is...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:  Ah, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...you are referring to a person who signed 
as a witness? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes, who signed as a witness.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, ja.  On... on... on... on the agreement 
at page 169? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  Then the next document is a next contract 
10 
between 
Mark 
Edward 
Clancy(?)[00:01:27] 
and 
Precise 
Trade.  It starts at page 170.  Would I be correct uh...? 
MR LOUBSER:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  And if you look at paragraph 2.1.  Mr Clancy 
undertakes to invest a maximum amount of R 2 500,00 in the 
joint venture over the period of 12-months. 
MR LOUBSER:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now if you look at page 175.  What is the 
date of this document? 
MR LOUBSER:  3 November 2014. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  And who signs as a witness. 
MR LOUBSER:  Uh, Carlitz.  It seems to be Carlitz. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR LOUBSER:  I think that... that is... she is actually a 
receptionist, Vivienne Carlitz in our firm.  
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 127 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  [Indistinct] appearing for or above the 
name, Precise Trade.  Is that of Mr Van der Walt? 
MR LOUBSER:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright.   
ADV SONI SC:  If I... can I ask you to look at the next 
document which starts at page 180.  Um, what is this 
document uh, on the face it uh, Mr Loubser? 
MR LOUBSER:  It appears to be a memorandum of 
agreement entered into between TMM Holdings.  Mr Mario 
Ferreira and Mr Jan Adriaan van der Walt.   
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR LOUBSER:  Um, term of agreement uh...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:  Uh, just... just before that.  Uh, TMM 
Holdings, who represents TMM Holdings...[intervenes]  
MR LOUBSER:  Uh...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:  ... in respect of this contract? 
MR LOUBSER:  Yes.  From here, it is a... it is entered by 
MJA Ferreira.   
ADV SONI SC:  And that is Mario Ferreira? 
MR LOUBSER:  Uh, yes.  Mario Ferreira. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  All right.  And this agreement, unlike the 
agreement uh, that Mr Clancy and Mr Pimentel signed is with 
Mr Van der Walt in his personal capacity.  Is that correct? 
MR LOUBSER:  Yes, it is an agreement between three 
parties, TMM, Ferreira and Van der Walt personally. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 128 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  And Ferreira and TMM Holdings are 
together 
referred 
to 
as 
TMM. 
 
If 
you... 
if 
you 
look...[intervenes]  
MR LOUBSER:  It provides in page... paragraph 1.1 of the 
agreement. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  And under their names at page 180. 
MR LOUBSER:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  And you will see there that unlike Mr Clancy 
and Mr Pimentel the right that is given to... or... the... the... 
where they have to pay.  What this agreement does is, it 
10 
allows Mr Ferreira... oh, sorry.  Mr Van der Walt to present 
any deals that come his way to TMM who have the right to 
first refusal to that deal.  Is that correct? 
MR LOUBSER:  That is what it appears from the agreement, 
yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  And then, if you look at paragraph 5.  You 
see that it is not only local.  Will you read paragraph 5 into 
the record Mr Loubser? 
MR LOUBSER:  “The parties agreed that this agreement will 
be applicable for all local and international investments”. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  And if you look at page 185.  When was this 
agreement signed? 
MR LOUBSER:  It is signed by TMM on the 14t h of March by 
Mr Ferreira.  Also, on a form... uh, ja, the 14 t h of March.  The 
handwriting is not clear.  The 14t h of March 2012 it appears. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 129 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:  And Mr Van der Walt...[intervenes]  
MR LOUBSER:  Ja, all... all of them it appears. 
ADV SONI SC:  Do you recognise the signature of the 
witness? 
MR LOUBSER:  Uh, yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Who is that? 
MR LOUBSER:  That is also a secretary at our firm. 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh. 
MR LOUBSER:  Oh, a previous... a previous secretary.  
Sorry.  Connie Steiger. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is the name? 
MR LOUBSER:  Connie... I think it is... Connie Ferreira 
Steiger. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  Unrelated to Mr Ferreira. 
MR LOUBSER:  Unrelated. 
ADV SONI SC:  Ja. 
MR LOUBSER:  She is no longer with the firm. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Then if you look at the next document 
Mr Loubser.  It is at page 186.  And can you describe that 
20 
document?  Page 186. 
MR LOUBSER:  It appears to be an addendum to a previous 
agreement.  It does not specify which ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Uh, just raise your voice and repeat again. 
MR LOUBSER:  Oh, it appears to be an addendum to the 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 130 of 253 
 
previous agreement.  It does not really specify which 
agreement but it seems to be an addendum to a previous 
agreement. 
ADV SONI SC:  Alright.  And what this agreement says... if I 
could just ask you to summarise page 187, paragraph 1 and 
2? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:  Oh, sorry.  One, two and three.  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It appears to be an agreement on its own, 
does it not?  It does not seem to amend any other 
10 
agreement, does it?  On these terms. 
ADV SONI SC:  Uh, not.  You... you are quite right 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  It seems to be a standalone 
agreement. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  Okay.  You. you accept that Mr 
Loubser? 
MR LOUBSER:  Uh...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Or you are not sure? 
20 
MR LOUBSER:  No uh...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  It does not seem to be an addendum 
to...[intervenes]  
MR LOUBSER:  In... either those...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  It says addendum...[intervenes]  
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 131 of 253 
 
MR LOUBSER:  It is... it is starting ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  At page ...[indistinct]  
MECHANICAL INTERRUPTION:  [00:07:54] 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...when one reads paragraph 1 uh, it 
seems to be just uh, uh, fresh... a standalone agreement. 
MR LOUBSER:  It appears so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes, because there is no reference to that 
agreement at all Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  H’m. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Now this teams with three separate issues.  
The Venice Village Development.  Do you know anything 
about that? 
MR LOUBSER:  Uh, I know there was a development with Mr 
Van der Walt with involved in his personal capacity with uh, 
Mr Ferreira.  I do not know if he was a shareholder or how 
he was involved but I knew about a development that... that 
appears with that.  I knew they... they were somehow 
involved.  How... 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
20 
MR LOUBSER:  Also, a director of this Venice Village or... I 
do not know.  But I knew... I have heard in the passing 
mentioned that Venice Village. 
ADV SONI SC:  Okay.  And his reward would be set out at 
paragraph 1.1.  What is that? 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 132 of 253 
 
MR LOUBSER:  Uh, the parties specifically agree that Van 
der Walt will be entitled to receive 5% referral commission 
on each and every unit sold of this development to third 
parties. 
ADV SONI SC:  The...[intervenes]  
MR LOUBSER:  The second part.  It is a heading, Ponton(?) 
[00:09:32] loan. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR LOUBSER:  The parties agree that on date of repayment 
and fulfilment of the loan agreement of Ponton, Van der Walt 
10 
will receive a referral commission of 17%.  And the third one 
relates to... its heading, Wetlands Country Retreat.   
 
The parties agree that Van der Walt facilitated the 
purchase of the shares through Triple Trade and Invest and 
Van der Walt will be entitled to refer.... receive a referral 
commission.   
 
Uh, it sets out sale of game.  He is entitled 30% of the 
nett profit.  He is also entitled to 10% or... that is after the 
business plan is been approved, the parties will agree to 
either convert the referral commission received by Van der 
20 
Walt into 10% shares into Triple Trade and Invest. 
ADV SONI SC:  And then it records certain payments that 
were received uh...[intervenes]  
MR LOUBSER:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Do you have any idea what that is about? 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 133 of 253 
 
MR LOUBSER:  Uh, it reports payment that is being received 
by Van der Walt in terms of the... I assume the agreement 
which he lists dates and amounts which totals R 4 50 402,69.   
ADV SONI SC:  Now, do you know whether Mr Van der Walt 
accounted to the firm for these amounts that he lists here? 
MR LOUBSER:  No, he did not. 
ADV SONI SC:  He did not? 
MR LOUBSER:  No. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now, when you get these documents, I take 
it... you are not going to say were outraged but you were 
10 
concerned that Mr Van der Walt is receiving this money that 
is not going into the business or did that not concern you? 
MR LOUBSER:  He... uh, Mr Van der Walt um, has always 
been an investor in different companies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  He has always been...? 
MR LOUBSER:  He was always uh... always uh... it was not 
strange because he entered into agreements with various 
parties, friends and to develop properties.   
 
But when he showed me this um, he explained it, this is 
work which he had done early in the mornings, after hours, 
20 
over weekends, something... an agreement he entered on its 
own with uh, with ...[indistinct]  
MECHANICAL INTERRUPTION 
CHAIRPERSON:  So...[intervenes]  
MR LOUBSER:  Indeed he did. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 134 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
...or 
was... 
was 
this 
work 
that 
...[intervenes]  
MR LOUBSER:  He did on his own...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  ...he was allowed to earn income if he did 
it outside of normal working hours? 
MR LOUBSER:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He was allowed to do that? 
MR LOUBSER:  He was not... he never specifically disclosed 
it to me but I did not take issue with it, the fact that he 
earned money which I knew.  He was working late at night 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR LOUBSER:  ...with other people involved. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But what I am saying is um, as far as 
you know ...[intervenes]  
MR SONI SC:   So can I then come back to page 197 and 
the last three questions you asked there and your question 
at paragraph 9 seems to suggest that you are right that the 
handwritten inscription would have been entered into 
before it was given to you because you then ask what does 
20 
TMM loan and TMM agreement mean, is that correct? 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes.  So, Mr Chairperson, my assumptions 
were mine, I accept that. 
MR SONI SC:   And then you ask him about other payments 
and then you ask him a question about Mr Montana.  I 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 135 of 253 
 
would like to deal with each of those matters please.  So 
your question at paragraph 9 on page 197 is what? 
MR LOUBSER:   “You made certain notes on the bank  
statement, TMM loan and TMM agreement.  Kindly 
distinguish between the two.” 
MR SONI SC:   And what is his answer?   
MR LOUBSER:   He says …[intervenes] 
MR SONI SC:   It appears at page 201, paragraph 18, 
Chairperson. 
MR LOUBSER:   What I understood from his explanation is 
10 
TMM loan, so loan that he received from TMM, personal 
loan or a loan between Precise Trade and TMM.  It is loan 
that he received from – money from and the TMM 
agreement, I assumed was the agreement where TMM had 
to 
pay 
certain 
commissions 
or 
work 
he 
had 
done 
personally. 
MR SONI SC:   Right and then paragraph 10 you ask him if 
he was aware of the investigation. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes, I asked if he is aware of any 
investigation by SAPD or any other instance which – ja. 
20 
MR SONI SC:   And what was his answer? 
MR LOUBSER:   He said -  I translate: 
“Ek is nie bewus...” 
Or it is in Afrikaans, I am not aware of any …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I think I have lost you or you 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 136 of 253 
 
have lost me.  Paragraph 10 at which page? 
MR SONI SC:   Page 201, Chairperson, the answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   201. 
MR LOUBSER:   At paragraph 19, page 201. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Oh.  Ja, I think you said at 
paragraph 10 and I was looking at – on the side which is 
paragraph 19. 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that is at paragraph 10? 
MR SONI SC:   At paragraph 10, yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but that appears at paragraph 19, 
okay. 
MR SONI SC:   And what was his answer? 
MR LOUBSER:   In response to my question if he is aware 
any investigation by SAPD or any other instances, he 
responded, he said he is not aware of any investigation of 
whatever nature by any instance against him personally or 
against Precise Trade and Invest. 
MR SONI SC:   And then paragraph 10 at page 197, what 
was the question? 
20 
MR LOUBSER:   It is the second 10. 
MR SONI SC:   Sorry, the second 10, yes. 
MR LOUBSER:   The second 10. 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR LOUBSER:   Then I asked whether Mr Montana is in 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 137 of 253 
 
any – enigsins, any – involved to the entity. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, what did you – you asked him 
whether he knew Mr Montana? 
MR LOUBSER:   Ja, maybe to rephrase, I asked whether 
Mr Montana is in any way involved to the entity Precise 
Trade and Invest and if so, the nature of his involvement.  
And also asked him were there were at any stage payments 
made to him out of that Precise Trade and Invest account 
except for the purchase of the property and he responded 
to that.   
10 
MR SONI SC:   That is at page 202, paragraph 20, out 
paragraph 10.2, is that correct? 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes, I am the sole – I am hundred percent 
shareholder in Precise Trade and Invest and the sole 
director.  No final agreement could be finalized between 
Precise Trade and Invest and Mr Montana due to various 
reasons but specifically the way how to deal with property 
transactions 
and 
investments 
as 
well 
as 
Montana’s 
shortage 
of 
funds. 
 
There 
was 
negotiations 
with 
– 
regarding a possible joint venture in various properties but 
20 
the parties decided not to proceed with the joint venture.  I 
confirm that all five the properties belong to Precise Trade 
and Invest. 
 
And then, as the second part of my question, 
whether any payments was made by Precise Trade and 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 138 of 253 
 
Invest to Montana other than the purchase price, he says a 
loan of R1.3 million was granted to Mr Montana which are 
clearly set out in a loan agreement. 
MR SONI SC:   So I just want to go back to that last issue, 
Mr Loubser, did you understand that to mean that the loan 
had been made through the Precise Trade account? 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   Can I then ask you to look at the account – 
the bank account of Precise Trade which, as we have 
already indicated, starts at page 90 and goes up to page 
10 
193. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   So perhaps I should just deal with the last 
point because it is fresh in everybody’s mind.  He says that 
a loan was made to Mr Montana of R1,3 million on the 20 
February 2015. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   Okay.  May I just ask, if one looks at the 
bank account itself, I have looked for it but I have not seen 
such an amount being debited to the account.  So if you 
20 
look at page 194. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   That is the February transactions. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   Can you see – and I am asking because I 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 139 of 253 
 
have looked for it, to tally. 
MR LOUBSER:   Sorry, you are looking at page? 
MR SONI SC:   Page 194.  Sorry, 191.   
MR LOUBSER:   191 deals with November – sorry, 191, my 
apologies.  There he says …[intervenes] 
MR SONI SC:   If you look from the bottom you will see the 
last entry is made on the 28 February. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes, I see that. 
MR SONI SC:   And if you went up you will see there is an 
entry on the 20 February but that is for R2 million. 
10 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   But there is no indication that on 20 
February R1,3 million was given to Mr Montana. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   And you will see it is in relation to – if you 
look at page 191, the account reflects that that was in 
respect of the Parkwood property. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes.  Erf 359, Parkwood. 
MR SONI SC:   Yes.  Mr Loubser, it is not my intention to 
suggest that there is something wrong here, I am just 
20 
saying there is a bit of a disjuncture between what Mr van 
der Walt said in his response and that the bank account 
reflects.  I am just trying to point that out through you. 
MR LOUBSER:   I can – I do not – I am not here at all to 
try and explain what Mr van der Walt did [inaudible – 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 140 of 253 
 
speaking simultaneously] 
MR SONI SC:   No, no, I am not asking, I am just pointing 
it out. 
MR LOUBSER:   But all I can point out is, in his answer at 
page 202 he said a loan was granted to Montana on the 20 
February 2015 which is clearly set out in a loan agreement.  
Unfortunately, loan agreement was not annexed to it but a 
reading of that does not necessarily mean the R1.3 million 
was paid on the 20 February, it could have been the 
agreement was made – done on the 20 February 2015 but 
10 
to be paid in March of April.  I am not saying that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I am not sure whether there is any 
issue between the two of you because the lighting here is 
quite bad, I think a few days ago I asked if somebody could 
arrange to get some lights that could help me here.  So 
when you were referring Mr Loubser to payment at page 
191, I think of 20 February, I was trying to have a look here 
and I was expecting to see in the entries reference to Mr 
Montana but I was not able to see so I am not sure, so – 
but I got the impression that there is some issue about 
20 
some question or there is no issue? 
MR SONI SC:   Chairperson, all I have a duty to do is, the 
witness is presented documents to say in respect of the 
documents that he is presenting – and I know [inaudible – 
speaking simultaneously] 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 141 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR LOUBSER:   Is there is – there appears to be 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, I understand that, I see – I got 
the impression that Mr Loubser was not prepared to give 
an answer to a question, is that correct or is that not 
correct? 
MR LOUBSER:   No, not at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR LOUBSER:   Not at all, I more than willing to answer 
10 
any questions, if I understand the question …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, alright.  I did not hear 
everything but I understood Mr Soni to simply want to 
check with you whether his understanding of this document 
would be the same as yours. 
MR LOUBSER:   No, fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In relation to – with reference to what Mr 
van der Walt had said.  On the fact of it that did not appear 
to me to be a problem, ja. 
MR LOUBSER:   No, no, definitely no …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   There is no problem. 
MR LOUBSER:   I mean, if for clarity sake Mr Soni can put 
the question to me again, I might… 
MR SONI SC:   So, Mr Loubser, this is my difficulty, we are 
trying to work out where the monies reflected in the bank 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 142 of 253 
 
account went to and tally it with the explanation given to 
Mr van der Walt – I mean, by Mr van der Walt to you.  Now 
he says, when you ask him specifically about Mr Montana, 
he says we gave – I gave must Montana a loan of R1,3 
million. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   Now I am – and I would have expected that 
there would be an entry that reflects a debit of R1,3 million 
around that period.  Now I was I just pointing out it does 
not appear to be so. 
10 
MR GREEN:   It does not appear. 
MR SONI SC:   So that is… 
MR LOUBSER:   I agree, it does not appear, thanks. 
MR SONI SC:   And there is no reflection of a payment to 
Montana during that period – can I just point this out again 
and again so that we have it on record, he makes, for 
example, on the 18 July at page 190 – you will see he talks 
about the Montana payment.  On the 18 July again, he 
talks about another Montana payment and then on 24 July 
he talks about TLM and that I understand is Tshepo Lucky 
20 
Montana.  That is Mr Montana. 
 
So those three I could relate to Mr Montana and 
that was the only purpose of my question. 
MR LOUBSER:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, you say TMM as reflected in 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 143 of 253 
 
handwritten form at page 190 you understand to be a 
reference to Mr Montana? 
MR SONI SC:   No, not TMM, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
MR SONI SC:   On the 24  – at page 190, on the 24 July 
2014 there is an amount – a payment of R400 000 and you 
will see in the bank statement it is said the reference is 
TLM. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, now I can see, TLM. 
MR SONI SC:   That is right. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   You say there is a handwritten TMM, so I 
thought you were saying TMM, you say TLM. 
MR SONI SC:   TLM. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
MR SONI SC:   So I am merely pointing out that where 
there appears to be a reference to Mr Montana it coincides 
with what Mr van der Walt gives in his breakdown. 
 
Now can I just ask you, Mr Loubser, because if you 
are not aware of this, all we can ask you to do is to confirm 
that all these documents were given to you with these 
20 
handwritten inscriptions there and knowing Mr van der 
Walt’s handwriting you say that that handwriting is his 
handwriting. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not know about the fact of the 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 144 of 253 
 
transactions, the payments made into the accounts and the 
payment made from the account. 
MR LOUBSER:   No, I do not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And all you can do is rely on what Mr 
van der Walt said. 
MR LOUBSER:   What he answered. 
MR SONI SC:   I just – if I could ask one final question 
because it is quite relevant to this.  If you look at the very 
first entry in the bank account or the transaction history we 
were given, it is on the 18 June 2014, am I correct? 
10 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   And that is a deposit of R1,85 million, is 
that correct? 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   The second entry is on the same date, the 
18 June 2014 and there is a deposit of R400 million – 
sorry, R4 million. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   Right.  And to that Mr van der Walt says is 
the TMM loan, as he describes it. 
20 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   Then immediately after that there is a 
payment on the very same day of R2,25 million. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   And that is said to be in regard to Precise. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 145 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Regard to? 
MR SONI SC:   To Precise as reflected in …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that where he has written guarantee 
or something? 
MR SONI SC:   No, no, no.  Next to – under the date 
18/06/2014 it says withdrawal and in the line immediately 
under that the bank write Precise Riaan(?) loan. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Is that not with reference to that 
R2 250 000? 
MR SONI SC:   Yes, yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is in relation to that? 
MR SONI SC:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On my page immediately after that there 
is something written there by hand that looks to me like 
guarantee but it might be something else.  Do you have the 
same thing. 
MR SONI SC:   Oh, yes.  No, no, you are quite right, 
Chairperson.  I was not looking – because that is next to 
the figure 2,25 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Is there any significance to 
that handwritten…? 
MR SONI SC:   It has significance, Chairperson, because 
this is the first payment made in respect of Parkwood 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 146 of 253 
 
property. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just raise your voice, that is the first 
payment? 
MR SONI SC:   Sorry, it is the first payment made in 
respect of Parkwood property. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, made by Mr van der Walt? 
MR SONI SC:   Van der Walt. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR 
SONI 
SC: 
 
And 
that 
obviously 
is 
a 
payment 
…[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the reference to guarantee, is there 
any – or you do not know? 
MR SONI SC:   What I understand, when one looks at the 
whole 
picture, 
the 
Parkwood 
agreement 
between 
Mr 
Montana and Precise Trade is to this effect that there will 
be a payment, a down payment of R2,5 million and they 
also say that that can be paid in respect of the bond 
outstanding on Mr Montana’s property that he is occupying 
in Waterkloof at that time.   
 
So just – the inference is that that was the payment 
20 
made to finalize that bond. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  Mr Loubser, is that Mr van der 
Walt’s handwriting or not, that says guarantee, or not? 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you have any understanding of what 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 147 of 253 
 
that guarantee means apart from what…? 
MR LOUBSER:   Not at all, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You have no idea what it means? 
MR LOUBSER:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MR SONI SC:   Chairperson, may I – I just want to 
complete the picture because this was not only conjecture.  
If I can ask you to look at page 198, with respect, 
Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   While I am looking at that, this 
10 
document, Mr Loubser, starting at page 190, the one we 
are looking at. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is part of what Mr van der Walt 
furnished to you and Mr van Wyk, is it not? 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you not have occasion to ask about 
what this guarantee refers to? 
MR LOUBSER:   No.  In his response he just said that that 
was part of the purchase price. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR LOUBSER:   He says that R2.250 000, it is part of the 
purchase price. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, alright.  Page 1…? 
MR SONI SC:   Page 198. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 148 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   198, yes. 
MR SONI SC:   Chairperson, you will see at the middle of 
the page is the start of paragraph 2.2 talking about the 
purchase price of R6,8 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   This is his dealing with the answer to this 
Parkwood Property and you will see on the 18 June that is 
the payment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   That is made in respect of …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   And I put – because I have read the terms 
of the agreement, the purchase of the Parkwood property 
by Mr van der Walt, the clause reads in terms of a deposit 
of R2,5 million will be paid and he says but this can be 
paid in respect of the bond on Mr Montana’s property in 
Waterkloof. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I may have read somewhere, and I 
thought it might be in connection with the agreements 
relating to these properties or in relation to documents 
20 
relating to this Swifambo or Siyaya or Siyangenda.  I seem 
to think I have read somewhere an agreement that refers to 
certain payments as guarantees or guarantee. 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So when I see this guarantee I am 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 149 of 253 
 
wondering whether it has a connection with what I may 
have read somewhere, so – but maybe not. 
MR SONI SC:   You will recall, Chairperson, yesterday 
when Ms Ngoye was giving evidence she talked about the 
R900 million guarantee. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   That they were required to pay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   And that which they saw for the first time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR SONI SC:   When the interdict applications were done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes in relation to Swifambo. 
MR SONI SC:    No, Siyangena. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, Siyangena.  So maybe that is 
where I am taking it from. 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, that is alright. 
MR SONI SC:   Mr Chairperson, in view of the fact that Mr 
Loubser does not know any more about these, it would be 
unfair to ask him to speculate and one is just going to get 
20 
the correct answers, well, I cannot tell, this is what was 
said to me.  And it may just be better to confirm that all of 
this is what was said to him and then for us to draw our 
own inferences when one puts the whole picture together. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well in any event you – if you have 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 150 of 253 
 
not already done so, if you have information relating to Mr 
van der Walt, you could send notice to him to say these are 
– this is what we are looking at, you are at liberty to 
furnish us with an affidavit, obviously he at liberty even to 
come to South Africa. 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And apply to adduce evidence. 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So he might elect to put up an affidavit. 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   He might elect to come. 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He might elect not to want have anything 
to do with us and, of course, since he is out of South 
Africa, we cannot compel him. 
MR SONI SC:   No, sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that is fine but there is one question 
I want to ask.  Mr Loubser, there is a letter that – I do not 
know where exactly it is here in the bundle but there is a 
letter that Mr van der Walt wrote on the letterheads of the 
20 
law firm if I am not mistaken or it might have been an email 
but he wrote to an estate agent, I believe, in regard to one 
of these property transactions and said to the estate agent 
that the law firm had, I think, R5 million in its trust account 
which was for financing that property.  I got the impression 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 151 of 253 
 
in the documents that there was no such amount in the 
trust account of the law firm when Mr van der Walt said 
there was.  Do you remember what – did you come across 
that in the documents or not? 
 MR LOUBSER:   There was – ja because that was in the 
media report, there was still also mention of a R5 million 
but there was never money in our trust account, Loubser 
Van der Walt, the firm’s trust account of R5 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR LOUBSER:   We never held it in our trust account. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So to the extent that that is what 
he said in a letter, that is not true, as far as you know. 
MR LOUBSER:   We did the whole …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   To the extent that he may have said 
there was at a particular time when he wrote that letter 
there was an amount of R5 million in the law firm’s trust 
account for that property, that would not be true. 
MR LOUBSER:   I do not know the exact dates but I do not 
– we… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR LOUBSER:   There was never an amount of R5 million 
deposited into the firm’s trust account. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR LOUBSER:   By …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   5 million, is it not?  Not 500 000, 5 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 152 of 253 
 
million? 
MR SONI SC:   Yes, 5 million, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that much you can say, that there 
was never such an amount. 
MR LOUBSER:   Not in the firm’s trust account. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In the trust account. 
MR LOUBSER:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Do you remember that letter? 
MR SONI SC:   Yes, I …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you able to refer him to it and the 
10 
page so that for the sake of completeness we…? 
MR SONI SC:   Yes.  I know we made a point of it in 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I wonder whether your junior is able to 
be of assistance. 
MR SONI SC:   Yes.  Chairperson, this is a document that 
appears somewhere in another file. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In another file. 
MR SONI SC:   Can I show it to Mr Loubser? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR SONI SC:   And then I will address you on where we 
will find it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is fine, ja. 
MR SONI SC:   And when it will come for you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is fine.  Mr Loubser, if you can 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 153 of 253 
 
have a look at that letter?  You can say, in the meantime, 
Mr Soni, that is it is a letter date what. 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or if it is an email dated what, from 
whom and addressed to whom and about what. 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or you will not be able to say that until 
you get the letter back. 
MR SONI SC:   No, I …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe Mr Loubser you can tell us. 
10 
MR LOUBSER:   Let me …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who is it from? 
MR LOUBSER:   It is a letter from Loubser Van der Walt 
Incorporated to Pam Golding Property. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR LOUBSER:   With a heading T L Montana transaction. 
“Referring to our conversation…” 
It is dated the 8 November 2014, wherein the signatory, Mr 
van der Walt, confirmed that: 
“We hold in our trust investment account and 
20 
amount of R5 million which amount is available to 
be allocated towards the purchase price of the 
property. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Would that statement be correct 
that at that time – you know whether that statement is 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 154 of 253 
 
correct that at that time there was R5 million deposited in 
the law firm’s trust account in regard to that property? 
MR LOUBSER:   I am not aware of R5 million that was paid 
into 
our 
firm’s 
trust 
account, 
but 
it 
refers 
here 
to 
investment – Investec account. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, it is not a trust -  the letter does not 
say trust account, it says investment account.  The letter, 
what does it say? 
MR LOUBSER:   It says: 
“…held in our trust investment account, Investec 
10 
Bank, R5 million.” 
But I am not aware of such a R5 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that something that can be checked, 
that you can check and maybe do a supplementary affidavit 
whether when you investigate you are able to confirm for 
sure whether it is so or it is not so or are you sure that 
there would not have been?  I just want us to be sure. 
MR LOUBSER:   There would not have been a – no, I 
cannot say for sure, but I can check whether we received 
an amount from whoever into our trust account. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, because we just want to – we want 
to see whether what he said there was factually correct. 
MR LOUBSER:   So this letter is dated the 6 t h or the 8 
November. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni and them can email you so that 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 155 of 253 
 
you have a copy or – so then you can do a supplementary 
affidavit.  He can keep it. 
MR SONI SC:   Yes, yes, we will make another copy, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, keep it and then by when would 
you be able to file a supplementary affidavit just to deal 
with that part? 
MR LOUBSER:   Next week. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Next week Wednesday, next week 
Friday? 
10 
MR LOUBSER:   By next week Friday at the latest. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Friday next week. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes, Mr Soni just exactly what the 
…[intervenes] 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, no thank you. 
MR SONI SC:   Can I, Chairperson, because it may well be 
an important issue, if one looks at page 193 – is it 191?  
Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
20 
MR SONI SC:   Of the papers and that is the – sorry, page 
190 of the papers, the date of that is the 6 November, the 
date of the letter where Mr van der Walt confirms that that 
is the amount.  If one looks at page 190 and looks at the 
entry in the bank statement on the 6 November 2014 you 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 156 of 253 
 
will see a deposit of R5 million from Mr Pimentel.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on one second, you are saying you 
are page 190? 
MR SONI SC:   190. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then what date? 
MR SONI SC:   6 November 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:   6 November 2014.  Yes? 
MR SONI SC:  And you will see that that is a deposit of R5 
million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh yes, there is a deposit of R5 million 
10 
and is this the investment – Investec account that he was 
talking about in the letter? 
MR SONI SC:   Mr Loubser? 
MR LOUBSER:   That could be, that is why I looked at the 
dates.  But as Mr van der Walt previously indicated all 
these amounts was paid into Precise Trade and Invest 
directly, not through Loubser Van der Walt’s trust account. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR LOUBSER:   Been deposited directly.  So it could be 
that he meant – no, I do not want to speculate what he 
20 
meant. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR LOUBSER:   He received R5 million in Precise Trade 
and Invest. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes,  
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 157 of 253 
 
MR LOUBSER:   But that money was – R5 million was 
never paid into our normal trust account. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  But the letter does represent, as 
you read it, that the money was being held in the trust 
account of – or in the account of the law firm, is that right? 
MR LOUBSER:   It says that it is held in our trust 
investment account.  But that trust investment account is 
the one of Precise Trade and Invest. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would you have had such an account as 
a law firm?  Trust investment? 
10 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or is it Investec or investment account 
that he refers. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes, the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The way you invest your clients’ money 
that you have not used, would that be where it…? 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There would be a trust investment 
account. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is where you would invest clients’ 
monies that you are not supposed to… 
MR LOUBSER:   No, those accounts were – actually were 
property transactions where the purchaser bought the 
property and he did not require a guarantee …[intervenes] 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 158 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, so that it gets interest in the 
meantime. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, but the reference therein that 
in that letter is it a reference to that type of account that a 
law firm would have or is it a reference to a different 
account? 
MR LOUBSER:   I do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are not sure? 
MR LOUBSER:   No. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  But as you read it, it 
could refer to – you say it may have – it may have meant 
Precise Trade’s Investec account. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  And the letter is dated what? 
MR LOUBSER:   8 November. 
MR SONI SC:   The 6 t h.  It is dated the 6 t h, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The letter is dated the 6 t h? 
MR SONI SC:   The 6 November. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which is the same date as the entry. 
20 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you see it as 6 or as 8, what is 
written there? 
MR LOUBSER:   It is very… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Very difficult and the lighting is not 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 159 of 253 
 
good. 
MR LOUBSER:   Illegible, it could be either a 6 or 8, it is a 
zero …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, but whether it is 8 or 6, if this 
deposit happened on the 6 it might not make a difference. 
MR SONI SC:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay. 
MR SONI SC:   May I, while you are there, Chairperson, 
refer you to the very next entry on the bank account.  The 
6 November is a deposit from Mr. Pimentel of R5 million 
10 
and then on the 7 November in the bank account the very 
next entry is a payment of R5 million to Pam Golding 199 
Empire Place, which is the Sandhurst Property, which is 
what that letter refers to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes, which is the Parkwood. 
MR SONI SC:   No, no, Sandhurst. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, Sandhurst.  
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Okay. 
MR SONI SC:   Because that is the letter addressed to 
20 
Pam Golding who sold the Sandhurst property. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, that letter is in regard to the 
Sandhurst property. 
MR SONI SC:   That is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine.   
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 160 of 253 
 
MR SONI SC:   The bank account doesn’t but Mr van der 
Walt’s inscription says it was by Mr Plimenthal, you will 
see the name Plimenthal next to that five million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay.  Are you done?  Are you 
done with …[intervenes] 
MR SONI SC:   I am. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you very much Mr Loubser for 
coming to give evidence.  I guess that for the sake of 
completeness even though at this stage it might look 
obvious, it might help if you are able to confirm that 
10 
roundabout that date of 6 November 2014 there was no 
such deposit amount held within the trust account in 
relation to any such property. 
MR LOUBSER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, just so that it is clear and that line is 
Friday next week. 
MR LOUBSER:   You can just phrase it like that and I will 
do a supplementary affidavit. 
ADV SONI SC:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In fact, okay no thank you very much, 
20 
you are excused. 
ADV SONI SC:   Thank you so much Mr Loubser. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni we are at nearly twenty five to 
five, I indicated that I would be prepared to sit till later 
than that, but I was thinking we would go up to six, but I 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 161 of 253 
 
did say we would find out from the witness who would be 
coming in whether it is convenient because they might not 
have planned to be here for that long.  What is the 
position?  Who is the next witness? 
ADV SONI SC:   The next witness is Mr Green Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Check what his situation is about us 
continuing or whether he is happy to come back tomorrow.  
Well you can just ask him, he will speak from where he is, 
you don’t have to go there. 
ADV SONI SC:   He is happy to continue Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   He is happy to continue.   Okay, and we 
won’t be long with him. 
ADV SONI SC:   No, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, let’s take a ten minutes break now 
and if there was going to be another witness ...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:   There is another witness, and that is Ms 
Karen de Beer.   She came all the way from Cape Town so 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, what is her situation?  She can just 
speak from where – what is your situation?  You are happy 
20 
to stay?   Yes, you are spending the night in Jo’burg?  Oh 
you live in Pretoria?   Oh you came from Cape Town, but 
tomorrow would be inconvenient for you?   It would be 
inconvenient tomorrow, okay alright, we will try and finish 
because your evidence won’t be long either, but let us take 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 162 of 253 
 
a ten minutes break, and then we will continue, it is twenty 
five to now, we will resume at quarter to. 
 
We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay Mr Soni let’s proceed. 
ADV SONI SC:   Chairperson the next two witnesses are, if 
I can call them, and I say this because of the support the 
Commission needs from ordinary people and these are two 
10 
ordinary people going about their business and are here to 
assist the Commission in explaining the roles of different 
players. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   What you will see when all the evidence is 
led Chairperson that Mr Montana was the person who goes 
and spots the properties, makes offers for the properties 
and then enters into contracts and eventually the property 
is transferred to the Versace Trade, because you have 
heard now that all the – except the holding property, so we 
20 
have an estate agent, Mr Green and an owner, Ms De Beer, 
who will give evidence to that effect.  The evidence will be 
short but with respect Chairperson it is quite dramatic 
because 
they 
remember 
Mr 
Montana’s 
role 
in 
the 
transactions. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 163 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you need also to say what makes 
their evidence relevant, namely that the transactions 
relating to these properties insofar as they involve Mr 
Montana happened in the context of certain contracts 
involving PRASA, of which Mr Montana was Group CEO 
and Siyangena, is that right? 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And Siyangena and the relationship 
between TMM and Siyangena. 
ADV SONI SC:   That is so. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, do you want to just wrap that up? 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just touch on that properly so that 
whoever is listening can follow, because you and I have 
read a lot of these documents, we know, but somebody 
else might say I am not following this evidence by this 
witness or by the Commission now. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, Chairperson the evidence of Mr 
Loubser 
confirms 
what 
we 
already 
know, 
and 
the 
importance of Mr Loubser ’s evidence is he says the 
20 
information that he communicated today was given to him 
by Mr van der Walt.  That information is to this effect, that 
Mr van der Walt acted as an attorney for TMM, acted as an 
attorney for Siyangena, acted as an attorney of ESS, all 
major companies in which Mr Mariel Ferreira has a major 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 164 of 253 
 
interest.    
 
What we also know is that some of these properties, 
not necessarily all, but some were funded by money and Mr 
Loubser ’s evidence on – having regard to what Mr van der 
Walt told him on money supplied by TMM and Chairperson 
it is important when one looks at TMM is not TMM the 
company but TMM in the joint venture agreement that he – 
Mr van der Walt submitted to Mr Loubser and that Mr 
Loubser brought to court today. 
 
So when we talk about TMM we are not only talking 
10 
about the company, we are talking about TMM and Mr 
Ferreira. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   And these are not small sums of money 
Chairperson, you will recall the first amount is R5 000 000 
and R1 800 000 paid on the same day, the very same day 
to commit to R5 000 000 is paid to settle Mr Montana’s 
debt – Mr Montana’s bond in a property he owns in 
Waterkloof. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you.  Thank you, Mr Green, 
20 
for your patience and for coming to give evidence, we 
appreciate your cooperation, you can administer the oath 
or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
MR GREEN:   Louis Green. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 165 of 253 
 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR GREEN:   No I don’t. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR GREEN:   Yes, I do. 
REGISTGRAR:   Do you swear that the evidence you give 
will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth, if so please raise your right hand and say so help me 
God. 
10 
MR GREEN:   So help me God. 
MR LOUIS GREEN:   [d.s.s.] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, you may be 
seated.   You may proceed Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:   As you please Chairman.  Mr Green 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Although he will ask the questions look 
at me most of the time. 
ADV SONI SC:   Mr Green what is your profession at the 
moment? 
20 
MR GREEN:   At the moment I am a practicing Estate 
Agent. 
ADV SONI SC:   And in 2014? 
MR GREEN:  In 2014 I was an Estate Agent as well.  
ADV SONI SC:   And at that stage would Hootch Agency, a 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 166 of 253 
 
group where you attached to? 
MR GREEN:   I was with Pam Golding in the Hyde Park 
office. 
ADV SONI SC:   Does the name Mr Montana – Lucky 
Montana ring a bell with you? 
MR GREEN:   Yes it does. 
ADV SONI SC:   And in what connection? 
MR GREEN:   I sold two properties to Mr Montana. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, can I just ask you,  you’ve made an 
affidavit…[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry, do raise your voice a little bit 
because there’s some noise with the aircon here, thank 
you. 
ADV SONI SC:   So, you say you sold? 
MR GREEN:   I sold two properties to Mr Montana. 
ADV SONI SC:   Just for putting them in context, one is in 
Sandhurst and the other is in Hurlingham? 
MR GREEN:   That’s correct. 
ADV SONI SC:   So those are the two deluxe properties.  
Now…[intervenes]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe for the sake of completeness, 
2015, 2014? 
MR GREEN:   I’m going to have to refer…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That’s fine.  
MR GREEN:   It was during 2014/2015 …[intervenes]. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 167 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s fine the exact date you can look 
up later I just wanted us to have that ballpark in terms of 
time frame. 
ADV SONI SC:   You’ve made a statement in regard to 
these transactions is that correct? 
MR GREEN:   That’s correct. 
ADV SONI SC:   And that statement was made on the 1 s t of 
October 2015, is that correct? 
MR GREEN:   That’s correct. 
ADV SONI SC:   Chairperson, Mr Green’s statement 
10 
appears at Bundle G, page 80 and 81. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are dealing with Bundle G hey, is that 
right?  
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, that is so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, and…[intervenes]. 
ADV SONI SC:   Page 80 and 81. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you admit Mr Loubser ’s statement as 
EXHIBIT SS16, I don’t think so, I don’t remember you 
asking me…[intervenes]. 
ADV SONI SC:   No SSO, I think I forgot Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay we’ll – it is so admitted as 
EXHIBIT SS16, that is now the statement or affidavit of Mr 
Nicholas Johannes Loubser. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: And the Annexures thereto and now we 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 168 of 253 
 
are dealing with the affidavit of Mr Louis Green and that is 
in Bundle G and you would like me to admit it as EXHIBIT 
SS15.   
ADV SONI SC:   As you please Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit of Mr Louis Green is 
admitted as EXHIBIT SS15, ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now, Mr Green I understand this took 
pace some time ago and I understand that you were not 
well for a period thereafter.  You may look at your affidavit, 
you may want to recast your affidavit.  I just want to deal 
10 
with the first property that you are talking about, that you 
sold to Mr Montana.  Can you recall the details of how that 
happened? 
MR GREEN:   Yes I was on show and Mr Montana came to 
the show day, this was – I’m recalling the first time I met 
Mr Montana, he came to the show day, it was just before 
the closing of the show day and he asked if he could just 
run through the house quickly …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is which house now? 
MR GREEN:   This was the…[intervenes]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   This was the last one? 
MR GREEN:   No, this was the Hurlingham house. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hurlingham house?  
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s where you met him for the first 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 169 of 253 
 
time?   
MR GREEN:   That’s where I first met him. 
CHAIRPERSON: Okay.   
MR GREEN:   He ran through the house and said that he 
was interested in the property, he was looking to develop 
and it would be of interest to him.  I had another property 
in Sandhurst which was in Empire Place, which is the first 
property that he purchased, that property I invited him to 
come and view the property at one of my show days which 
he came to visit. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   And did – what was his reaction after the 
show day at Sandhurst? 
MR GREEN:   He certainly showed interest in the property 
and said that he would like to proceed with the purchase of 
the property, it was a very good deal as well and he 
recognised that. 
ADV SONI SC:   Did he make an offer? 
MR GREEN:   Yes, he did make an offer. 
CHAIRPERSON: What was the property sold for, before he 
made an offer what was it up for. In terms of the amount, 
20 
you can refresh your memory by looking at the documents.   
MR GREEN:   That property, prior to me getting the 
mandate, I think was at around R18million with the 
previous agency.  I sold the property, I think it was 
R13.9million. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 170 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   To Mr Montana? 
MR GREEN:   To Mr Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay, but you say that, at some stage 
before you got involved with the property it was about 
R18million?  
MR GREEN:   That’s correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But do you have any recollection of what 
the amount was at which you were selling it before Mr 
Montana made the offer of …[intervenes].  
MR GREEN:   I think it was around about the R15million. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay. 
MR GREEN:   And the circumstances around the sale were 
that the owner had already purchased and renovated a new 
house for his family. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR GREEN:   So, you know, there was definite opportunity.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes he needed a sale as soon as 
possible 
MR GREEN:   Ja he needed – you know we managed to put 
a deal together. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  
ADV SONI SC:   So, Mr Montana made an offer and did the 
old man accept the offer? 
MR GREEN:   Yes, I don’t recall if it was that Mr Montana 
offered 
R13million 
and 
the 
owner 
came 
back 
with 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 171 of 253 
 
R15million, you know whether it was – the bottom line is, it 
was settled at R13.9million.  So I don’t recall the exact 
circumstance as to how we arrived at the R13.9million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja that’s fine. 
ADV SONI SC:   Alright, now in regard to that sale, if I can 
call it that, was any deposit paid? 
MR GREEN:   Yes, there was a deposit paid. 
ADV SONI SC:   What was the amount of the deposit? 
MR GREEN:   The deposit was R5million. 
ADV SONI SC:   If I could just ask you, Mr Green, in that 
10 
Bundle in front of you, would you look at page 85?   
MR GREEN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well before that, can I just clarify this.  
When Mr Montana made the first offer as you recall, did he 
make that offer on the basis that he personally was the 
purchaser? 
MR GREEN:   Yes, the offer was made by him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, not for an entity or…[intervenes]. 
MR GREEN:   No, it was by him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay, thank you. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   Chairperson I thought I’d just get rid of 
this document, this is the very document that Mr Loubser 
was shown. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay let’s deal with that. 
ADV SONI SC:   I just thought I’d…[intervenes]. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 172 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now, when Mr Montana – sorry can you 
remember who the seller was, the name of the seller? 
MR GREEN:   Yes, it was Kholer. 
ADV SONI SC:   Mr Kholer? 
MR GREEN:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   And the deposit was paid, was then the 
property sold to Mr Montana? 
MR GREEN:   Yes, the deposit would only have been paid 
once the sale agreement was agreed. So the offer to 
10 
purchase, once it’s signed by all parties, becomes the sale 
agreement. Once the sale agreement is ready, the deposit 
will be paid. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, now I just want to get to the point 
where, eventually, the property was transferred, not to Mr 
Montana but to a company called Precise Trade, is that 
correct. 
MR GREEN:   That’s correct. 
ADV SONI SC:   How did that happen? 
CHAIRPERSON: I’m sorry, just before that, in terms of the 
20 
agreement, what was the deposit that Mr Montana was 
supposed to pay?   
MR GREEN:   R5million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  R5million and that’s the deposit that was 
paid? 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 173 of 253 
 
MR GREEN:   That’s the deposit that was paid. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:    Now, it was eventually sold to Precise 
Trade, am I correct? 
MR GREEN:   That’s correct yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   If I can ask you to look at page 
92…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I know that, because of time you may be 
skipping certain things deliberately but I think it is 
important to capture some of those circumstances under 
10 
which the identity of the purchaser changed in terms of, if 
from changing it from it being Montana in his personal 
capacity to a legal entity.  So the circumstances under 
which – that should be captured. 
ADV SONI SC:   You appreciate, Mr Green, that Mr 
Montana signs an agreement to buy the property and then 
the property is then going to be sold to somebody else.  
The question is, how did that change come about, having 
regard to the fact that a R5million deposit had already 
been paid? 
20 
MR GREEN:   Ja I don’t recall the exact events, other than, 
I was asked to please speak to the seller to see if they 
could change – so in effect, cancel the first agreement and 
substitute that agreement with a new agreement with 
Precise. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 174 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  
MR GREEN:   So, it wasn’t an issue where the property 
was transferred or that any of the process had already 
started, the only thing that had happened was the deposit 
had been paid and in this substitute agreement – so I 
would never allow an agreement to be cancelled, the 
agreement would need to be substituted.  So, there would 
need to be a new agreement and once that agreement is 
received then the other agreement is cancelled and I make 
reference in the – on page 94 that the deposit in 2.1 was 
10 
received on the 7 t h of November 2014.  So, the deposit had 
already been received on the fist sale agreement. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, so when we say at page 94, this is 
the agreement between Mr Kholer and Precise Trade? 
MR GREEN:   That is correct, this is the final sale 
agreement. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, so if I can just ask you when you’re 
saying, in – about how the change took place, can I ask 
you to please look at paragraph 5 of your affidavit.  I know 
it’s a long time and that’s why I thought you may want to 
20 
refresh your memory, page 80 paragraph 5.  Do you want 
to read that into the record and…[intervenes]? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think he may well actually – you know 
it’s a very short affidavit this, he could just read it. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, that may be…[intervenes]. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 175 of 253 
 
MR GREEN:   Should I read that? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   Could you read the whole affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Read the whole affidavit ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   Read that and we can ask specific 
questions. 
MR GREEN:   I must read the whole affidavit? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja you can read the whole affidavit.  
MR GREEN:   “I the undersigned, Louis Green, ID number 
5905125119086…[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or maybe you can start on the – on 
paragraph 2. 
MR GREEN:   Okay, 
“On or about mid 2014, I was instructed by Mr 
Kholer to market and sell a property known as 
portion 18 of Erf 1 Sandhurst Gauteng, situated at 
119 Empire Place, Sandhurst, Johannesburg.  As a 
result, thereof I placed the property on show a 
number of times and on or about the 26 t h of October 
a gentleman, now known to me as Mr Lucky 
20 
Montana, visited the show day and expressed 
interest in buying the property.  Either that day or 
the next day, I cannot now remember, Montana 
signed an offer to purchase for the property in the 
amount of R13.9million.  I cannot now recall where 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 176 of 253 
 
the offer was signed as I do many offers, it may 
have been signed on the show day.  The offer was 
accepted by the seller on the 28 t h of October 2014.  
I was subsequently contacted by a certain Mr 
Adriaan Riaan van der Walt by email on 24/11/05, 
the email contained a letter…[intervenes]?. 
CHAIRPERSON: That’s 2014 hey?   
MR GREEN:   Yes 2014, 
“From Loubser van der Walt Incorporated Attorneys 
confirming that they had R5million in a Trust 
10 
account with Investec Bank.  A true copy of the 
email, the attorney’s letter and the offer to purchase 
signed by Montana is attached hereto, marked as 
Annexure LG1…[intervenes]. 
ADV SONI SC:   Sorry Mr Green and sorry Chairperson, I 
just want to place this on record, you – after you left Pam 
Golding were you able to receive any documents from 
them? 
MR GREEN:   No all of the – I was completely locked out of 
everything, so all my email was deleted, all my diary was 
20 
deleted and I have no access to any documentation. 
ADV SONI SC:   And I just place on record, Chairperson, 
that many of the documents that I refer to in the affidavit, 
are not in our possession and we couldn’t find the primary 
source because, as Mr Green says, these are all deleted 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 177 of 253 
 
thereafter.  So, I just place that on record, when you see 
the affidavit and Annexures there will be some Annexures 
that are missing. 
MR GREEN:   But these documents were a part of the 
affidavit at the time of signing the affidavit which was done 
at the Werksmans offices in Sandton.   
“On the 7 t h of October 2014 I received an email 
from an der Walt with proof of payment in the 
amount of 
R5million into Pam Golding’s Trust 
account for and on behalf of Lucky Montana, I 
10 
attach a true copy of that email as Annexure LGG.  
On the 25 t h of November I received a further 
facsimile from van der Walt with a letter attached, 
marked as urgent, the effect of the letter, as will be 
seen, was to change the buyer from Lucky Montana 
to a company called Precise Trade and Invest 02 
Pty Ltd.  I then sent a fresh offer to purchase to van 
der Walt in the name of Precise Trade and Invest 
Pty Ltd which was immediately signed by van der 
Walt and returned to me.  Note that at clause 1.5 I 
20 
wrote the expression, the deposit 2.1 was received 
on 7 t h November 2014.  The effect of this is that the 
deposit paid for Lucky Montana was not being held 
– was now being – sorry was not being held, I think 
that should be now, for Precise Trade and Invest 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 178 of 253 
 
Ltd.  A true copy of the relevant emails and new 
offer 
to 
purchase 
is 
attached 
hereto, 
marked 
Annexure LG3.  The conveyancing was carried out 
by Snyman’s Incorporated; the Fourways office and 
the property was transferred on the 6 t h of August 
2015. Within a few days of transfer, I went to the 
property and met with Riaan van der Walt, he was 
on his own and to the best of my memory this was 
the first time that I had seen him I walked him 
through the property and handed him the keys.  
10 
There is one more document I want to attach from 
my file, I do not know when I got it but it is a copy 
of the bank guarantee for the payment of the 
remaining R8.9million from Invested.  I attach a true 
copy of this as Annexure LG4”.  
ADV SONI SC:   Mr Green, can I just stop you there, that 
is now everything you say in this affidavit about the 
Sandhurst property. 
MR GREEN:   This is all relating to Sandhurst yes.  
Coincidentally I was also the selling agent on another 
20 
property that was purchased by Lucky Montana, this is the 
property located in Hurlingham on 12 Montrose Road, and 
known as the remaining extent of Erf 70 Hurlingham.  The 
Seller was Mrs Gavisser and Montana bought it from her 
with myself as the agent.  The conveyancing was done by 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 179 of 253 
 
Janine Bredekamp in Parkview.  I distinctly recall Janine 
Bredekamp calling me one day and saying that Mr Montana 
had contacted her and requested her to change the buyer 
from himself to another entity.  I do not now recall what 
that entity was but she refused to go along with it as she 
wanted to finalise the transaction.  That transfer went 
through on the 28 t h of July 2015.  I attach a copy of the 
Title Deeds hereto as Annexure LG5 and as far as the 
seller of that property is still in occupation and paying 
occupational rent.  Prior to me signing this statement, I 
10 
have carefully read through it and am satisfied that the 
facts are correctly and accurately recorded, the following 
questions were put to me, in person by the Commissioner 
of Oath and I entered the answers in my own handwriting. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR GREEN:  Do you know and understand the contents?  
Yes.  Do you have any other documents? 
CHAIRPERSON:  No you do not have to read that. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR GREEN:  Thank you. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Now Mr Green as I understand from my 
conversation with you earlier today you do not have an 
independent 
recollection 
of 
this 
but 
this 
– 
of 
these 
transactions but what you have set out here is what you – 
or you knew on the 1 October 2015, is that correct? 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 180 of 253 
 
MR GREEN:  Yes and it was on documents that were 
presented to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR GREEN:  The initial investigation was done by I think 
Paul O’Sullivan. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Werksmans.  Was it done by Werksmans? 
MR GREEN:  Sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:  The initial investigation was it done by 
Werksmans? 
MR GREEN:  By Paul O’Sullivan the investigator. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  No fine. 
MR GREEN:  Ja and – so that was we initially made contact 
with and provided me with documentation and you know the 
documentation never came from me but it was provided to 
me by O’Sullivan. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now in respect of – you have – how long 
have you been an estate agent? 
MR GREEN:  I have been an estate agent I think for 
15/16/17 years. 
ADV SONI SC:  In respect of these two properties I mean I 
20 
know one was the transfer was effected in the name of 
Precise Trade. 
MR GREEN:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  But as far as you were concerned to whom 
was that property sold, that is the Sandhurst property? 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 181 of 253 
 
MR GREEN:  Well the first sale as the documents reflect 
was 
to 
Lucky 
Montana 
and 
the 
property 
eventually 
transferred to the company not to Lucky. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  After the transfer of the property did 
you have – according to your knowledge did you have 
communications with the purchaser? 
MR GREEN:  Yes I did. 
ADV SONI SC:  And did you have communications with Mr 
Montana? 
MR GREEN:  I think I did yes. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  And – but you do not have an independent 
recollection of it? 
MR GREEN:  Well I – I did see a document where after the 
transfer I had spoken – I had sent out an email where I 
have copied – it was in respect to the pool cover. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR GREEN:  Where I have copied Montana in on the email 
that I sent to Van Der Walt, to Precise and he was quite 
irate and upset at the fact that I have copied Montana in on 
the email.  So yes I had. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  But subsequent to that did you then 
continue communicating with Mr Montana in respect of the 
part or can you not recall it? 
MR GREEN: I do not think I – I – there would have been no 
reason to continue.  I mean my communication going 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 182 of 253 
 
forward and this was up until 2017 was all with Van Der 
Walt. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me ask this question.  Initially the 
person who was interested in buying the property was Mr 
Montana. 
MR GREEN:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And he made an offer to purchase.  And 
he made an offer to purchase that was accepted by the 
seller? 
MR GREEN:  That is correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that was a deal then – there was a 
deal between the two of them. 
MR GREEN:  Ja there was a deal.  The deposit was paid. 
CHAIRPERSON:  A deposit was paid.  Until you received a 
letter or email from Mr Van Der Walt asking that the buyer 
be changed to be Precise Trade what you knew – what you 
knew as the estate agent was that there was an agreement 
of sale between Mr Montana and the seller. 
MR GREEN:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that right ja.  Now when you got the 
20 
email or letter from Mr Van Der Walt asking that the 
purchaser be changed before you and or the seller – before 
you took that request to Ms – to the seller did you have any 
discussion or communication with Mr Montana himself to 
say, I am receiving a letter from a third party who says we 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 183 of 253 
 
must change – change this you are no longer going to be 
the purchaser or is that … 
MR GREEN:  No I do not – I do not recall I do not believe 
so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR GREEN:  Because Mr Van Der Walt was in my mind the 
attorney.  So if you look you will see that it was the 
attorney’s letter that I received. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR GREEN:  Saying that the deposit – he is holding the 
10 
deposit in trust. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR GREEN:  And you know the fact that the attorney was 
also – I did not even know who the directors of Precise 
Trading were. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR GREEN:  At that point in time it was you know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Did – did Mr – did Mr Van Der Walt 
in – either in that letter or in a telephone conversation with 
you around that time ever say anything to the effect that he 
20 
was acting on behalf of Mr Montana in communicating with 
you that the purchaser should be changed?  Did he make 
any representation that Mr Montana was okay with that?  He 
was representing him or – or how did this come about 
because I would have thought that if as far as you knew at 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 184 of 253 
 
the time that you received the email or letter from Mr Van 
Der Walt this house was the subject of an agreement that 
had been concluded. 
ADV SONI SC:  Concluded. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The first thing that would come to your 
mind but who are you?  
MR GREEN:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  This property has a buyer, there is a deal.  
So I do not expect that you would ask that question so is 
there anything that allayed your concerns in that regard? 
10 
MR GREEN:  I might very well have. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GREEN:  But I cannot… 
CHAIRPERSON:  You cannot remember. 
MR GREEN:  With conviction and any recollection. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GREEN:  Or accuracy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GREEN:  Make a statement that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That you did. 
20 
MR GREEN:  You know I do not recall. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So there I would imagine you know 
given my experience and how pedantic I am in my deals that 
I would have confirmed that with Mr Montana that this is in 
fact you know albeit it was not in writing I might very well 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 185 of 253 
 
have been in a phone call or I might have received a phone 
call from him saying listen this is what happening we cannot 
– I am not going to take transfer we are putting into a 
company. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR GREEN:  But I honestly cannot without any recollection 
make a statement like that. 
ADV SONI SC:  Because my own thinking is that you would 
done have something to make sure that it was in order. 
ADV SONI SC:  Absolutely. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  This was in order with Mr Montana 
because otherwise you would be causing your client – the 
seller to be in breach of the agreement, you would be in 
breach of the agreement. 
MR GREEN:  Well it is not something I can do unilaterally. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is not something you do because 
particularly when there was R5 million that had been paid 
already. 
MR GREEN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And if you were to go along with that 
20 
request without having [intervened] yourself. 
MR GREEN:  Secured himself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  From Mr Montana that this should be in 
order that would be very strange that. 
MR GREEN:  I would agree with you 100%. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 186 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GREEN:  Perhaps I can say that it – I definitely would 
have confirmed that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GREEN:  But I do not know if it was me confirming or 
before it happening me receiving a phone call. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GREEN:  To say this is what is going to happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GREEN:  But 100% it would have been done. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GREEN:  There would have been something. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GREEN:  I would never do it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Would it have been enough for Mr 
Van Der Walt to just say even in a letter, I am acting for Mr 
Montana in that situation where he says, change the identity 
of the – or you – would you still have said, look I want to 
hear from Mr Montana.  I want something in writing from Mr 
Montana. 
20 
MR GREEN:  Well I think my obligation knowing that I am 
holding in our trust account R5 million which at this point in 
time belongs to Mr Montana.  I would need the confirmation 
from him.  There might very well have been a written 
confirmation as well. I just do not have access to the 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 187 of 253 
 
documentation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But you certainly would not have 
just gone ahead with that? 
MR GREEN:  Never, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR GREEN:  I – it would be against practice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR GREEN:  You know it is not something – I cannot just 
sign Mr Montana’s deposit to someone else. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
10 
MR GREEN:  Without… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Yes Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Green you might recall you mentioned a 
little earlier that there was an email from Mr Van Der Walt 
saying but you contracted. 
MR GREEN:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Can I show you three emails we will just go 
through them and place them on record.  Chairperson these 
are going to be part of a different bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that the one that you – was shown to 
20 
Mr Loubser? 
ADV SONI SC:  No, no this is a different one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Do I have it here?  The one you are 
showing him or not? 
ADV SONI SC:  Not, not in your set of documents at the 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 188 of 253 
 
moment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SONI SC:  They will be presented in a different set of 
bundles tomorrow Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is not a bundle that is here? 
ADV SONI SC:  It is Bundle H Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I thought there was Bundle H during the 
day, during the morning.  What page of Bundle H? 
ADV SONI SC:  Page 185, 186 and 181 respectively. I am 
going to refer Mr Green to each of them.  Chairperson you 
10 
will see it is marked SP12, SP13 and SP11 respectively. 
The first one Chairperson is at 18 – 185. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I have got it. 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please Chairperson.  Mr Green have 
a look at the document of the 10 June. This is an email from 
you to Mr Van Der Walt and Mr Montana.  Do you see that? 
MR GREEN:  I think it is the 10 May. 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh sorry 10 May. 
MR GREEN:  Yes I do see it. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now this is…. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You must always just say the year Mr Soni 
so… 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh as you please Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because when one reads the transcript 
one will not know which year you talking about.  It said it is 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 189 of 253 
 
an email dated 10 May 2016 sent at three minutes past 
twelve from Mr Louis Green and it is addressed to Jan 
Adrian Van Der Walt and Mr Lucky Montana is copied.  The 
subject matter is electric pool cover keys. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Now this is an email you address to 
Mr Van Der Walt Mr Green. 
MR GREEN:  That is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  And it deals with the pool cover and you are 
having found two further keys for the electric pool cover. 
MR GREEN:  That is correct. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Right.  Is the response to you … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us hear what he says what Mr Green 
says to him first. 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh as you please Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja just read what you say in that email to 
Mr Van Der Walt. 
MR GREEN:   
“Hi Riaan hope you are well.  I received a call from the 
Kohlers that they have found an extra two sets of keys for 
the electric pool cover.  The keys are in my possession.  
20 
When would you be able to meet or should I keep them until 
you are around the area?” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And you copied Mr Lucky Montana in 
that email, is that right? 
MR GREEN:  Yes I did. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 190 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  This – would this have been after the sale 
of the property or before? 
MR GREEN:    I think this is after. 
CHAIRPERSON:  After the transfers. 
MR GREEN:  It is after the transfer of the property. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GREEN:  You know they have – he has already got 
occupation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  You remember earlier on there was 
a question whether you dealt with Mr Montana after – after 
10 
the transfer. 
MR GREEN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think if I recall. 
MR GREEN:  If I have mentioned this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You could not remember or you would not 
sure that you did.  I am not sure.  But here you do copy Mr 
Lucky Montana.  Are you able to say why you would have 
copied him here since he was not the purchaser ultimately? 
MR GREEN:  No I have – I have no idea why I copied him 
but he has certainly been copied and I spoke of the follow 
20 
up email that I received asking me why I had copied 
Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I think that is the … 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That Mr Soni was checking into. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 191 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:  That is the next one.  That is about half an 
hour later, am I correct?  The email on the 10 May 2016 at 
12:26 from Mr Van Der Walt to yourself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it appears at page 186 and it is 
marked SP13. 
ADV SONI SC:  SP13 yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja SP13 just read it Mr Green. 
ADV SONI SC:  Sorry can I just make one other point? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  That Mr Van Der Walt cc’s Mr Montana on 
10 
this as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
ADV SONI SC:  So sorry could you read into the record? 
MR GREEN:  Hi Louis, so this is an email from Riaan Van 
Der Walt sent to myself copying Lucky Montana on the 10 
May 2016 at 12:26pm.  Subject:  Electric pool cover keys. 
“Hi Louis please explain why you have cc Mr L Montana in 
this mail.  You are well aware of the fact and as already 
explained to you last year before the property was even 
bought by my company that Meneer L Montana has nothing 
20 
to do with Precise or this property.  Please refrain from this 
action in the future.  The pool cover keys can be handed to 
Jan from MC Maintenance.  I will arrange with him regarding 
the keys.  Kind Regards.” 
ADV SONI SC:  Can I ask you to look another document 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 192 of 253 
 
now and that Chairperson that is SP14 which is on page 
187. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you coming back to this email or not?  
That the one he has just read are you done with it? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Before you move to another one.  
On this email Mr Green Mr Van Der Walt asks you to explain 
why you copied Mr Montana in your email to him alright.  Do 
say yes because when you nod the record does not capture 
nodding. 
10 
MR GREEN:  Okay yes yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You agree? 
MR GREEN:  That is what … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Now I am sure we will get to an email 
where maybe you give an explanation or where you will deal 
with that but he says here in this email of 10 May 2016 to 
you in the second line. 
“Before the property was even bought by my company” 
By my company I think he refers to Precise Trade, is that 
right? 
20 
MR GREEN:  Precise. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before the property was even bought by 
my company.  He says you know that before the property 
was even bought by my company you know that Mr Montana 
has nothing to do with Precise or this property.  Is my 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 193 of 253 
 
reading correct?  Is it the same as yours that what he is 
conveying is that on the face of it is that even before his 
company Precise Trade bought this property Mr Montana 
had nothing to do with it? 
MR GREEN:  Well how could I possibly know that even 
before he bought it that Mr Montana had nothing to do with 
it.  Mr Montana was my purchaser. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes that is why I am asking whether you 
understand this email the same way I – as I understand it 
because that is strange to me. 
10 
MR GREEN:  Ja I think I would not read too much into it 
being that Afrikaans in his home tongue and you know he is 
speaking English here just very badly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no. 
MR GREEN:  But – but. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No just leave that alone.  If you just read 
the letter. 
MR GREEN:  If I read the contents. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You understand it the same as I do. 
MR GREEN:  I absolutely agree with you 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that would be factually not correct 
namely that Montana had nothing to do with the property 
before Precise Trade became the purchaser. 
MR GREEN:  Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay alright. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 194 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Now… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  About five minutes later Mr Green you send 
– and Chairperson this is at page 187 SP14 you send an 
email to Mr Van Der Walt but you do not cc Mr Montana and 
what do you say in that email? 
MR GREEN:   
“Apologies.” 
ADV SONI SC:  So that email now is the 10 May 2016, am I 
correct? 
10 
MR GREEN:  That is correct and it is at 12:38pm. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Can I ask you to turn to the other 
document by… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry again Mr Soni I am sorry. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In your response to Mr – email to Mr Van 
Der Walt why do you not give him an explanation.  He asked 
you – he asked for an explanation why you were copying Mr 
Montana who according to Van der Walt had nothing to do 
with the property or with the company.  But when you 
20 
respond you say “apologies” but you do not provide an 
explanation as to why – how it came about. 
MR GREEN:  Well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why not? 
MR GREEN:  I can say that I was wrong in copying Montana 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 195 of 253 
 
because it was Precise’s properties that I was dealing with 
not Montana.  So I – I should – I should not have copied 
Montana in on the email. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GREEN:  And I just apologised for doing it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Langata please move back to your 
seat otherwise we – I am being disturbed.  Yes but are you 
saying that copying Mr Montana on your part in that email 
was not something you had done consciously?  Are you 
saying it was oversight or are you saying you had a reason 
10 
to copy him but if Mr Van Der Walt did not want you to copy 
him in then you would not?  I am trying to understand that.  
How did it come about that knowing that Mr Montana was no 
longer the purchaser you still long after the transfer of the 
property copied him and Mr Van Der Walt asked for an 
explanation and you just say “apologies” and it is left.  
Because I am trying to understand that. 
MR GREEN:  Ja it was not a conscious – it was – there was 
no – it was not a conscious to copy him or eliminate him 
you know it – I cannot give a reason why I copied him. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR GREEN:  I can tell you that I did copy him 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GREEN:  But I cannot tell you why. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do – are you able to say an maybe Mr 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 196 of 253 
 
Soni might know this from the documents here but do you 
know – would you remember whether after there had been a 
change of the identity of the purchaser whether you still 
dealt – you still included Mr Montana in matters relating to 
this sale or not? 
MR GREEN:  I doubt it because if I had – I do not know how 
much correspondence there actually was after the – the 
purchase agreement was changed.  I do not recall and I do 
not have the – the information to provide you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
MR 
GREEN: 
 
How 
much 
correspondence 
there 
was 
thereafter but had I corresponded and copied Montana in I 
am sure I would have received the same response from Van 
Der Walt saying you – why you copying Montana in on our – 
on my business. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR GREEN:  So I can maybe say no there was no other 
correspondence up until this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. Did you at the time or when there 
was a change of identity of the purchaser did you establish 
20 
who the directors of Precise Trade were?  Maybe if the 
shareholders – did you establish whether Montana was 
involved in Precise Trade at all or not?  Or were you told or 
not? 
MR GREEN:  No I am – I definite – if I am dealing with a 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 197 of 253 
 
legal entity, I am obligated to ensure that I am dealing with 
the right person. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GREEN:  And that there is that person. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Has proof. 
MR GREEN:  Is enabled. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is authorised ja. 
MR GREEN:  Is authorised to deal on behalf of the entity as 
well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
10 
MR GREEN:  So I would have done all of that stuff. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR GREEN:  And to the best of recollection he was the sole 
director. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that Van Der Walt or… 
MR GREEN:  Not Precise. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Van Der Walt or. 
MR GREEN:  Van Der Walt. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Van Der Walt. 
MR GREEN:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So, so as far as you would have known at 
the time Montana had nothing to do with Precise Trade? 
MR GREEN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  From your recollection. 
MR GREEN:  From – yes. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 198 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  I have given you another document it is 
called SP11.  Chairperson it appears at page 181.  Have 
you got it?  That is an email dated the 23 June Mr – June – 
23 June 2016 Mr Green have you got that in front of you? 
MR GREEN:  Yes I do. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now could you – could you say that – do 
you accept that this email was sent by you? 
MR GREEN:  Yes I do. 
ADV SONI SC:  And it was sent to Mr Montana and a Ms 
10 
Kossakane at PRASA. 
MR GREEN:  That is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  And it was sent on the 23 June 2016. 
MR GREEN:  Correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  And what does the text of the email read? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before the text the subject matter? 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh sorry. 
MR GREEN:  The subject matter is 119 Empire Place which 
is the Sandhurst property. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which is the Sandhurst property. 
20 
MR GREEN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
MR GREEN:   
“Hi Tumi please see below the email sent on 21 April 2015.  
Braam called as he did not receive any response and really 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 199 of 253 
 
needs to sort the cover at 119 Empire Place, Sandhurst.  
Please make contact with Braam to make the necessary 
arrangements. Best Regards.” 
ADV SONI SC:  Now this is a month and a half after you 
apologise to Mr Van Der Walt for cc-ing Mr Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before that Mr Soni.  I am sorry before 
that who is Tumi? 
MR GREEN:  I think Tumi is or was Montana’s PA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR GREEN:  I think. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay alright.  Then continue with 
the question Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  So Mr Green none of this makes sense now 
because you are told not to communicate but you now 
exclude Mr Van Der Walt. 
MR GREEN:  And communicate. 
ADV SONI SC:  But you not only talk to Mr Montana but to 
his PA as well. 
MR 
GREEN: 
 
Ja 
I 
cannot 
– 
I 
cannot 
recall 
the 
circumstances here.  And I do not have the other email – 
20 
because I refer to another email here. 
ADV SONI SC:  Of the 21 April. 
MR GREEN:  April ja which…. 
ADV SONI SC:  But that was before the 10 May.  I am only 
trying to point out. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 200 of 253 
 
MR GREEN:  No, no I – I cannot answer I do not know why 
or – for what reason I would be sending this to her and to 
Mr Montana. 
ADV SONI SC:  But... but more intruding is the fact that it 
concerns the very same issue that you addressed to Mr Van 
der Walt and did not get a response from. 
MR DE BEER:  Ja, this... this is uh, for the servicing... it is 
the servicing of the pool cover.  The... the other one... the 
other email was about spare keys. 
ADV SONI SC:  Okay.  But... but it is still about the pool 
10 
cover for his house...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  Yes, yes.  Sandton.  
ADV SONI SC:  I am just trying to...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  Yes.  No, it is ...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:  It does not make sense at all. 
MR DE BEER:  No uh, it does not.  I cannot... I cannot um... 
I cannot... I cannot say why.  I do not know.   
ADV SONI SC:  But. but clearly... we are... all we are trying 
to establish is.  We have a series of communications.  We 
are just trying to say, you would not have communicated 
20 
with... with Mr Montana without a good reason.  Would... 
would that be fair to say? 
MR DE BEER:  Yes, I would... I would say so. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  So what you cannot recall now is why 
you communicated with Montana instead of... but there must 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 201 of 253 
 
have been a reason why you did. 
MR DE BEER:  Absolutely.  And especially, you know, having 
been enlightened to the fact that I must not communicate 
with Montana on 119 Empire but here, clearly uh, I have 
communicated with him. 
ADV SONI SC:  And left Mr Van der Walt out. 
MR DE BEER:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  I mean, that seems strange.  You go to the 
old owner that knew about the new one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if you... maybe because... uh, but 
10 
clearly 
because 
Mr 
Green, 
you 
do 
say... 
you 
have 
said...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  Oh, hold on.  Uh, sorry.  I can... I can tell you 
why.  Because this is 2015 and this is 2016.  That is why.  
This MP11 is 2015.  The 23 rd of June 2015 and this is 2016. 
ADV SONI SC:  You know, I also looked at... at that and I 
thought it is 2016. 
MR DE BEER:  No, you can see it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, some of this ...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  It is like I have explained...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...these members uh... but why would you 
talk about the same subject...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  And you can see, it says I refer to the email 
of April 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But... but... but if you are talking about the 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 202 of 253 
 
same subject, namely, the cover...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  No, this... this.. this was the servicing of the 
pool cover. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Yes. 
 
And 
what 
you 
have 
spoken 
to...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  In 2016, they have found an extra set of 
keys. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR DE BEER:  For the cover. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR DE BEER:  And that is when I... in 2016, I spoke to Van 
der Walt. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR DE BEER:  And he says, “why are you talking to me?”  
But it is clear here that this email is 2015.  You can see in 
the body of the email I say, “please see below the email sent 
on 21 April 2015”.  So this email is 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
But 
by 
that 
date... 
by 
that 
date, 
23 June 2015... let us ...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...let us assume it is 2015, was Mr 
Montana still the purchaser of the property? 
MR DE BEER:  Uh, no.  I think that... that had already 
happened.  That. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So why would you be talking to him about 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 203 of 253 
 
this property if he was no longer the purchaser? 
MR DE BEER:  Well, can I... can I see the... the... the date 
of the agreement?  What date...? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, you can have a look.  We are... we 
are simply trying to understand Mr Green...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  No, no.  I... I am in the same ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  And we... we... we are sorting the dots in 
that there is anything funny that you did.  We are just trying 
to understand. 
MR DE BEER:  No, I...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR DE BEER:  ...I appreciate it and...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR 
DE 
BEER: 
 
...I 
am 
trying 
to 
the 
best 
of 
my 
ability...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, to assist. 
MR DE BEER:  ...to assist you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR DE BEER:  Um...   
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Soni, can you help him with the 
20 
agreement, please? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes, I am just...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  He is looking for the page for the 
agreement ...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  I am just looking at what date the 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 204 of 253 
 
agreement... 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I do not know if that will help you in 
terms of... oh, you want the agreement be changed over?  
The change of the identity of the purchaser? 
MR DE BEER:  Ja, what... what date... 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR DE BEER:  So there was an email about the um... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Uh, Mr Soni, are you able to help him? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  The agreement with Precise Trade is 
the 26t h of November 2014 Chairperson. 
10 
MR DE BEER:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  So this is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  So it is long after? 
ADV SONI SC:  ...a month later. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, no not... not necessarily long after but 
it is after. 
MR DE BEER:  Yes, it is after. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  It is between the two. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  So.... so and therefore it means 
20 
that when you wrote to Mr Van der Walt and he...he said to 
you why you are copying Mr Montana, you were not including 
Montana in regard to this property after the change of the 
purchaser for the first time?  You had done so before? 
MR DE BEER:  Yes, but if you... if you look at this one which 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 205 of 253 
 
was in between the two emails, I never even referred to um, 
uh, Van der Walt here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, no.  I... I... I accept that.  The 
point that I am trying to see whether you and I can agree on 
is that there are at least now two occasions when you are in 
involving... you were involving Mr Montana in regard to this 
property...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  Where...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  ...during a time when he was no longer a 
purchaser. 
10 
MR DE BEER:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You agree with me on that? 
MR DE BEER:  [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja.  Okay. 
MR DE BEER:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So... so but then... but to go back to... to 
the point was, when we are looking at the dates of the two 
emails and you discovered that the one is 2015 and not 
2016. 
MR DE BEER:  Correct. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  The... the question that uh, Mr Soni had 
asked you was, why would you have been communicating 
with Mr Montana at a time when he had nothing to do, to 
your knowledge... if to your knowledge...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  Yes. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 206 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...he had nothing with this property?  And 
you had earlier said that you cannot explain uh, who... is 
that still your answer that...?  You can see that it is awkward 
...[indistinct]  
MR DE BEER:  No, I understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes, yes. 
MR DE BEER:  And... you know, I...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR DE BEER:  ...at this point in my life, I was very ill. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
10 
MR DE BEER:  Um, I was on... I was heavily medicated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR DE BEER:  And I cannot tell you...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR DE BEER:  ...why... why I did this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR DE BEER:  There is no, you know... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR DE BEER:  It... it is what it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
20 
MR DE BEER:  The facts are here.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR DE BEER:  It is in writing.  It is in black-and-white. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR DE BEER:  And I cannot tell you why. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 207 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR DE BEER:  Because it should not have been. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Well, Mr Soni maybe you... you... 
maybe you need to put to Mr Van der Walt(sic) what you... 
what you... you think the position is.  Uh, if it is not too early 
to do that. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because maybe that might help him even 
to remember. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if you intended to do that a little later, 
that is fine.  I am just saying. 
ADV SONI SC:  No, I... I would like to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am just saying...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...maybe it.. it is the time to put to him so 
he can comment. 
ADV SONI SC:  Uh, Mr Green, this is a property that is 
purchases for nearly R 14 million, correct?   
MR DE BEER:  [No audible reply]  
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Montana comes to the show house.  He 
buys the property.  He finds a deposit is paid by somebody 
who is saying he is paying money on behalf of Mr Montana  
MECHANICAL INTERRUPTION 
ADV SONI SC:  Then there is a change in... and you are told 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 208 of 253 
 
“please change the name of the purchaser”.  Then after, you 
communicate.  Even after the change, you communicated 
with Mr Montana. 
MR DE BEER:  Correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  Until you are told “why are you dealing with 
Mr Montana?”  Now, it... it appears strange that a person 
who was... had interest in this and who was not... uh, the uh, 
Mr Van der Walt was not at an arm’s length with Mr Montana.  
He is the one who paid the deposit.  That R 5 million deposit.  
It is paid by Mr Van der Walt.  It is paid by Precise Trade.  
10 
MR DE BEER:  I do not know who paid it.  The money came 
from that account, yes.  
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR DE BEER:  The trust account. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Yes, but Mr Van der Walt’s trust 
account. 
MR DE BEER:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Ja.  And so, all we just want to...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  It was not unusual. 
ADV SONI SC:  Ja. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, I... I... I think Mr Green, I think you are 
maybe saying and I do not know... I just want to clarify 
because maybe that is the area of confusion in uh, in regard 
to your answer and Mr Soni’s question.  You may be 
meaning, you were not aware when the deposit was made, 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 209 of 253 
 
who made the deposit?  Or is that not the case? 
MR DE BEER:  No, no.  I do not... I have no idea who paid 
the deposit...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR DE BEER:  ...other than that the deposit came on Mr Van 
der Walt’s trust account to our trust account. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, you... you knew that when you had 
that payment of the deposit happened?  You knew that... 
where it came from? 
MR DE BEER:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
MR DE BEER:  Because I received the...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  All right.  Then we are on the same page. 
MR DE BEER:  ...the uh, the email. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, then you are on the same page.  Ja. 
MR DE BEER:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV SONI SC:  And the deposit is made, if you look at uh, 
page 89 of those documents.  The beneficiary reference 
20 
number is said to be Montana.  Although the deposit is paid 
by Mr Van der Walt’s firm, it... it is in regards to uh, Mr 
Montana’s purchase. 
MR DE BEER:  Yes, because Mr Montana was the purchaser. 
ADV 
SONI 
SC: 
 And 
then, 
suddenly... 
and 
you 
are 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 210 of 253 
 
communicating with Mr Montana throughout this period 
together with Mr Van der Walt even after the change in 
ownership. 
MR DE BEER:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  And then suddenly you are told but why are 
you talking to Mr Montana?  Does that not sound strange?  
And I told you last year. 
MR DE BEER:  Ja.  Well, I never... I mean, I never uh... I did 
not understand the mechanics of the entities and, you know, 
the arrangements between the parties.  It is... it is not um, 
10 
uncommon for someone to say: 
“You know what?  I am not going to put this into my 
personal name.  I am going to put it into an entity.  
Uh, I am going to put it into a trust.  It is going to 
become a development property”. 
 
So it is something that happened. 
ADV SONI SC:  Right. 
MR DE BEER:  Um, so... 
ADV SONI SC:  So on our version, this is not something 
that...[intervenes]  
20 
MR DE BEER:  It is not unusual. 
ADV SONI SC:  It may not be unusual.  I am asking in all the 
circumstances, did it not strike you as strange? 
MR DE BEER:  Well, when it struck me as strange was when 
I got the... the mail from um, Van der Walt, saying, “why 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 211 of 253 
 
are... why did you copy Montana in, in this communication?”  
For me that was strange.   
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR DE BEER:  You know, I did not even... it did not even 
enter my mind to divorce the two.  There was no... I never 
had formal notification that this is how it is.  So, I did not 
know. 
ADV SONI SC:  Let me go back to something else about that 
email.  Mr Van der Walt says to you:  “But look, I told you 
last year that he had nothing to do with this property”.  Is 
10 
that true?  Did he tell you that 
MR DE BEER:  I do not recall.  I cannot... I cannot say I 
recall him telling me...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Does the email say...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  The email says...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  ...the previous year. 
MR DE BEER:  ...”I explained to you last year”. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
MR DE BEER:  You know, maybe that was uh, his telling me:  
“Listen, I am buying the property now”.  Um, that is... he... 
20 
what he is considering his explanation last year that it is not 
Montana anymore.  I... I cannot... I cannot answer... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Soni...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  I do not recall uh... I never received an 
official notification saying that this is what the structure is 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 212 of 253 
 
and... you know, I... I had always thought that they were uh, 
partners in development. 
ADV SONI SC:  Why did you think that? 
MR DE BEER:  That is just what... just from their interaction 
and...  
ADV SONI SC:  The interaction with...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Who did you think were partners? 
MR DE BEER:  Uh, Montana and um, Van der Walt. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Van der Walt. 
MR DE BEER:  Ja, that they had entered into a partnership 
10 
in this particular development. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What development? 
MR DE BEER:  Um, which is not unusual. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What development? 
MR DE BEER:  Well...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Was unlisted development.  That... that 
property Sandhurst or is not uh...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  It has not been... it was a house. 
CHAIRPERSON:  A house.  Yes. 
MR DE BEER:  But it had not been developed.  I mean, 
20 
they... uh, it has not been developed where the Hurlingham’s 
number 1 has been... the development work has started on 
that property but uh, um Sandhurst...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  What are you talking about when you say it 
was... it had not been developed but it was a house? 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 213 of 253 
 
MR DE BEER:  Well, I... I thought the... the intention was to 
develop the Sandhurst property, to do something else.  You 
know, and that is why I thought um, they were partners. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who gave you that impression? 
MR DE BEER:  I beg your pardon? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who gave you that impression? 
MR DE BEER:  No, no one.  It... it is just their interaction 
that gave me the impression.  It was not uh... there was no 
formal “this is what we do and here is our uh, development 
plan or document”.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR DE BEER:  It is just from what... what was said that I 
derived um, my thoughts.  You know, in my mind how I 
thought it was structured. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Soni, continue. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  You say the interactions were... were 
you in their presence when the two of them were together? 
MR DE BEER:  I have never been with the two of them 
together ever. 
ADV SONI SC:  When you say interactions, what are you 
20 
talking about? 
MR DE BEER:  Ja, just the... the... when you know, when I 
met with Van der Walt and when I met with Montana, I 
thought that um, they had moved it from Montana into a 
development 
company 
to 
a 
property 
company 
to 
do 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 214 of 253 
 
something with the property. 
ADV SONI SC:  But you thought Montana was still involved? 
MR DE BEER:  Yes.  Uh, I did not know that this has been 
separate or, you know, I had no idea of any of this stuff that 
uh, I am sitting here being questioned. 
ADV SONI SC:  Ja.  Now Mr Green, when I talked to you 
earlier, raised all these matters with you.  You might 
remember.  I showed you all these emails. 
MR DE BEER:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  It is not a question of questioning you.  It is 
10 
trying to make sense. 
MR DE BEER:  No, no.  I...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:  Of what does not appear to...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  Absolutely. 
ADV SONI SC:  ...to... So I would like you to...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  And there are unfortunately big gaps.  I 
mean, I would have had piles of papers of uh, every 
transaction.  There 
was 
paperwork.  There is... and 
correspondence.   
 
There is never... I never uh, delve into uh, um, a 
20 
situation like this without paperwork where I can tell you 
exactly automatically what happened.  I do not have that.  
Uh... 
ADV SONI SC:  But anyway.  Can I get back to your 
affidavit?  What you said in your affidavit...[intervenes]  
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 215 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Wait, before... before... before you do that 
Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  When you copied Mr Montana um, when 
you sent an email to Mr Van der Walt...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...and Mr Van der Walt said:  “Explain to 
me why you are copying uh, Mr Montana?” 
MR DE BEER:  Mr Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:  “You know that he has got nothing to do 
10 
with this uh, company... my company or the property”.  Why 
did you not say to him:  “Oh, I thought you... you guys were 
partners in some development?”  Because that is the only 
thing I can think of now...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...uh, that might have influenced you.  Is 
that what might have influenced you? 
MR DE BEER:  No, I... I mean, my natural is to just... okay, 
sorry.  I had it all wrong.  Uh...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  But that is not...[intervenes]  
20 
MR DE BEER:  Uh...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  But that is not natural.  That is not a 
natural reaction Mr Green. 
MR DE BEER:  Is that not? 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you genuinely believed that the two were 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 216 of 253 
 
in a partnership that relates to this property and you copy Mr 
Montana.  And Mr Van der Walt objects and calls upon you to 
give an explanation, it seems to be the natural or uh, 
reaction would be:  “Oh, but I thought you guys were 
partners.  That is why I copied him”.   
 
Or, you might say, “I am sorry.  I thought that...”  You... 
you would say, “This is how it comes about.  This is my 
understanding.” 
 
He might say, “Where did you get that from”.  Or 
whatever.  But you would offer this explanation because that 
10 
is the genuine explanation. 
MR DE BEER:  Ja, I mean, my... my reaction was:  “I am 
sorry. You know, like, I really did not know and apologies.  I 
uh, I had no idea.”  Is that not what apologies suggests? 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  No, no, no.  I am just thinking if... 
if... if... if somebody seems to criticise you on something that 
you genuinely believe was fine...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...uh, then you would say, “Please help me 
because 
this 
is 
how 
I 
have 
always 
understood 
your 
20 
relationship to be but if it is not uh, I will not but this is why I 
did it.  Otherwise, I had no other reason”.  That is what I 
would have expected. 
MR DE BEER:  Oh, you know, my response is what is here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 217 of 253 
 
MR DE BEER:  I cannot [laughs]... I cannot change my 
response.  That was my response. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR DE BEER:  Though, you know, be it right or wrong.  That 
was the response.  And I... I cannot say to you uh, I did not 
have type up an email or...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR DE BEER:  ...to phone him or... My response was 
apologies.  Like, sorry.  Uh, carry on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  H’m. 
10 
MR DE BEER:  You know it was... 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR DE BEER:  It... it... my job was done.  I was finished.   
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR DE BEER:  There was no... I did not have to do any of 
this uh, remote keys and uh, pool fence, maintenance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR DE BEER:  That was... my job was done.  The minute the 
property transferred, I am finished. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
20 
MR DE BEER:  So I had no obligation to Van Der Walt to um, 
look after anything. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  H’m. 
MR DE BEER:  Ja, I... I did receive um, a mandate from him 
in 2017... 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 218 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR DE BEER:  ...to sell the property for him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  H’m. 
MR DE BEER:  And then my obligations were to him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR DE BEER:  And I was now in a situation where I was 
answerable to him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  Mr Soni, continue. 
ADV SONI SC:  Uh, Mr Green, I just want to ask.  In respect 
of your recollection of this, what you set out in your... in your 
10 
affidavit...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  ...is you recollection at the time and soon 
after all these things happened? 
MR DE BEER:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Chair, I have no further questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  Ai.  Well, I thought you would uh, put 
to Mr Van der Walt(sic) what may have happened at least. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Um, having regard to a lot of evidence that 
20 
has been led here and some of the evidence that will still be 
led, anyone knowing the evidence that has been led and 
some of the evidence that is still to be led, is likely to 
wonder 
whether, 
besides 
trade, 
did 
not 
become 
the 
purchaser... was not the purchaser simply by name in form 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 219 of 253 
 
but the real of owner of the house was going to be Mr 
Montana. 
 
Or that whatever name was written in the deed’s office 
as the owner of the property, the person who was going to 
enjoy the occupation, whether it was not Mr Montana. 
 
Now if that is the position, it may make sense why Mr 
Montana would continue to be involved in regard to this 
property after there had been a change of the identity of the 
purchaser.   
 
It would explain why uh, you would have written... you 
10 
would have copied him when you wrote to Mr Van der Walt 
about the keys.  Was it the keys or the cover? 
MR DE BEER:  The keys of the property. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  It would explain why.  Because if Mr 
Montana was going to be the person who was going to 
occupy the property or if he was the... the real owner of the 
property, he would be the person who would need to know 
where to find the keys and so and so on.  Did you... what do 
you think about that possibility? 
MR DE BEER:  Ja, uh... you know um, unfortunately, Van der 
20 
Walt says, as I explained to you last year.  So I cannot say, 
well, he did not explain to me last year, that he is... you 
know, it is quite possible that he did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR DE BEER:  So I... and he put in his letter here that he 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 220 of 253 
 
explained to me last year. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR DE BEER:  So at the time of um, my... my responding to 
this...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR DE BEER:  ...and just saying apologies...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR DE BEER:  ...uh, it is possible that he had explained to 
me the year or uh, a couple of months prior to this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
10 
MR DE BEER:  Um...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  But the questions I am...[intervenes]  
MR DE BEER:  Uh...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  ...the question I am putting to you is, 
whether you agree that if the person was going to occupy the 
property was Mr Montana, even though the purchaser was 
Precise Trade or, if in... if the real owner of the property was 
going to be Montana even though on paper. 
MR DE BEER:  Uh ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  ...of Precise Trade, would you agree that it 
20 
would make sense why you would keep on um, involving 
him? 
MR DE BEER:  Uh, if... if I can say that when I 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  If that was your understanding. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 221 of 253 
 
MR DE BEER:  Well, when I first showed Montana the 
house...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR DE BEER:  ...I... it was my understanding then that he 
would occupy the house. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR DE BEER:  That he would move in and live in this house. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR DE BEER:  That was my understanding. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
10 
MR DE BEER:  Um, the circumstances changed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR DE BEER:  Because Precise Trading became the legal 
entity that owned that property. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR DE BEER:  Um, or let me ask why did Montana not 
occupy the house once Precise got occupation fo the 
property?  Why did not Precise do a... a rental deal to 
Montana?  Because they were trying to rent the property out.  
I think they did rent the property out. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m? 
MR DE BEER:  So why did not Montana rent the property 
from Precise. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but you are not answering my 
question.  My question is.  Do you accept that it would make 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 222 of 253 
 
sense or you... it would have made sense for you to involve 
Mr Montana even though he was not the purchaser of the 
property, if your understanding at the time was that he was 
going to occupy the property or he was the real owner of the 
property? 
MR DE BEER:  All right.  So...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  That was your understanding. 
MR DE BEER:  If you are asking me, did I believe he was the 
real owner of the property?  The answer is no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but... but if you... if that was your 
10 
understanding, would it... would you agree that, then it would 
make sense to involve him? 
MR DE BEER:  If I thought that he was the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  The real owner. 
MR DE BEER:  ...that uh, Van der Walt was a proxy or...? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, that kind of thing. 
MR DE BEER:  Uh... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR DE BEER:  Then yes, I would... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR DE BEER:  I would agree with you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  Otherwise, you cannot think of 
any other reason why you would involve somebody who is 
not the owner of the property. 
MR DE BEER:  Ja. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 223 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who is not the purchaser, who is not the 
tenant in discussing about the keys and so on. 
MR DE BEER:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay.  Alright.  Um, it... it... it... it 
maybe that we... I do not know if we will put everything that 
should be put to Mr Van der... Mr Green? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Um... 
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson, the difficulty is that Mr Green’s 
recollection of this does not go beyond the... what he said in 
10 
his... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but the question of what he knew and 
is it not because if he knew the position to be that Montana 
was the real owner then it makes sense that he was 
involving him. 
MR SONI SC:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or that he was going to occupy or that 
he had some rights in the property under …[intervenes] 
MR SONI SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, then it makes sense. 
20 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But it does not know, he did not know, it 
does not make sense. 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And he concedes that. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 224 of 253 
 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It does not make sense.  Maybe we 
should leave at this, you can reflect on it.  Mr van der 
Walt, we may or may not ask you to come …[intervenes] 
MR SONI SC:   Mr Green. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  I am terribly – it is late in 
the day.  Mr Green, we might call you back later on. 
MR GREEN:   No problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And in the meantime, you might or might 
not be able to refresh your memory in one way or another 
10 
but I think let us leave it at that for this evening. 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, Mr Green, we 
appreciate that you came and for all the patience.  I am 
sorry that we are finished so late. 
MS DE BEER:   No… 
CHAIRPERSON:   But thank you very much, you are 
excused. 
MR SONI SC:   Thank you very much. 
MR GREEN:   Thank you. 
20 
MR SONI SC:   I will just leave this here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR SONI SC:   Chairperson, our next witness is going to 
be Ms Karin de Beer.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let her come through.  Those files, 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 225 of 253 
 
does Ms de Beer need them or else they could be taken 
away, those files that Mr Green was using. 
MR SONI SC:   No.  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She does not need any documents? 
MR SONI SC:   No, she just needs …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then they must be taken away if she 
does not need them.  Does she need that file? 
MS DE BEER:   Just G, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Ms de Beer, I am terribly 
sorry, we have kept you like the whole day.  We really 
10 
apologise but we are very grateful that you have been 
patient.  Thank you very much.  Please administer the oath 
or affirmation? 
MS KAREN DE BEER:   (d.s.s.) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, you may be 
seated.  You may proceed, Mr Soni. 
MR SONI SC:   As you please, Chairperson.  Ms de Beer, 
firstly, let me thank you for coming all the way from Cape 
Town.  I know you do live in Pretoria but you shortened 
your trip in Cape Town and we are very, very grateful to 
20 
you.  Ms de Beer, you have a statement in front of you that 
starts at page 49 of bundle G and ends at page 50, is that 
correct? 
MS DE BEER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   Now you have read this statement. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 226 of 253 
 
MS DE BEER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   Recently as well. 
MS DE BEER:   Ja, I did. 
MR SONI SC:   Do you confirm that what is contained in 
this statement is true and correct? 
MS DE BEER:   Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on one second, we are talking 
about a statement, a sworn statement, appearing at page 
49, handwritten 49 of bundle G and the statement is 
admitted as EXHIBIT SS15. 
10 
HANDWRITTEN 
SWORN 
STATEMENT 
BY 
KAREN 
DE 
BEER  HANDED IN AS EXHIBIT SS15 
MR SONI SC:   As you please, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  It is a statement by Karen de Beer, 
is that right? 
MS DE BEER:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you. 
MR SONI SC:    Now to the extent that you want to refer to 
your statement please feel free to do so but in my short 
conversation with you, as I understand it, you have quite a 
20 
good recollection of what happened during this period. 
MS DE BEER:   Yes, yes, very well. 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
MS DE BEER:   You know, I did not meet – you know, I had 
my property on the market, it was a guesthouse and 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 227 of 253 
 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just for record just indicate what 
property we are talking about? 
MS DE BEER:   225 Rose Street, Waterkloof. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Waterkloof? 
MS DE BEER:   Waterkloof. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, that is the Waterkloof 
property. 
MR SONI SC:   On our version it would be the Waterkloof 
property. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, Waterkloof property, yes. 
MS DE BEER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, you owned the property? 
MS DE BEER:   Yes, I owned. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DE BEER:   It was a guesthouse.  I am a property 
developer 
and 
I 
did 
two 
developments, 
you 
know, 
guesthouses just before the World Cup and …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   2010. 
MS DE BEER:   Yes, 2010.  So I purchased the property 
20 
2005, 2006 and then I did two projects and – so after the 
World Cup I basically decided to sell the property, so in 
2013 I put it on the market.  And Mr Lucky Montana lived 
five houses away from me in the same street. 
 
So when the boards went up I – on the first time 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 228 of 253 
 
that the house was sold in 2013, the 10 March, two of my 
agents Daniel de Lange and Antoinette Geldenhuys at that 
time was the people selling the property and the boards 
went up and the first weekend that they showed the house, 
the one agent, Daniel, is very into cars.  You know, he 
likes nice cars.   
So he came and he brought me a contract and for 
exactly the price – and, you know, I am used to, because I 
am in property development, you know, people when it is a 
house at that price they are always trying to bargain with 
10 
you.  So I said but …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   What was is being sold for, what was the 
price that you were selling it for? 
MS DE BEER:   I eventually sold it for 10.5 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   For? 
MS DE BEER:   10.5 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But what was the price that you had put 
up if you are able to remember? 
MS DE BEER:   11 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
20 
MS DE BEER:   At the first contract, was sold for 11 
million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DE BEER:   The first transaction we did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 229 of 253 
 
MS DE BEER:   And there was no offering for a lower 
price, etcetera, so I said to my agent, I said listen, when 
people buying this kind of properties, he did not make an 
offer?  And he says no.  I said then I do not trust this 
transaction, you know?  And he says no, no, no, this is 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And who was the purchaser for the 11 
million price? 
MS DE BEER:   Lucky Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Lucky Montana.  
10 
MS DE BEER:   So they came to me and they said to me 
ja, but Lucky Montana, he is the CEO of PRASA and his 
cars – because he came there two or three times and every 
time with a different very, very smart expensive car.  So he 
said to me no, no, no, no, there will not be a problem, he 
will be able to afford because he said to us the loan is a 
formality because one of his friends worked at ABSA.  But 
what he did not know, I was also an ABSA client.   
 
And so three weeks later, I got an email to say that 
they only got value for 7.5 million.  So I was so angry 
20 
because I knew, because I was an ABSA client, my bond 
was more than that at that stage and they knew that.  So, I 
mean, I knew it was not correct.  So …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, hang on one second? 
MS DE BEER:   I am sorry. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 230 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before this offer to purchase of Mr 
Montana for 11 million, did you know Mr Montana? 
MS DE BEER:   Not at all.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Even though he was five blocks away? 
MS DE BEER:   Yes not at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
MS DE BEER:   I only found that out after we met on the 
second transaction. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MS DE BEER:   That he was living there. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you are now saying that you learnt 
that ABSA had valued your property for 7 million or was it 
somebody else who had valued the property? 
MS DE BEER:   No, it was – I got a letter from Mr Lucky 
Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS DE BEER:   That he received a valuation from ABSA 
and they only found 7.5 million value which I knew was not 
true because, I mean, I had a bond, you know, on the 
property because I bought for a lot less but I did, as I say, 
20 
a development there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Development. 
MS DE BEER:   And I did a guesthouse.  So I really spent 
a lot of money there.  And …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   When you say you knew it was not true. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 231 of 253 
 
MS DE BEER:   Ja? 
CHAIRPERSON:   What was not true, was it the valuation 
…[intervenes] 
MS DE BEER:   The valuation was not true. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or that he had got the valuation? 
MS DE BEER:   Ja, no, no, no, I – you see, he said to my 
agent the bond will be a formality. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DE BEER:   That we will get the bond within no time 
because he has got a friend in ABSA that is going to assist 
10 
him.  So three weeks later I got a letter from him stating 
that they only found value for R7.5 million.  Okay?   
 
So I said to my agent, okay, do you want – oh he 
said ja, but Lucky would like to meet with me to discuss 
this.  So I said no, I am not in – I am not going to start with 
an auction, I am withdrawing the property from the market.  
Which I did and …[intervenes] 
MR SONI SC:   Sorry, can I just stop you and just, 
Chairperson, 
because 
there 
are 
documents 
that 
are 
available.  Can I ask you to look at page 52 to page 59? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course another way of doing it, Mr 
Soni, and I do not know if it might be a faster way, to let 
her 
finish 
her 
story 
and 
then 
later 
on 
identify 
the 
documents. 
MR SONI SC:   As you please. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 232 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MS DE BEER:   Okay.  So 18 months later I decided to put 
the house back on the market and when the first board 
went up, Lucky stopped there and he went to – at that 
stage it was Liesl Theunissen and Daniel, the agent that 
was also involved on the first transaction, they were 
showing the house and that is how I found out that Lucky 
lived five houses from me because as they put the boards 
up, he stopped there and he said to the agent, okay, I want 
to make an offer, I have to have this house.  
10 
And so the agent said to him, listen, my boss will 
not sell to you because of the previous experience, there is 
no way that I can take an offer to her.  So he said okay, go 
and speak to her and come back to me and tell her this 
time I am buying cash.   
So the agent came to me and I 
said to him …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   This time what was the price, this time.  
Was it 11 million? 
MS DE BEER:   I had it in the – it was 11 million and he 
made an offer for 10.5 million. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS DE BEER:   Okay.  So I said to the agent, okay, cash.  
You know, last time it was a formality, now it is cash.  No, 
if he does not put down at least 3.5 million non-refundable 
deposit I am not going to enter into an agreement with him.  
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 233 of 253 
 
So this must – discuss it with him first, let us not waste 
one another’s time and then from there I will enter into an 
agreement, so – which we did and he did pay the R3.5 
million non-refundable deposit into his lawyer’s trust 
account which I think paid it over – I cannot recall, but to 
my lawyer’s trust account and the balance they paid later.   
 
They were supposed to pay it 30 days after the 
deposit and they went over longer but I gave them leeway 
to sort of like get all their ducks in a row because at that 
time they came back to my lawyer and said but they want 
10 
to buy the property through a Mr Johan Smith from Cape 
Town.   
And I was very angry about it.  I said no, no, no, no, 
you know, this is now just dragging this whole transaction, 
I am not going to allow this.   
And so my lawyer my actually said, okay, I will 
discuss it with them, etcetera, it will not take longer than 
normal, it is just changing the contract.  Okay.  
 
And then after that - how I know it was Mr Lucky 
Montana, I did not meet him on the first contract, on the 
20 
second contract he insisted meeting me.   
But my staff, everybody, they were in awe with him 
and the one lady that has been working for me for many 
years said to me she cannot believe that a man that works 
in an overall can afford a house like this because he 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 234 of 253 
 
sometimes 
visited 
the 
house 
to 
come 
and 
do 
measurements, etcetera, in his PRASA overall.  Okay.  So 
that is one of the reasons why we knew it was Mr Lucky 
Montana.   
But I met with him twice, the last time to hand over 
the keys of my house and discuss, you know, technicalities 
about, you know, when he would like to move in, etcetera. 
But I sent a letter and that is the other thing, to 
prove that it was Mr Lucky Montana, I sent a letter to all 
my neighbours, because I had a very good relationship with 
10 
them, and I introduced my new buyer to the whole 
community and I said please, I would like you guys to make 
Mr Lucky Montana feel welcome, etcetera, he is the CEO of 
PRASA and I have sent that out and I do not know whether 
that was the reason why the next moment Mr Paul 
O’Sullivan contacted me and it was the Rapport and the 
Sunday Times and everybody was like a ton of bricks, you 
know, sort of to get information, which I did not want to 
give in the beginning because I did not know what was 
going on and I did not want Mr Lucky Montana – he was a 
20 
very, very sweet man and a very nice guy, so I did not 
want trouble for him and I did not know about all the 
dealings, etcetera, so I refused in the beginning until this 
Paul O’Sullivan told me if you do not give me the contracts 
and stuff, I will subpoena you to come to court.  So that is 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 235 of 253 
 
basically how I got involved in this whole investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Soni, I think you can… 
MR SONI SC:   Yes, Chair, but we have the full picture. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR SONI SC:   And I just want to fill in the documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   Ms de Beer, can I ask you, if you turn to 
page 52, up to page 59. 
MS DE BEER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   This is an offer – a deed of members – a 
10 
sale of members’ interest.  Is this the first agreement that 
you entered into with Mr Montana? 
MS DE BEER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   And if you look at page 59 you will see that 
it is dated the 10 February 2013. 
MS DE BEER:   That is correct. 
MR SONI SC:   That is when you signed. 
MS DE BEER:   That is correct. 
MR SONI SC:   And then if you look at the purchase price, 
purchase price was R10,5 million. 
20 
MS DE BEER:   Yes because the reason for the 10,5, I 
went because I wanted at that stage to sell the house very 
quickly. 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
MS DE BEER:   So I said to my agents even though he 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 236 of 253 
 
never sort of like agreed on, you know, sort of making an 
offer, I said to him let us tell him – because he said it was 
a formality, tell him I …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Look at me more than you look at him.  I 
am the one you are telling the story to. 
MS DE BEER:   I am terribly sorry about that.  Okay, so I 
said to my agent, when he came to me and he said to me 
ja, it is going to be a quick deal, it is a formality, I said to 
him to make it more sweet, I said let us – go to your guy 
and say to him that I will sell the property to him if it is so 
10 
quick at R10.5 million.  Okay?   
So that is the reason why it was sold for 10.5.  He 
never made an offer for 10.5, I offered.  Okay? 
MR SONI SC:   Then if you turn to page 65. 
MS DE BEER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   You will see that that is the agreement you 
concluded with Mr Johan Smith as a trustee of the Minor(?) 
Property Trust, page 65. 
MS DE BEER:   Ja. 
MR SONI SC:   Do you see that is the Memorandum of 
20 
Agreement yourself …[intervenes] 
MS DE BEER:   This one was replaced with the one that 
was signed by Lucky Montana.  This contract – the original 
one was signed by Lucky Montana in this contract and then 
they say okay, they are going to exchange …[intervenes] 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 237 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then it was Smith? 
MS DE BEER:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then – but it later changed to 
Precise Trade or not? 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
MS DE BEER:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ultimately it was changed to Precise 
Trade. 
MS DE BEER:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
10 
MR SONI SC:   Just to put it in perspective, at page 70 will 
see that the agreement with Mr Smith was signed on the 25 
August 2014, if you look at page 70. 
MS DE BEER:   Page 70? 
MR SONI SC:   70, yes, the handwritten 70. 
MS DE BEER:   Ja, ja, that is correct. 
MR SONI SC:   But what eventually happened and that is 
what the Chairperson was pointing out, that if you look at 
page 71, this is the Deed of Transfer, the property was in 
fact transferred to – from Amani Guesthouse CC to Precise 
20 
Trade and Invest CC. 
MS DE BEER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   So that is what the Chairperson has been 
saying. 
MS DE BEER:   Ja. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 238 of 253 
 
MR SONI SC:   So we had three sets of owners, if I can put 
that way. 
MS DE BEER:   That is correct, there was a big 
controversy all of them about which entity to use and that 
is, like I say, that is the reason why I was very angry 
because I was thinking, you know, this whole thing – and I 
was threatening that if they do not come to a point now of 
making a decision, they are going to forfeit their deposit, 
you know, I need this to be registered.   
And so that is why – and I must be honest with you, 
10 
that I did not really – I am not a very good administrator, I 
left that for my lawyers, but eventually, you know, I just 
said to my lawyer just deal with it, whatever – whatever 
they want to use.   
I mean, my buyer was Lucky Montana, whichever 
entity he decides to use, I do not really care, I just want to 
get this registered and move on.  So for that reason, as I 
say, it was different entities that was used. 
MR SONI SC:   Ms de Beer, you said something as you 
started this part of your evidence, you said there was a 
20 
controversy among them. 
MS DE BEER:   Ja. 
MR SONI SC:   Who is the them? 
MS DE BEER:   I did not really speak to any of the people 
but I mean I was told – I was phoned by my lawyer to say 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 239 of 253 
 
Johan Smith in Cape Town and they are not sure.   
Now who they were, I do not really – I cannot really 
tell you who all was involved.  Like I say, I did not get into 
the nitty gritty.   
All I know is that Lucky was my buyer and him and 
Johan Smith and all of them were sort of like arguing of 
which CC or company or whatever to use and I just 
referred them back to Mr P J Viviers who was my lawyer at 
the time and Mr van der Walt did the negotiations with my 
lawyer. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Alright. 
MS DE BEER:   So my – I do not – I cannot recall but I do 
not think my lawyer had any dealings with Johan Smith or I 
think they had done that dealings through the lawyer of Mr 
Lucky Montana which was Van der Walt. 
MR SONI SC:   Eventually the property was transferred to 
Precise Trade as you had agreed. 
MS DE BEER:   That is correct. 
MR SONI SC:   And the price was 11 million – at the price 
of R11 million. 
20 
MS DE BEER:   I think was 10.5. 
MR SONI SC:   Well, if you look at page 73 at the bottom. 
MS DE BEER:   Ja? 
MR SONI SC:   You will see and the purchase price to be 
the sum of R11 million.  The very last two lines of 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 240 of 253 
 
…[intervenes] 
MS DE BEER:   Oh, oh, yes, I see.  Okay.  Yes, as I say, 
that is why I know and maybe – I do not know, maybe I was 
– I cannot remember - like if I cannot recall, maybe I was 
angry and they offered 11 million after the 10.5 originally 
18 months ago. 
MR SONI SC:   And you were not going to give [inaudible – 
speaking simultaneously] 
MS DE BEER:   Definitely not. 
MR SONI SC:   Yes.  Now we have the – and I am just 
10 
trying to understand because you said something quite 
significant at the end of your affidavit, that Montana 
coming and saying on several occasions I want to buy this 
property. 
MS DE BEER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:   But then he says, as you say, there is a 
controversy 
in 
whose 
name 
should 
the 
property 
be 
registered. 
MS DE BEER:   He never discussed that with me, never. 
MR SONI SC:   No, no, I understand. 
20 
MS DE BEER:   Ja, okay. 
MR SONI SC:   But there …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   What you did understand is that the 
controversy was about in whose name the property would 
be …[intervenes] 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 241 of 253 
 
MS DE BEER:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He did not discuss it with you but from 
your lawyer you understood that there was a controversy. 
MS DE BEER:   Yes, that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MS DE BEER:   The whole issue around whose – which 
entity is to be used was done through his lawyer, Van der 
Walt, and I was just notified by my lawyer that this what is 
busy happening and I was fighting with my lawyer and I 
said they had better now get to a point of what they want 
10 
to do because otherwise they are out of time, I am going to 
get them to forfeit their deposit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I guess what you wanted was the 
millions. 
MS DE BEER:   Yes.  [Laughter] 
CHAIRPERSON:   In what name the entity – the property 
was, you did not care, you wanted the millions. 
MS DE BEER:   Absolutely, absolutely. 
MR SONI SC:   But just in regard to the point because this 
obviously was a matter of some significance to you.   
20 
In your affidavit, which you made in September 
2015, on the 21 September 2015, if you look at page 50, 
you make a point about who the purchaser really was and 
can I ask you to please read what you say at paragraph 8 
of that affidavit into the record? 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 242 of 253 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   What page? 
MR SONI SC:   Page 50, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Five zero? 
MR SONI SC:   Yes. 
MS DE BEER:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS DE BEER:   You are talking about… 
MR SONI SC:   Paragraph that starts despite …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
The 
top 
paragraph 
at 
page 
…[intervenes] 
10 
MS DE BEER:   Okay. 
“Despite the fact that there are corporate entities 
involved there is no doubt in my mind whatsoever 
that the house in question was sold by me through 
my CC to Lucky Montana.  First to him directly, then 
to a trust run by Johan Smith and eventually 
through his attorneys, corporate Precise Trade and 
Invest.  The various contracting entities, such as 
John Smith, Minor Property Trust and Fredees(?) 
Trade and Invest Unlimited are merely this alter ego 
20 
of Montana.” 
Which is correct. 
MR SONI SC:   Now when you handed the keys over, to 
whom did you hand the keys over? 
MS DE BEER:   I handed the keys over to Mr Lucky 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 243 of 253 
 
Montana myself. 
MR SONI SC:   This is the day after or a day or two after 
you left the property? 
MS DE BEER:   Yes.  Oh, another very important thing is 
that I believe that if you leave a property for somebody 
else, make sure that it looks better than what he saw it.  
So I actually phoned his secretary and I asked her at a 
time to meet with Mr Montana …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is Mr Montana’s secretary? 
MS DE BEER:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS DE BEER:   And I phoned and I said I would like to 
meet with him because I am going to repaint the house.  
That was not part of the deal but when I moved my stuff 
out, out of the house, all the marks where your furniture 
was, was – you know, there was ugly marks, etcetera, and 
I looked at it and I thought, you know, with all my furniture 
and everything, this is not the picture that he saw and I 
would not like to leave it like this.   
So I phoned her and said to her please could you 
20 
ask Lucky I would like to meet with him and then he can 
tell me what colour he would like to have the house from 
the inside.  He did not offer the outside but I mean the 
inside of the house.   
And then she said to me okay, she will come back 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 244 of 253 
 
to me and I think a day or two later she said to me Mr 
Montana said thank you for the offer, but, I mean, do not 
worry about it, he is going to redo and rebuild the inside so 
you are going to just waste money. 
 
So there was also part of the fact that me and 
Lucky discussed that and that happened because, I mean, 
after I moved out, he almost rebuilt the whole house.  I 
was very upset because I thought it was very beautiful.  
[Laughter] 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, in other words, what Mr Montana’s 
10 
secretary told you, Mr Montana said he would do to the 
house actually happened subsequently? 
MS DE BEER:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS DE BEER:   He said to me it is no need to do that, I 
mean, he going to break down the place anyway. 
MR SONI SC:   And you are a developer, was it a major – I 
mean, was it a major renovation that he effected? 
MS DE BEER:   I never, I must be honest with you I never 
had contact with him afterwards, but I drove past that 
20 
house, I had a lot of sentimental values there, you 
understand so I drove a lot past it to see what is 
happening, but you know when I drove past there I mean I 
was so upset because there was just scaffolding, all the 
windows were broken out, there was new windows put in, in 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 245 of 253 
 
the whole house, and as I say it went on for months you 
know and up till today the scaffolding is still standing 
there. 
 
Nobody ever moved in, and it has been six years.  
ADV SONI SC:    Oh. 
MS DE BEER:   I think, I think, I think the State sort of 
didn’t allow because when Paula Sullivan got involved, I 
think they blocked any movement on the house, or 
something like that, because nobody has moved in, in six 
years.  
10 
ADV SONI SC:    Now there was a stage just before you 
moved out that Montana walked through the house with 
you, is that correct? 
MS DE BEER:   That’s correct.    
ADV SONI SC:    And you deal with that at paragraph 6 of 
your affidavit Ms de Beer? 
MS DE BEER:    Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:    And you can start, it is at paragraph 6, 
and you can start with the sentence that reads, the second 
sentence, the first meeting. 
20 
MS DE BEER:   The first meeting I had with Montana was 
in or about mid-November 2014.  Montana walked through 
the house at that stage as he wanted to check some things 
I moved out and the morning of the 26 t h 2013 I again met 
with Montana and handed him the keys for the property.  
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 246 of 253 
 
ADV SONI SC:    This is after he declined your offer to 
repaint the house. 
MS DE BEER:   That is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:    The inside, sorry. 
MS DE BEER:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:    And then can I ask you to please turn to 
pages 7 ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Just before that, so all of this happened, 
the transfer happened, the transfer was – of the property 
was from your close corporation as the owner to Precise 
10 
Trade as the new owner but you are saying as far as you 
are concerned the real owner was Mr Montana? 
MS DE BEER:   For sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you  say you had these interactions 
with him even with is secretary saying that Mr Montana 
said he would – telling you his plans about the house, 
which ultimately you saw happening?    
MS DE BEER:   Absolutely, because I – when I walked 
through the house with Lucky when I handed him the keys I 
suggested to him, because being in property development 
20 
and I had business rights because it was a guesthouse and 
you know the average rates and taxes at that time in 
Waterkloof was about R2 400 roundabout there, and I think 
at that time if I can remember well mine was about R11 000 
to R12 000, and I asked him who is going to stay in this 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 247 of 253 
 
house and he said he was going to stay there, and I said to 
him I suggest that if you – I said are you going to run it as 
a guesthouse and he said to me no, he was going to live 
there.  And I said to him you know I would suggest that you 
deregister the business rights because otherwise you are 
going to pay R10 000 a month more for rates and taxes if 
you are not going to run it as a business, and so he said 
no, no it is not necessary he will keep it like that, maybe in 
future he would like to do something with it. 
 
So I mean I had those kind of discussions with him. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay.   
MS DE BEER:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, I interrupted you Mr Soni.   
ADV SONI SC:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I interrupted you, you can continue. 
ADV SONI SC:    No Chair, can I ask you please Ms de 
Beer to look at page 76 and page 77 and these are letters 
you wrote after you left. 
MS DE BEER:   That’s correct. 
ADV SONI SC:   Is that correct?   What are these letters, 
20 
just in general before you read them? 
MS DE BEER:    These letters, as you will see is the 27 t h 
of November, that was after I handed over my keys to Mr 
Montana and I just actually felt the community, my 
neighbours, because I had good relationships with my 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 248 of 253 
 
neighbours, and I just basically introduced Mr Lucky 
Montana to them, and you know sort of like telling them, 
you know make him welcome, make him feel – because he 
is a very smart man, and he is a very gentle man and I 
would like you people to sort of make him part of the 
community.  So this is the reason for the letter that I have 
written. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If that email hasn’t been read into the 
record I think ...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:    I want it read in ja. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, go ahead yes. 
ADV SONI SC:    So the email is dated the 27 t h of 
November and it is addressed to a particular email address 
and the subject matter is Rose Avenue Security, is that 
your ...[intervenes]  
MS DE BEER:    Yes, what actually happened I mean I was 
about a year or two years prior to that my husband was 
gun-pointed at our house coming from the gym and it was 
very, very traumatic and after that we had 24 hour security 
at our, you know with a gatehouse outside our gate.  So 
20 
that is basically just ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Whose email address is that one where 
you sent it to, and – is it Vision or something, do you want 
to, that letter at page 76, that email address.  Was that a 
common email address for the community or what? 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 249 of 253 
 
MS DE BEER:    Yes, I think, I can’t remember well, you 
know at some stage some of the community also got 
involved with security and I can’t remember whether that 
was you know part of – you know because some of the 
community would get say ten houses would have a security 
patrolling and I can’t remember at this stage what really 
happening, all I know we had our own security, but we also 
sort of participated you know in the community as well you 
understand, so I think maybe that could be that, I can’t 
remember. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay.   
ADV SONI SC:    Will you read then – well to whom is that 
email addressed? 
MS DE BEER:    To who?   
ADV SONI SC:    Yes. 
MS DE BEER:    I would like, to all my neighbours, which 
one?   Ja, my neighbours it was the people across the road 
from me, the people – I had a corner stand, it was a corner 
house, now the people right opposite me, the people next 
to me on the left hand side and the people at the top of 
20 
me.  It was only to basic three neighbours, ja.  The people 
that I was close to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, just read the whole email.   
MS DE BEER:   Okay. 
“To all my neighbours, 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 250 of 253 
 
I would like to inform you that I have sold my home 
to Mr Lucky Montana, the current CEO of PRASA.  
He is a very nice gentleman and would take full 
responsibility of the property on the 1 s t December 
2014.  I would like to find out whether you would be 
interested 
to 
continue 
with 
our 
arrangement 
concerning the security, if not I would remove the 
guardhouse and continue with their service at my 
new residence. 
Thank you very much for your kind and faithful 
10 
friendship over the past seven years and I hope you 
have a prosperous Christmas and a New Year.”    
ADV SONI SC:    And you sign off as ...[intervenes]  
MS DE BEER:   Karen de Beer ...[intervenes]    
ADV SONI SC:    Ms Karen de Beer and ...[intervenes]  
MS DE BEER:    Karen de Beer and Family yes.  I 
remember 
now, 
sorry, 
I 
remember 
now, 
it 
was 
the 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The email address? 
MS DE BEER:   The email address, Vision Property, was 
20 
the few neighbours just on either side, we were just about 
four or five, because of the gun pointing you know we 
basically decided to get somebody you know sort of to 
patrol. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 251 of 253 
 
MR SONI SC:   Then if you look at the next page, page 77, 
you will see that is a further email from yourself, but this is 
addressed to Karen Mitchell. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At what page?  
MR SONI SC:   Oh sorry, page 77 Chair I think, it is the 
very next page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well it also say to all my neighbours, but 
it says addressed to, okay, yes continue.  
MS DE BEER:   I think maybe ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it identical? 
10 
MR SONI SC:    It is identical. 
MS DE BEER:   It is identical. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MS DE BEER:   I think what could have happened here, 
maybe one of my staff maybe had an oversight on one of 
the people and that we then basically forwarded to them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MS DE BEER:   Okay. 
MR SONI SC:    But what you say in your affidavit, and I 
am just asking if that is now your recollection as well, you 
20 
want to make it public that you want them to embrace Mr 
Montana?  
MS DE BEER:   Yes, yes.  You know we had a very, very 
nice 
community 
and 
you 
know 
everybody 
was 
quite 
sensitive about what is going on around them after this gun 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 252 of 253 
 
point etcetera, and I wanted to let these people know that 
there is somebody moving in here, this is who it is and it is 
a very nice person and I would like him, because I also 
told him about the nice neighbours that I had, so I want to 
just make – actually them to get to know one another. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS DE BEER:   I told him about what nice neighbours I 
have and I told them about what a nice man has bought my 
house. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you ever meet Mr van der Walt? 
10 
MR SONI SC:    Never, never.  
MS DE BEER:   But Mr Montana you met? 
MR SONI SC:    Yes Mr Montana I met several times.  
MS DE BEER:   Yes. 
MR SONI SC:    On the last contract, on the first contract 
never.  
MS DE BEER:   Yes, okay, alright. 
MR SONI SC:    And to your knowledge did Mr van der Walt 
ever visit the house, in the way that Mr Montana said don’t 
worry about painting and ...[intervenes]   
20 
MS DE BEER:   No, because I don’t know what Mr van der 
Walt looks like, I have never met him, I don’t even know 
where his offices is. 
MR SONI SC:    And Mr Johan Smit?  
MS DE BEER:   Never, never.  I never spoke to any of 
01 JULY 2020 – DAY 228 
 
Page 253 of 253 
 
them, I never spoke to them, I worked through my lawyer. 
MR SONI SC:    So Mr Montana is the only one that you 
spoke to amongst the different ...[intervenes]   
MS DE BEER:   Yes, and his secretary? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS DE BEER:   And his secretary. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And his secretary, yes okay, okay. 
MR SONI SC:   Chairperson I have no further questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes thank you very much Ms de Beer, we 
will release you, we once again want to say we are grateful 
10 
that you were patient, thank you very much for coming to 
give your evidence. 
MS DE BEER:   It is a pleasure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are now excused. 
MS DE BEER:   Thank you. 
MR SONI SC:   Thank you again from us Ms de Beer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We will adjourn now and tomorrow it is 
two witnesses, depending on whether an application is 
going to be brought in terms of ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, so we will, but we will start at 
20 
ten.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 2 JULY 2020 
