 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
03 AUGUST 2020 
 
 
DAY 243 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7008 
MOBILE: 079 429 4795  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 108 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
03 AUGUST 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 3 of 108 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 03 AUGUST 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:   Lighting seems not to be as good as it 
should be.   
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us continue.  I think they will 
attend to it.   
ADV SONI SC: Chairperson you would recall that on Friday 
there was an application for a variation of the directive that 
was issued on the 24 July. Over the weekend we were told – 
received a notification that Mr Nxasana is now going to be 
10 
acting for Judge Makhubele and her previous attorneys had 
withdrawn from the matter.  Early this morning we received a 
new 
Notice 
of 
Motion 
asking 
for 
further 
relief 
but 
Chairperson for all practical purposes what we have is the 
application that was adjourned on Friday and the extent to 
which it is being amplified today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So let us – you propose to – to let 
me hear what Mr Nxasana has to say? 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay they just need to sanitise there first.   
20 
ADV NXASANA:  Thank you Chairperson.  Chairperson the 
situation is as follows.  Indeed, we received instructions on 
Saturday to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you just want to place yourself on 
record first properly. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 4 of 108 
 
ADV NXASANA:  Yes thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV NXASANA:  Thank you Chairperson.   
ADV NXASANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you can move your mask a little bit if 
… 
ADV NXASANA:  Yes thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you do not have a problem with that so 
that I can hear you properly. 
ADV NXASANA:  Thank you Chairperson I am – my name is 
10 
Nxasana initials MSO of MSO Nxasana and Associates.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV NXASANA:  Attorneys based in Durban.  Chairperson I 
am 
here 
representing 
Judge 
Makhubele. 
 
I 
received 
instructions on Saturday that was the 31 – is it the 1s t?  Yes 
on the 1s t – Saturday the 1s t August to assist her with this 
matter and my instructions were very specific that I have to 
brief senior counsel in the matter.  I have – I was also given 
the name of the senior counsel that client intends briefing 
and I have contacted the senior counsel who then advised 
20 
me that he is – he will only be available after mid- 
September because of the prior engagements that he is busy 
with.  And the senior counsel also advised me – he indicated 
that he will be appearing before the Chairperson here in this 
commission in a matter involving the – I think it is the DG of 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 5 of 108 
 
the State Security Agency but a date has not yet been 
allocated for that matter.  And … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.   
ADV NXASANA:  As a result of … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV NXASANA:  As a result of my instructions Chairperson I 
immediately sent a Notice of Appointment as attorneys of 
record I think it was on Saturday – on Sunday if I am not 
mistaken.  I am seeing client for the first time because we 
have been communicating over the phone since I am based 
10 
in Durban and she is based here.   
At the time of receiving instructions I was also 
simultaneously advised that – that was before instructions 
were confirmed that there was an application that was set 
down on Friday and the client could not make it because of 
the short notice and also because of the developments 
arising from the withdrawal of the – of her attorneys of 
record on that day.   
Then the situation is I pointed out in the letter that I 
will be appearing today and seeking an adjournment so that 
20 
we can fully and properly consult with client together with 
counsel. 
That is the reason I am here today.  Thank you 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
So 
you 
– 
you 
are 
applying 
for 
a 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 6 of 108 
 
postponement and the reason for the postponement or the 
application is that you have been instructed as the attorney 
and your instructions are to obtain senior counsel’s services 
– senior counsel – the particular senior counsel that is 
sought to be involved in the matter is not available until mid-
September. 
ADV NXASANA:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Basically, the lawyers are not ready? 
ADV NXASANA:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the problem. 
10 
ADV NXASANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But your client had lawyers for a long time. 
ADV NXASANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
And 
according 
to 
their 
letter 
as 
I 
understand it – their correspondence their mandate was 
terminated on I think they said on Thursday but I think the 
communication to the commission was on Friday morning 
when the application that your client had effectively lodged 
she had not put it as an application it was an affidavit but I 
decided to treat it as an application because she was making 
20 
a certain request in the affidavit with regard to the 
amendment of the directives.   
 
That application was set down for hearing at two 
o’clock in the course of the morning.  I think the legal team 
obtained at least I think the secretary of the commission – 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 7 of 108 
 
acting secretary of the commission the correspondence or 
Notice of Withdrawal and therefore nobody appeared at two 
o’clock on her behalf.   
 
I decided to postpone the matter to today on the 
basis that it was important that unless there is a good 
reason that is advanced for an adjournment the hearing of 
her evidence should continue today and that application 
would be deal with this morning.  But from what you are 
saying I do not know whether you are in a position to deal 
with anything other than the application for a postponement.  
10 
In other words, I do not know whether you are even in a 
position to deal with that application itself insofar as it may 
have 
aspects 
that 
do 
not 
or 
may 
not 
relate 
to 
a 
postponement.  It may be that all of them relate to a 
postponement but I just want to make sure that I understand 
quite well what it is that you are dealing with. 
ADV NXASANA:  Chair before I respond. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV NXASANA:  I see client is waving there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  You want to… 
20 
ADV NXASANA:  If I may approach her? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay alright.   
ADV NXASANA:  Thank you Chair.  Chair perhaps without 
prejudice to client’s rights she advises me that in fact I 
omitted to address that because having then noted that the 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 8 of 108 
 
matter was set down on Friday I did canvass that issue with 
her with a view to finding out if she then did make an 
appearance before the 
commission 
after the 
erstwhile 
attorneys had withdrawn.  But then she indicated to me that 
a lady from the commission who called her and advised her 
that she was directed to appear in person after the attorneys 
had withdrawn and that lady told her that the matter was set 
down at two.  It was at approximately about half past one 
when she received the call and it was impossible for her to 
make an appearance considering that she had to drive and 
10 
come here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no I – I do understand up to a certain 
point maybe her inability to be here on Friday. 
ADV NXASANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  She may – she may have been in court, 
she may have had some commitments and the termination of 
mandate of the attorneys may have happened at the last 
minute.  So – so it is just a pity that nobody appeared but I 
did not dismiss the application I postponed it to today.  So 
my question is whether you are moving that application or 
20 
you just moving an application for a postponement because 
of the reasons that you have advanced separate from 
whatever reasons may have been in that application.  Or is it 
– is it both.  I just want to know what I am dealing with. 
ADV NXASANA:  Oh thanks Your Worship – sorry Chair.  
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 9 of 108 
 
Chair my – my standpoint today is to move an application for 
a postponement.  Firstly, to deal with the application itself as 
well as to deal with the – the – her testimony. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV NXASANA:  Simply because from my reading of the 
material that has been provided to me and also from the 
instructions that I managed to take telephonically from client 
Chair we are dealing with – I am not saying that she must be 
treated differently to other witnesses but the fact of the 
matter is she is a sitting judge.  And a sitting – as a sitting 
10 
judge we know that the matter which she is invited to testify 
about where she has been implicated by some witnesses that 
matters is serving before the Judicial Conduct Committee of 
the JSC.  And the – a recommendation has already been 
taken that a tribunal should be established to investigate 
those allegations.  The point I am making Chair is that the 
reason why she seeks the assistance of senior counsel it is 
because of the repercussions that the matter might end up 
having on herself.  The matter has the potential of – of 
getting her impeached if one were to say so. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV NXASANA:  And she knew this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but that is not something she would 
have realised only recently.  That is something that she knew 
a long time ago. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 10 of 108 
 
ADV NXASANA:  Chair I – I agree that she knew about that 
perhaps but if – I think when she gets the opportunity to 
explain herself properly, she will take the Chairperson into 
her confidence and explain what exactly happened. But as of 
now Chair I was given an – an assurance that the matter will 
definitely see to finality and that is why I am here – I came 
all the way yesterday from Durban to make sure that the 
matter – if a postponement is granted by mid-September 
here counsel will be available and we will have… 
CHAIRPERSON:  You see your client has had a long time to 
10 
make all the preparations.  She did not know as far as I can 
gather from the various affidavits and documents that are in 
the file of the commission.  She did not just get to know that 
there were all kinds of allegations against her with regard to 
the role she played when she was Chairperson of the Board 
of PRASA only this year.   She knew that there were 
allegations against her in regard to her role in PRASA 
already in 2018.  She left the board I think about mid-March 
2018.  There were court applications that were brought by 
PRASA relating to against Siyaya where allegations were 
20 
made against – against her by I think some of the witnesses 
that have given evidence.  She – she has known about those 
allegations for quite some time.  If I understand correctly 
from correspondence, she herself at some stage indicated 
that she wanted to clear her name with regard to these 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 11 of 108 
 
allegations.  And she has had affidavits – the affidavits of Mr 
– of Ms Martha Ngoye, Mr Dingiswayo and Mr Agmat from 
February this year.  That is six months.  Somebody who was 
very concerned about these allegations would not even have 
waited for a date to – of hearing would do all the work 
necessary to be ready.  And she has had the affidavits of Mr 
Botes and Mr Magashoa for the past at least two months, I 
think.  She had attorneys from I think from soon after she 
was served with Rule 3.3 Notices in February or March and 
the attorneys began to correspond with the legal team of the 
10 
commission.  As I understand the position the legal team of 
the commission communicated to her that they would like her 
version on the allegations already at that time – maybe April 
– months ago.  She did not furnish the commission with her 
version all these months.  The only affidavit that she – or the 
first affidavit that she furnished related to Mr Botes – Mr 
Botes’ statement and I think in it she does deal with certain 
aspects 
of 
what happened 
at 
PRASA 
when 
she 
was 
Chairperson of the Board her relationship with Ms Ngoye and 
Mr Dingiswayo.  I am not saying that she deals fully with 
20 
those allegations but she does deal with them.  She – those 
attorneys withdrew at some stage a few months ago and she 
indicated that she was prepared to meet with the legal team 
of the commission and she was ready to furnish her affidavit 
or affidavits.  And I think that was either some time in I think 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 12 of 108 
 
that some time in – towards the end June if I am not 
mistaken.  She had a meeting with the legal team on the 9 
July.  There may be some issues about how she felt treated 
in that meeting but what has been said and I think what is 
common cause is that she came to that meeting only 
prepared to deal with one affidavit namely that of Mr Botes 
and not all the others.  We put a day aside on Friday – 
Friday the 24t h for the hearing of her evidence.  We lost that 
day.  We had to shift other witnesses in order to hear her 
evidence today.  If I grant her application it means we lose 
10 
another day.  We do not have a lot of time as a commission.  
We are operating under a court order that says we must 
finish our work within a certain time.  There are many other 
people who must still testify.  There is – there are really 
serious problems.  Now it is very difficult for me to see that 
on what you have submitted there is a good reason for 
postponement in the light of all of these things that I am 
saying.  I am putting to you what is in my mind for you to 
address if there is anything you wish to say other than what 
you have been able to say. 
20 
ADV NXASANA:  Chair thank you for giving me that 
background.  Chair as I have indicated that I have taken 
tentative instructions I will try my best to respond to some of 
the issues that the Chairperson has raised.  Chair one of the 
things that have been… 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 13 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh I am sorry let me also mention 
something else.  If I recall correctly her counsel on Friday 
the 24t h indicated that there was an undertaking on her part 
to file affidavits or an affidavit by the end of this past week 
and of course the application that was lodged on – on 
Thursday last week asked for time to file the affidavits today 
and I was hoping that this morning one would be told the 
affidavits are ready – are available but even if they are not 
available I think certainly from my side and I think the same 
position with the legal team it does not mean that we cannot 
10 
proceed and I cannot proceed and hear evidence and she 
can be questioned on the various matters.  The matters on 
which she would be questioned are largely factual.  I am not 
– I cannot remember that there is any legal complex issue 
that arises.  They are largely factual matters.   
ADV NXASANA:  Chair thank you.  I hear you.  But Chair my 
instructions are that there were – there was a period of 
lockdown that also must be taken into consideration.  Also, 
client is a judge she is allocated work and she has to attend 
to all these litigations. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you see the – the question of being a 
judge is – its importance as I see it relates to when she is 
going to be required to appear before the commission 
because she could be – it could be a date that on which she 
is supposed to be in court and there are other people who 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 14 of 108 
 
would have been ready to appear before her and there would 
be lawyers, they would be cost for people and it is – so it is 
that public interest part that I think is important. 
ADV NXASANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Once – once you are not talking about that 
you are talking about preparing affidavits.  I do not see why 
her situation – her work commitments are any different from 
anyone else who is not a judge who has – who also has work 
commitments.  Everybody makes time to – to do what they 
need to do.  There are lots of people who are not judges who 
10 
are very busy with whatever they do but when they – they 
are required to prepare affidavits they prepare affidavits. 
ADV NXASANA:  Chair perhaps for the sake of clarity and 
progress can I – can I ask – can I request that client 
explains herself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no that is fine. 
ADV NXASANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We can do that.  Well I think if she is going 
to explain herself it seems to me, she would have to do that 
under oath because you are her lawyer.  I do not see that 
20 
she can … 
ADV NXASANA:  Yes no that is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Represent herself while you are here. 
ADV NXASANA:  No it is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so if – but if she does that I – under 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 15 of 108 
 
oath that is different. 
ADV NXASANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that fine? 
ADV NXASANA:  It is fine Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Thank you.  Will you please 
administer the oath or affirmation? 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Tintswalo Annah Makhubele. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
10 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  None at all. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Yes. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so help me 
God. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  So help me God. 
REGISTRAR:  Thank you. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  You may be seated.   
TINTSWALO ANNAH MAKHUBELE  [d.s.s.] 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you are going to be comfortable 
removing the mask to enable you to be heard, that is fine.  If 
you are not comfortable with that, we just need to make sure 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 16 of 108 
 
we can hear you.  Whatever you are comfortable with. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Well, Chairperson the mask is made 
with a long beak.  So I should be able to speak.  So if you 
can hear me properly, I rather keep it on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, no, no.  That is fine.  As long as I 
hear you, that is fine.  I think somebody must check with the 
transcribers if they can hear.   
STENOGRAPHER:  [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Okay. 
 
I 
think 
just 
say 
something 
...[intervenes]  
10 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...then they will tell me.  They will indicate 
if they can hear you properly.   
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Can you hear me everybody? 
STENOGRAPHER:  [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m? 
STENOGRAPHER:  [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:  It is muffling, the sound.   
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Thank you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.  Thank you.  Okay Mr 
20 
Nxasana.  Well, Judge Makhubele, your counsel says it is 
better that you explain yourself, to address some of these 
issues that I have raised.  You have heard what I have 
raised, is it not? 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Chairperson, I have actually been 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 17 of 108 
 
handing notes to my attorney.  You probably realise that 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I saw that, yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  I was getting restless and I was, at 
some point, I raised my hand and I... at some point I wanted 
to stand up. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, I did not see you raise your hand.  
Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Because I realised something is 
about to repeat itself here. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  My attorneys... my senior counsel 
are very competent, as in Mr Shakoane, senior counsel of 
many years, appeared on my behalf on 24 July.   
 
Under similar circumstances as Mr Nxasana here, not 
even having had one minute eye... physical or eye-contact 
communication with me.   
 
And although I was at home... I was not watching the 
proceedings.  My family was.  And I read a lot of reports 
about it.  And because me and him, we never had a 
20 
consultation.  There were a lot of factual inaccuracies.   
 
And I see it happening when Chairperson tries to get 
information that I only can give to this Commission.  Mr 
Shakoane and my attorneys, previous attorneys, a competent 
black law firm were seriously embarrassed on 24 July. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 18 of 108 
 
 
Despite their protest machines, that they have not had a 
consultation with me but they had to represent me under 
those circumstances. 
 
And you can imagine what that does to one’s self-
confidence and one’s law firm because the media, the public 
had a go at them, taking into account their inability to 
represent 
me 
properly 
because 
they 
did 
not 
have 
a 
consultation with me. 
 
So when I say a repeat, I see Mr Nxasana is trying to 
phone ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why did you not have a consultation with 
them? 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  I will explain.  I have already 
explained Chairperson.  So I... Mr Nxasana and I, when we 
talked, I said I have already lodged an application and if I 
must deal with that application, I will deal with it myself 
today Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Actually, I do not want to give it 
without answering the questions that you have raised in my 
20 
absence on 24 July. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Whatever context, whether it will be 
for you to consider the application but simply made me to 
explain, so that when someone represents me and put it as 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 19 of 108 
 
an application, the Chairperson should understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
JUDGE 
MAKHUBELE:  I have no... I 
am 
not... the 
allegations against me relating to one issue of PRASA, I 
have no problem with that.  Chair has already indicated in 
my affidavit when I have dealt with the evidence of Advocate 
Botes, I have already touched on what actually happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  So I... that is my version. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
10 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  And I have already said that is my 
version. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  So for all intense and purposes.  My 
version is already ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Is already... okay. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  It is already before the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  It may be because Chair I have not 
had sight of the transcript of the evidence of Ms Ngoye and 
20 
Mr Dingiswayo.  I will need to supplement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  And obviously with the assistance of 
my legal team.  So I am not scared of those allegations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 20 of 108 
 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  But what I am scared of Chairperson 
is the perception that has been created that I am this 
arrogant person, disrespectful, refusing to work with the 
Commission.  Chairperson, if you have read my affidavit in 
the matter of Advocate Botes, or rather, my complaint 
against Advocate Botes.  I even ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I have read it.  Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  I have indicated that even before this 
Commission sat, one of the witnesses against me, that is 
Unite Behind, which is going to be represented by Mr 
10 
Achmat.  They had already started a campaign.  They have 
given me a name ‘state capture judge”.  So when they say, 
“state 
capture 
judge”, 
they 
are 
not 
referring 
to 
you 
Chairperson.  They are referring to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  They generated a lot of articles 
through one of their online publications, first book, Peter 
and...   Even before you had your first sitting calling me 
“state capture judge”.   
 
So I... I am... these words scares me Chairperson.  The 
20 
perception that it is going out there about who I am 
Chairperson. 
 
So in the affidavit that I have filed, I will answer all your 
questions with regard to the issues that you have raised with 
my erstwhile senior counsel which he was not able to 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 21 of 108 
 
articulate.  
 
And Chairperson, I will demonstrate before you that, one 
day when I was listening or watching the proceedings, 
Chairperson 
you 
were 
telling 
somebody 
whatever 
correspondence goes out, it goes with your... you may not be 
signing it but you are aware of everything. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Just repeat that last sentence. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  That you are aware of every 
correspondence that stand out to the witnesses or outsiders. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, you must have misheard.  I am not 
10 
aware 
of 
all 
correspondence 
that 
goes 
out 
of 
the 
Commission.  If I was to be aware of all of it, I would not 
have time to do anything. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Well ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  There is, however, correspondence that I 
see, for example, when the former president appeared before 
this 
Commission, 
I 
did 
announce 
that 
the 
specific 
correspondence that had been addressed to him in which he, 
through his lawyers, responded in a certain way, I did say 
that 
I 
was 
responsible 
for 
that 
correspondence 
and 
20 
therefore, if they had anybody to criticise they should 
criticise me.   
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Well, I am ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
But 
otherwise, 
there 
is 
a 
lot 
of 
correspondence that goes out without me seeing it but I do 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 22 of 108 
 
see some correspondence when there is a reason for me to 
see it. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Well, there is one email I will refer 
to.  It is maybe some 29 June from the acting Secretary of 
the Commission ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  ...to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  And when I complained about short 
notice of hearings and... the evidence that I will present to 
10 
you Chairperson will show you the kind of notices I have 
been given.  The time periods.   
 
Then she respond... in that case, I was given... in the 
case of Advocate Botes, the notice came to me of the 
hearing on twenty... 28 or 29 June, he was due to testify on 
the 1s t of July. 
 
You tell me Chairperson if that is sufficient notice?  And 
with... and same with Mr Mogashoa.  I do not know if he 
ended up testifying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He has not testified yet. 
20 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  But the notice, I received a day 
before his testimony.  So when I complained about the short 
notice, the acting secretary replied to my email and then 
they were talking amongst themselves as a team. 
 
But I was copied in that email, where she was saying 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 23 of 108 
 
there has been an instruction that the correspondence from 
me should be directed to you Chairperson to deal with. 
 
So that is only... maybe three weeks.  Three weeks ago.  
But 
throughout 
I 
have 
been 
communicating 
with 
the 
Commission with almost everybody and anybody. 
 
And at some point, I will show you, one would not know 
what the other one has already written to me about.  And so I 
intend to show you Chairperson that I heard on 24 July, you 
acknowledged that I am not an ordinary...  
 
I am Judge Makhubele.  I am just a simple girl but I 
10 
occupy the position of a judge.  I am not an ordinary person.  
And then I... because your rules do not...  
 
I think the argument will be, your rules... you did not 
anticipate to be dealing with judges or people who will be 
occupying high offices would appear before you but they do 
not make provision.   
 
But I then pointed out to the Commission.  I will show 
you the correspondence Chairperson that... 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m? 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  The closest to that, I think should be 
20 
applied, is the Superior Courts Act because ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  But hang on Judge Makhubele.  We need 
to... there is an application for a postponement that Mr 
Nxasana has moved.  We need to analyse that.  Now I 
understood that Mr Nxasana wished you to clarify certain 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 24 of 108 
 
matters with regard to that application. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Well, Chairperson what I realised is 
that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  I am sorry.  I am interrupting 
you but I am sorry.  I understand from what you... from part 
of what you have said that you are saying as far as dealing 
with allegations against you relating to your role at PRASA, 
you do not have a problem with that.  Did I understand you 
correctly? 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  I said... because when I... I never 
10 
when Miss Interpreter... your interaction with Mr Nxasana, I 
thought you are saying I have not... I have had this 
complaint for long.  I have not given a version.  And all I am 
saying is, I have given a version.  It may not been a 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  It may not be in a form that 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  It might not be as full as you would have 
liked. 
20 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  So I have given a version. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, so you have given a version? 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Yes. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 25 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Am I to understand that as far as you are 
concerned that there might not be much to add to that 
version? 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  I said... it is in my application.  
Remember, I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, whatever you have said. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  ...I have not... I have... I did not 
attend the hearings of Ms Ngoye and Mr Dingiswayo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  My former attorneys requested 
10 
transcripts.  They have not been given those transcripts.  So 
I may want to add when I receive those transcripts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  In the application that I am going to 
move, if Chair says I must move it, I have made that request 
that... with regard to Ms Ngoye and Mr Dingiswayo because 
they are the only direct witnesses that... for what happened 
at PRASA.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  I would want to have sight of their 
20 
evidence and then I add my version which, obviously, I have 
to confirm.  It was in a state... it is not in a sworn statement.  
It is in a statement that I submitted at the Pretoria Bar. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  So I will have to then confirm that 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 26 of 108 
 
statement and then add what I need to add.  And also, in the 
application I have also indicated there, there are certain 
investigations that were conducted by... certainly, let me not 
speak about Advocate Botes’ devices because I have already 
requested that information which I have not yet been 
provided with. 
 
But on my part, on the day when I have consulted with 
the 
legal 
team, 
a 
forensic 
investigator 
came 
for 
the 
consultation and he took my details, my ID number, my cell 
number. 
10 
 
And he was going to request cell phone records for a 
specific period.  Remember with... between me and mister... 
and Advocate Botes, the issue is who called who.  That is 
very important.  It may sound trivial but it is very important. 
 
So we provided the investigator with that information.  
That was on the 9t h of July.  Today is the 3rd of August.  I 
was informed it takes four days.   
 
So in the application that I have made, I have made that 
request that I need that information.  So those are things 
that I may want to supplement ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  To... yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  ...to the... but with regard to the 
circumstances 
that 
brings 
me 
before 
you 
Chairperson 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 27 of 108 
 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  I have already given a version. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You... yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  I have. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No, that is ...[intervenes]  
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  So what I was saying is that when 
Chairperson asked Mr Nxasana about my commitments, my 
failures...  Can I answer? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Because he does not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  H’m. 
10 
JUDGE 
MAKHUBELE:  I saw him for the first time 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and he said so too. [laughs] 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  He flew from... we spoke... we have 
been speaking since maybe Friday or Thursday evening. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  But then yesterday, then we agreed 
that he must appear.  Then he flew over.  I do not... we met 
here at the reception ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  ...as inside in Chairperson.  And 
Chairperson, may I just remind Chairperson that it is not just 
about 
legal 
representation. 
 
It 
is 
about 
efficient 
representation because when my legal team does not have a 
chance to even talk to me for a day or 30-minutes to put 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 28 of 108 
 
something to assist me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  But that is because you instructed 
them late. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Yes, but also Chairperson, the other 
thing I want to correct is, the previous attorneys... if I can 
take you through how they... their ...[indistinct] in my matter.   
 
In February they have dealt with my matter, just 
correspondence because they were already dealing with the 
JCC matter on my behalf.   
 
So they replied to one correspondence.  And that is on 
10 
the 24t h of February when I first received the Rule 3.3 
Notice. 
 
The first Rule 3.3. Notices came, I think, on the 21s t, 
22n d February of this year.  So these attorneys, because they 
were already assisting with the JCC matter, they then replied 
to those notices. 
 
And they indicated, right from the beginning, that the 
counsel that is assisting me at the JCC is conflicted because 
he is on retainer with the PRASA.   
 
So he, obviously, from an ethical point of view, he 
20 
cannot be appearing before me... to assist me in that matter 
because the same complainants are his briefing clients. 
 
So that was the end of February Chairperson.  And then 
I explained that then... we then had a lot of exchange with 
the secretariat. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 29 of 108 
 
 
I then appeared before the JCC just before National 
Lockdown.  And then there was National Lockdown on the 
30t h of March.  As Mr Nxasana says, that period must be 
taken into account.   
 
It had only been about three weeks since I was served 
with the Rule 3.3 Notices.  Then there was National 
Lockdown from 30 March where no one could anything and 
then when you resumed Chairperson ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, a lot of work could be done during... 
even Level 5 and Level 4 Lockdown, using technology 
10 
without meeting people.  We, ourselves, in the Commission, 
you know, did quite a lot of work.  People could be consulted 
virtually and emails could be exchanged.  All of that.  So a 
lot of work could be done without ...[intervenes]  
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Well ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  ...physically meeting with people. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  I agree fully Chair because we have 
been sitting.  I did research duty just after National 
Lockdown and then that is when we were starting with this 
MS teams because we already in the digital platform. 
20 
 
But what I am talking about is for me to consult... to 
appoint and consult an attorney under Level 5.  That was 
impossible Chairperson.  
 
And I did indicate to the Commission because they wrote 
to me sometime in April and then I said as soon as... you will 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 30 of 108 
 
see from the papers, one of the questions I asked them for 
reassurance was:  “Please, if you get a designation as an 
essential service, let me know because I may use that to 
travel to consult with my attorneys”. 
 
I did ask them that Chairperson.  I will show you the 
correspondence at the right time.  And then we... then there 
were other issues.   
 
Then when you resumed, you announced you have 
resumed.  And then... I then... that is when end of May, I 
received those 
notices 
about Advocate Botes and 
Mr 
10 
Mogashoa.   
 
And I then wrote the Commission and said... it may not 
have been immediately.  I explained why not immediately 
because it came in a week when I was doing urgent 
applications.  Two weeks. 
 
Then when I finished, I then wrote to the Commission to 
say I have read the affidavit of Advocates Botes and Mr 
Mogashoa and I think I want to get on with this matter.  
 
I... can you please let the legal team get in touch with 
me?  And because initially I had raised a lot of objections.  
20 
Can I... I... what Mr Botes says here now requires me to act 
immediately. 
 
Then I... that is when I wrote the letter of 23 June 
Chairperson.  And then I then dealt with the issue of how I 
was approached by the legal team. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 31 of 108 
 
 
And then the agreements we reached but in between two 
three days before mister... Advocate Botes testified, I was 
then told he was testifying and which was then impossible. 
 
Even before the legal team, as I have commented 
Chairperson, he came to testified.  But then I said I 
requested leave from JP Mlambo that I need to file this 
affidavit. 
 
And he gave me days off Chairperson and I filed this.  
So it is not true.  Because I see these things are being 
reported that I never did anything.  I filed an affidavit just a 
10 
day before Advocate Botes testified. 
 
And then the arrangement was I will consult with the 
legal team who prepared the affidavit for the other witnesses 
because that one of Mr Botes was specific to him. 
 
And in my letter Chairperson, I made request... a 
request that:  “Can I please testify during reses?”  Because 
we were approaching reses.   
 
The letter is very clear.  I said:  “Can I testify on the 
evidence of Advocate Botes because during June reses...?”   
 
And then... well, the Commission will explain why then 
20 
even before I consulted with the legal team, then they said... 
they then set the date for the 24t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja ...[intervenes]  
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  So Chairperson, I am trying to 
explain that there is a lot of things that ...[intervenes]  
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 32 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
JUDGE 
MAKHUBELE: 
 
...has 
been 
said 
about 
me 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  ...that I feel I am not leaving well.  If 
I you say I must leave, I will. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  But I [laughs]... I would not want to 
leave this Commission without dealing... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  But Chairperson, I filed an affidavit.  
It is 47-pages long. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I know.  I had to read all 47-pages. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  And I... it is a sequence and I was 
answering each and every question that I have been told I 
must 
respond 
to. 
 
The 
purpose 
of 
attaching 
the 
correspondence was to show the sequence and the issues 
that were being discussed.  And then again ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  That, of course, is ...[intervenes]  
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  ...I was asked to explain why I pulled 
20 
out of the consultation with the legal team and I took time to 
respond to... to answer you Chairperson.  It is for you 
Chairperson to decide whether my explanation makes sense 
or not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  H’m. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 33 of 108 
 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  And I was... or there are other things 
I was asked to address and I did but Chairperson the legal 
team answered my affidavit on Friday.  I received it Friday 
morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think it was... it was... well, I think they 
responded... I do not know when they responded but 
...[intervenes]  
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Ja, but ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  ...your affidavit came on Thursday, I think. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  I will also tell you the pressure that I 
10 
had to finalise that affidavit because my attorneys let me 
down.  Remember, I was doing opposed roll last week.  So 
we were... we would be consulting by telephone.  Draft... 
sending a draft for them to settle and then them bringing it 
back to me and then me waiting. 
 
But it was clear that we were not going to be able to file 
the statements, the sworn statements.  So what we were 
trying to do was to tell Chairperson that time... those 
timeframes are impossible to comply with, having regard to 
the fact that I was sitting in an opposed roll and I only had 
20 
three days. 
 
And the opposed roll runs for a week Chairperson.  So 
by six o’clock on the due date, my attorneys then told me 
that:  “Look, Judge we think...”  I do not know if this... what I 
am saying falls within a privileged attorney/client but for your 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 34 of 108 
 
purpose Chair, because I must respond to this question. 
 
By 18:00... remember, during the day I am in court.  By 
18:00 I am expecting a settled affidavit from my attorneys.  
They then tell me that  “Look, it is impossible.  We cannot do 
this”.   
 
What were my... my options were to sit back or do 
something.  I decided to do something Chair.  I was working 
from chambers.  I then called my family:  “Come here.  We 
must finalise this affidavit”.  My family assisted me.  We put 
together the affidavits.  We left my chambers at around 12 
10 
a.m. because I did not want to defy you order, Chair.  We 
went to the police station, the police were reluctant but 
they finally agreed to certify …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   The affidavit and the annexures, 
all totalling 140 pages.  12 a.m.  And then I called my one 
child has a bigger scanning machine to come to the house 
and we stand – we slept at 4 a.m.  That affidavit was sent 
to the Commission around twenty to four, Chairperson, 
because I did not want to defy your order, I said rather 
20 
when 
the 
Chairperson 
wakes 
up, 
the 
affidavit 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The affidavit should be there. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   The affidavit should be there and 
then I will deal with the other issues.  You will see there 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 35 of 108 
 
was no notice of motion because …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, there was no notice of motion.  
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   But all the issues that I am 
requesting have been addressed in the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   And thereafter we did not even – 
you know, when it is your own matter you even forget how 
things are supposed to be done.  I even forgot to paginate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   So I just – we just scanned and 
10 
sent through and then we – but when yesterday I realised 
oh, this thing is not paginated, then I sat down and 
paginated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   And then I said but there is no 
notice of motion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine …[intervenes] 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Then I then sent through the notice 
of motion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   But everything that I am requesting 
is in that affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   But then, Chairperson, I was 
talking about the legal team’s response to the issues.  I did 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 36 of 108 
 
not just wake up and say I want to find this affidavit, I 
wanted 
to 
respond 
to 
the 
issues 
that 
made 
you, 
Chairperson, to issue a subpoena, a regulation 10.6 
against me.  That is tantamount to a warrant of arrest or a 
summons and the regulation is clear, it says may – it gives 
you a discretion and obviously same thing if it was an 
application to rescind a judgment obtained in my absence.  
I will have to put factors that if you had been aware of me 
sitting there on the 24 July you would not have issued a 
regulation 10.6 notice against me.  That is the purpose of 
10 
that affidavit, Chairperson. 
 
And then the legal team responds in five pages – 
well, it is not the volume but it is the substance, but they 
do not deal with my – the merits of what I have said.  They 
simply say we deny we gave time …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes, 
okay. 
 
No, 
that 
is 
fine, 
I 
…[intervenes] 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Then they need time to find a 
substantive answer to my affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, well, they will speak for themselves.  
20 
I think we need to have some finality.  I certainly read your 
47 page affidavit on – I think I read it on Thursday, so I am 
aware of what you say in it.  I was aware when the matter 
was supposed to be heard at 2 p.m. on Friday.  I have read 
your earlier affidavit that you filed in response to Mr 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 37 of 108 
 
Botha’s affidavit so I am aware of all of those things.   
 
I think I need to say this.  Nothing that has been 
said so far changes my inclination not to grant a postpone 
but if there is anything that you have not said which you 
would like to say in support of the application, I am giving 
you another ten minutes to address me then you have had 
your time.  Now whether you use that ten minutes or he 
uses it or you take five minutes, he takes five minutes, I 
leave that to you but I want us to have finality on the 
question of a postponement. 
10 
 
Well, Chairperson, I would request the matter to 
stand down so I can discuss with my attorney on the issue 
of postponement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Because, as I say, we did not 
discuss. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no… 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   But then from my part, what I can 
tell you is that - as I have said, preparing, consulting with 
lawyers, preparing for efficient representation requires me 
20 
to be not in court.  Imagine today, it is my reading day for 
tomorrow’s matters, I am sitting here.  I am an emotional 
being.  When I leave here I am expected to go and read 
files for tomorrow’s matters.  I mean, if I had not been 
given the week off.  So it is – I realise it is – I realise it is 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 38 of 108 
 
impossible and I think I need to prepare.  Even if I were to 
do the drafting myself I need to prepare, I need to put 
together documents and I may have noted at some point I 
asked JP Mlambo that, please, just give me special leave, 
which I still intend to do because I am not coping, 
Chairperson.  I am not doing myself a good service and as 
my attorney has already said, this matter has serious 
implications for me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   And it is not something that I can 
10 
take light and say let me not just go and appear without 
consultation with attorneys but I request that we adjourn so 
I can brief my attorney.  I did something unconventional 
just now because, you know, when you have counselled an 
attorney, he is the one who must make submissions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   But Chairperson must understand, 
we are only meeting now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   And I did not – the line of your – or 
20 
rather, your conversation with him I realised that we are 
going back to that issue that here is a difficult State 
Capture Judge, she is controversial, she does not want to 
respond.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 39 of 108 
 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Then that is when I decided I need 
to address you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
JUDGE 
MAKHUBELE: 
 
 
But 
can 
you 
allow 
us 
an 
opportunity and I think 10 minutes, Chairperson, is too 
short a time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I was giving you ten minutes to say 
whatever else you might wish to say in support of your 
application if there is anything you have not said and I 
think it might be better that I hear what Mr Soni has to saw 
10 
before we allow the adjournment because then you would 
be knowing what he has had to say.  So I will give you the 
time but I want us to maybe adjourn if possible when there 
will be nothing further that you have not said in support of 
the application that you want to say. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Well, I have, but under my 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh you say – or are you saying that 
some of the things you want to say you would like to 
consult him first? 
20 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, alright. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes, Chairperson, that is why I am 
saying our submissions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 40 of 108 
 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Can we consult so that when Mr 
Soni 
makes 
submissions, 
we 
have 
already 
placed 
everything that we need to place before you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  You say ten minutes would not be 
enough? 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   I do not – well, let my attorney 
speak now …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Attorney or counsel, what do you say?  I 
do not want us to spend too much time that we do not 
have. 
10 
ADV NXASANA:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On things that might be dealt with 
without 
an 
adjournment 
but 
if 
there 
is 
a 
need 
for 
adjournment – is there any – are you able to say anything 
about how much time you need? 
ADV NXASANA:   Chair, can I propose that we be given at 
least 30 minutes? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think what I am going to do, I think I 
would rather – what I will do is, let me hear what Mr Soni 
has to say including on the amount of time and that does 
20 
not mean that your part is finished, I will still allow you – I 
will still like the question of that adjournment but I just 
want us to make use of the time as much as we can.  Okay, 
so let me hear Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  Thank you, Chair. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 41 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Both on the application so far as well as 
on the request for 30 minutes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Thank you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Soni? 
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson, I am going to take into 
account the interactions that you have heard with my 
learned friend. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  And what Judge Makhubele has said.  
Chairperson, the purpose of today is to decide on the 
10 
application, this one, and Judge Makhubele says that the 
affidavit that was served on us in the early hours of 
Thursday is the affidavit in support of the application.   
May I just make this point, Chairperson, that the first 
application for a postponement was made on the 24 July 
without any papers and that is a matter, Chairperson, that 
you raised with my learned friend who then appeared for 
Judge Makhubele, but is there no substantive application?  
And reasons were given for that, good or bad, but it was 
given. 
20 
 
And then we have now a further application with 
now a substantive application.  We submit, Chairperson, 
that the application before you must be determined by what 
is contained in the affidavit in support of that application. 
 
Now I have heard Judge Makhubele say well, we 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 42 of 108 
 
may wish to respond to different things in the affidavit 
where she refers to the legal team.  Chairperson, we do 
not want to because that is not the issue before you today. 
 
The question really is – and this is the issue, 
Chairperson, 
from 
the 
24 
July 
when 
application 
for 
postponement was made and the directive was given, 
Judge Makhubele knew that she had to file her papers, her 
affidavit by the 29 July and she would have to appear 
today.  What was then required was could that directive not 
be complied with?  Nothing in the affidavit addresses 
10 
anything that happened after the 24 t h.  So, Chairperson 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Actually, if one goes on the basis that, 
as Judge Makhubele indicates, she has given her version 
in the affidavit.  It might not be as full as she might have 
referred, it seems that then there was less work to be done 
in 
preparing 
the 
affidavit, 
an 
affidavit 
would 
just 
supplement that version. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I get the impression that what she 
20 
says is you have got the gist of my version already.  
ADV SONI SC:  There is one further matter that I must you, 
Chairperson.  Judge Makhubele says that part of the 
reason she is seeking the adjournment is that she has 
asked for the transcripts of the evidence of Ms Ngoyi and 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 43 of 108 
 
Mr Dingiswayo.  Well, Chairperson, on the 23 July her 
attorneys asked for it at about 11 o’clock on the 23 r d and at 
about four o’clock or three o’clock on the very same day 
they were given the link to the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   To the website. 
ADV SONI SC:  To the transcript, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So they could have got it from the 23 r d. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  And, Chairperson, at that time, that 
is the attorney that was representing Judge Makhubele. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But, as I understand it, the oral evidence 
10 
that was given by Ms Ngoyi and Mr Dingiswayo in relation 
to Judge Makhubele’s role at PRASA was substantially the 
same as what is in the affidavit. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that correct?  Is my recollection 
correct? 
ADV SONI SC:  Absolutely.  And, Chairperson, you will 
recall that in the case of Mr Dingiswayo all he did was 
confirm the correctness because it was late in the day and 
instead of having his evidence follow on the next day I 
20 
proposed that he merely confirms it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  So – and, Chairperson, you are absolutely 
right in regard to Ms Ngoyi, all she did was effectively set 
out what was set out in the affidavit that she made. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 44 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, alright. 
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson, we submit that the day must 
be used for the purpose that it has been set aside for, 
namely for Judge Makhubele to give her evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  I am going to take a tea break, it is 
now about seventeen minutes past eleven.  I am going to 
return at quarter to twelve.  Whatever you need to do – so 
that is tea break and whatever discussions you need to 
have with your attorney, use that time.  When I come back, 
I will give you the ten minutes to say whatever you might 
10 
still need to say in support of the application for a 
postponement.  I can indicate, as I have already indicated, 
that my inclination is to dismiss the application.  If nothing 
is said that persuades me 
when I come back, the 
application will be dismissed and I will need us to start. 
 
Now the question of whether there was good cause 
for you not to file affidavits on Wednesday, that need not 
be decided now.  I can decide it even later.  Or what is 
more, what is important is whether today we are able to 
proceed to hear your evidence.  So that is the inclination, I 
20 
am giving you the benefit of knowing what is in my mind.   
 
When we come back, I will give you ten minutes to 
see whether there is anything else you want to say and 
then if I feel that I can decide immediately, I will decide 
immediately if, from what you say, I need more time.  Then 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 45 of 108 
 
we will take it from there.  Yes, Judge Makhubele? 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Chair, there is an application.  Are 
you saying you are not going to hear me because in that 
application I have made requests that require Chairperson 
to make orders.  Are you saying my application is not going 
to be heard? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, remember, I said, you know, I need 
– earlier on I said I need to know exactly what we are 
dealing with today and there is an application for a 
postponement.  I have given you time to address me on the 
10 
application for a postponement and I am saying that I am 
going to give you ten minutes after the adjournment, 
because we have been dealing with it for a long time 
already, to address me.  If there is anything else that you 
want 
to 
address 
other 
than 
the 
application 
for 
a 
postponement, you will need to tell me but you will 
remember that when we started I asked Mr Nxasana 
exactly what it is that we are dealing with because I 
wanted to be sure. 
 
So what I am saying is, I have heard what you have 
20 
said up to now.  I have heard what Mr Nxasana has said up 
to now.  Based on what has been said to me, I am inclined 
to dismiss the application but I have not made a decision 
to dismiss it, I will give you more time to address me.  But 
I am saying that I gave you ten minutes after the 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 46 of 108 
 
adjournment to address me and if there is anything else I 
have missed that you want to bring to my attention that will 
be the time to bring it to my attention and then we will take 
it from there. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   The reason I am asking, Chair, if 
you can forgive me, is because if you start by dismissing 
my application for postponement then in the – in my 
affidavit I have already said the notice of motion that I sent 
it is actually what I am requesting in my affidavit.  And in 
…[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but why should you not deal with 
that after the adjournment, exactly what you want to raise, 
why should you not include it after the adjournment?  Ja, 
we will adjourn now, we will resume at quarter to and then 
I will give you that opportunity before I make a final 
decision. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Nxasana you were going to 
address whatever else you might not have addressed to me 
earlier in support of the application. 
Just switch on your mic, ja. 
ADV NXASANA:   Thank you Chair.  Chair I first indicated 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 47 of 108 
 
that when I stood up ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want to move your mask a little, 
so I can hear you properly, thanks. 
ADV NXASANA:  Chair when I told the Chairperson that 
that the instructions are to move an application for a 
postponement based on the reasons, especially that we 
have not consulted.   Chair, I was under the impression 
that today the matter was, obviously set-down for the 
application that my client has brought and I was moving 
that application for a postponement to enable her to enable 
10 
her 
to 
get 
legal 
assistance 
even 
if 
to 
argue 
that 
application, I don’t know if the Chair understands me? 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you are moving an application, not 
only for the postponement of the hearing of her evidence 
but also for the postponement of her application for a 
postponement? 
ADV NXASANA:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it correct? 
ADV NXASANA:   That is what I was saying, although I 
hear the client is saying that she – because I haven’t – 
20 
that is the reason why I was moving that application, 
precisely because I felt…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So there was an application for a 
postponement, you come, not to move that application for a 
postponement but to move another application for a 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 48 of 108 
 
postponement of the postponement? [Laughter] What is 
that Mr Nxasana? 
ADV NXASANA:   Chair the bottom line is it’s clear that 
Judge Makhubele requires legal assistance.  Yes, she has 
explained to the Chairperson how she ended up drafting 
the affidavit herself, when she had instructed attorneys and 
she said in her own words that the attorneys – after the 
attorneys had let her down and because…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let’s clear out again what we are 
dealing with.  Is it the application for a postponement that 
10 
was postponement today, including an application for the 
amendment of the Directive of 24 July or are you moving 
an application for a postponement of that postponement 
application? 
ADV NXASANA:   Chair, my view was to move an 
application for a postponement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of what, postponement of what? 
ADV NXASANA:   Of her testimony first and also I 
answered that I understood that the matter was set-down 
on the 30 t h at two for the application that client has 
20 
brought, which application could not proceed for the 
reasons that I have advanced but Chair, I then said that I 
submitted that she requires legal assistance because of 
the implications that all those proceedings may have, 
taking into consideration that the matter is serving before 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 49 of 108 
 
the JCC and a recommendation has already been made 
that the tribunal should be established, that was on that 
premise but then when the Chairperson pressed me with 
questions that is when I said, client is here to explain 
especially because there was an impression that client was 
delaying the matter to – she was delaying to come to the 
Commission and if, Chairperson, the Chairperson has 
already indicated if the Chairperson is inclined to refusing 
the postponement then based on the reason that the 
Chairperson has furnished  then the – then my application 
10 
or my  submission, Chair, is that if the Chairperson looks 
at the matters of motion that the client filed late last night, 
you’ll see Chairperson that you are going back to the 
…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Can I have a copy of that Notice of 
Motion, I did see it earlier on but I just want to have a look 
at it now, yes Mr Nxasana. 
ADV NXASANA:   Then, Chair, my submission is that, I 
hear the Chairperson saying that the matter – that Judge 
Makhubele is expected to testify on, is purely of a factual 
20 
nature but Chair, if you look at the affidavit that she filed in 
the application for the Regulation 10 sub-section 6, you 
see that she has made very serious allegations against the 
legal team, the very same legal team that is expected to 
lead her evidence. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 50 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, she brings her application in 
regard to the legal team at the last minute.  She has known 
the members of the legal team of the Commission involved 
in this matter for months and of course she did have a 
consultation with them on the 9 t h of July, well, maybe she 
might not have known, she might have known one before 
June, I’m not sure, but certainly she had a consultation 
with them on the 9 t h of July so she knew them, at least at 
the latest on that date.  Prior to that she had, as she said 
earlier on herself, she had raised certain objections which 
10 
included one of the members of the Commission’s legal 
team involved in the PRASA matter but she later withdrew 
all the objections that she had articulated and was 
prepared to consult, which she did on the 9 t h of July.  From 
the 9 t h of July she knew, at least, the two members of the 
Commission’s legal team who are involved in the matter.  
On Friday the 24 t h, it was, if I recall correctly, it was not 
one of her grounds for a postponement that she had an 
objection to members of the legal team.  When she filed 
her affidavit on Thursday last week, yes she has expressed 
20 
certain unhappiness with regard to members of the legal 
team which is in the affidavit but there has been quite a lot 
of time for her to raise such issues, at least from the 9 t h.  
We adjourned on the 24 t h, we adjourned today and she has 
raised, now, these concerns that she has raised.  It seems 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 51 of 108 
 
to me that she should have raised them much earlier 
number one.  Number two, what about the fact that the 
members of the legal team will not really decide anything 
relating to her, they will put questions to her, I’m the one 
who will, ultimately, make a decision, what do you say 
about that? 
ADV NXASANA:   Yes it may be so but I think Chair, as a 
witness, if the witness is making such serious allegations 
against members of the legal team, Chair, I submit that 
they must respond and from the answering affidavit you 
10 
see that only one member has responded but not fully to 
the allegations and there is not even a confirmatory 
affidavit from the evidence leader…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let’s go to the actual allegations or do 
you want to address – to address them.  As I understand it, 
I think she said they must indicate if they’ve done some 
work for PRASA or that kind of thing which suggests to me 
that it’s not – it might not be, even a situation that she’s in 
possession of any information herself in regard to one of 
the members of the legal team, I think she did not want to 
20 
put forward, in the affidavit what the issue was and I think, 
previously, she had done the same in regard to one 
member of the legal team but she had said that she was 
withdrawing that objection with regard to – when she 
withdrew objections, it included that objection against that 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 52 of 108 
 
one member of the legal team.  So – and she withdrew her 
objection and then bring it back. 
ADV NXASANA:   Chair that is also another problem, 
Chair, that I’m going to address the Chair on.  The other 
difficulty, Chair, is that, I hear the Chair is asking 
questions but they are questions that I cannot answer 
simply because I haven’t taken full instructions, I haven’t 
had the opportunity to consult…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja but you are arguing on the basis of 
an affidavit that she filed on Thursday. 
10 
ADV NXASANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Last week. 
ADV NXASANA:   But Chair I wasn’t aware of the objection 
that 
she 
withdrew 
earlier 
on, 
that’s 
my 
problem…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja but you did hear her later – earlier on 
because she also mentioned that she had withdrawn 
certain objections.  I think the objections about PRASA 
might not have been part of any objection at that time.  So, 
I think the objections that may be new, may be objections 
20 
about whether members of the legal team have done work 
for PRASA and the way she feels she was treated on the 
9 t h of July in the consultation.  I think those are the only 
ones that may be new, you must tell me if I’m missing 
something? 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 53 of 108 
 
ADV NXASANA:   Chair about new ones I’m not sure but 
what you have said is …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is what you know also, was the 
objections. 
ADV NXASANA:   Is what I’ve read about in the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV NXASANA:   Yes and Chair, my understanding of her 
request in terms of the application that she has brought in 
terms of 11.1 is that she was asking the members of the 
legal team to declare their interest, if they have any. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Which 
means 
she 
doesn’t 
have 
information whether they have a conflict of interest or not 
otherwise she would not be asking.  She would be saying, 
I’m aware that this and this is the position. 
ADV NXASANA:   Ja, but…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I mean, we are going to close to half a 
day now, I want finality.  Five me your last submissions in 
the next five minutes, whatever you want to address, I’ve 
given you more than ten minutes, we have got to have 
finality. 
20 
ADV NXASANA:   Yes Chair, I think, Chair the justice will 
only be done in this matter, Chair, if Judge Makhubele 
were to be – if the application that she has brought herself 
was going to be heard before the Chairperson was going to 
make a ruling on the issue of the application for a 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 54 of 108 
 
postponement.  The reason why I say that, it’s because it’s 
there in the application that she’s brought, the application 
in terms of Rule 11 sub-section 1, that is my submission 
and also Chair, in the event the Chairperson, as he has 
indicated that he is inclined to dismissing the application, 
in the event that the application is dismissed for a 
postponement to enable her to consult with her legal team, 
that will mean, basically, that she doesn’t have legal 
representation because in terms of the rules of the 
Commission, she’s entitled to legal representation and one 
10 
of the powers of the Chairperson is to grant the legal 
representative, appearing on behalf of the implicated 
witness, leave to re-examine the witness which I will not be 
in a position to do without having consulted and taken 
instructions but that’s not only the point.  The point is that 
the client requires and she needs services of Senior 
Counsel. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV NXASANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are those your submissions? 
20 
ADV NXASANA:   Those are my submissions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see with regard to the question of 
whether she had good grounds not to file her affidavit or 
affidavits within the timeframe stipulated in the Directive of 
July 24, that I can decide later, I don’t think I need to 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 55 of 108 
 
decide that now.  With regard to the application and with 
regard to the affidavits, she herself has said that she has 
actually, in her affidavit that she filed in response to Mr 
Botes, she has said that she has put in her version.  It 
might not be as full as she might have wished but she has 
said that she has put in her version, it’s not true that she 
has not put up her version and that’s the gist of what she 
was saying.  We are working under serious strains in terms 
of an Order of Court to make sure we work within a certain 
time and she has had enough time to really obtain counsel 
10 
who would be ready to proceed today, as I see it but also, 
although one accepts that, even a Judge does need legal 
representation in a case, in certain places one can’t forget 
the fact that she is a Judge, she is legally trained and also 
in the end, also the fact that, really the matters that will be 
dealt with be very factual, we are – the Commission is 
scheduled for a number of witnesses for quite some time 
and there are many more people who are supposed to 
testify and we lost a day on the 24 t h, we shifted other 
witnesses for today in order to sit.  So, I’m going to 
20 
dismiss the application but I will give reasons in due 
course.  The application is dismissed. 
ADV NXASANA:   Thank you Chair, just for clarity, the 
application that is dismissed is the application for a 
postponement. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 56 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well the application for a postponement 
is dismissed and I said the issue of whether she has 
complied – she had good cause to comply with the 
Directive in terms of filing an affidavit by Wednesday last 
week, that can be decided – I can decide that later on.  
Remember the Directive had two dates, one was the filing 
of the affidavits, on Wednesday and the other was for her 
to appear today and she has appeared. 
ADV NXASANA:   Yes Chair.  Chair there is an application 
before you, Chair…[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja which one? 
ADV NXASANA:   The one that – in terms of Rule 11 sub-
section 1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It’s an application for what? 
ADV NXASANA:   It sets out, there in the Notice of Motion, 
that 1) is the granting condonation for non-compliance with 
the time strains in term of  service, 2) reconsideration in 
rescission of the Directives of 24 July 2020 alternatively 
substitution of the time periods indicated in the said 
Directive. 
 
3) 
Setting 
aside 
and/or 
withdrawing 
the 
20 
regulation 10 sub-section 6 subpoena served on the 
applicant on 28 July 2020...[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well let’s take them one by one let’s 
leave out 1 for now, reconsideration and rescission of the 
Directives of 24 July 2020 or alternatively substitution of 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 57 of 108 
 
the time periods indicated in the said Directives.  The 
Directive was about two things, 1), her filing an affidavit or 
affidavits by Wednesday last week, 2) appearing today.  
She has appeared today so that falls away, there’s – that 
falls away, she did not file an affidavit on the 29 t h and she 
is asking us to – for a reconsideration of that to the extent 
that she may be asking for more time to file affidavits, 1) 
She has said that she has filed an affidavit, she has put up 
a version it’s not true that she has not put up a version, it 
might not be as full as she wanted  but even without that I 
10 
would not do that – I would not direct that she does that on 
another date if that was to require a postponement of the 
matter because the matters can be dealt with, without any 
further affidavits but if she chooses, apart from, I addition 
to having given oral evidence that, for certain reasons she 
would like to file affidavits, that might be a separate issue 
then 3) is about setting aside or withdrawing 10(6) 
Directive that’s what we have talked about  and then 
granting the applicant sufficient time to consult with her 
legal team, that’s what I’ve indicated, I don’t think that 
20 
there is good cause that has been shown and then with 
regard to 5), the transcripts, Mr Soni says, the previous 
attorneys were told on the 23 r d, they were given the link in 
order to be able to access the transcripts technologically. 
ADV NXASANA:   Chair, just on that point. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 58 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV NXASANA:   My instruction Chair, are that, that link 
was never provided to client and she has never seen the 
…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well that might be – that might have 
to be dealt with but my recollection is that the evidence 
that was given is substantially the same as the evidence 
that was in the affidavits which she has had – so I wasn’t 
going to postpone the proceedings in order for her to get 
the transcripts first because, as I say, even if the link 
10 
wasn’t even – the oral evidence was substantially along 
the lines of the affidavits.  6) The results of the analysis of 
the investigations conducted by the forensic, I’m sure that 
can be arranged for her to get that, Mr Soni did not 
address that, directing the legal team to provide all the cell 
phone records both – but also this is all coming on the 
morning of the hearing, I mean very late.  8) Directing and 
compelling the Commission’s legal team and investigators, 
assisting the Commission in the PRASA hearing to disclose 
their professional interest in PRASA, ja.  I think if she 
20 
needs to file a complaint she must file a complaint.  No we 
are proceeding. 
ADV NXASANA:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV NXASANA:   Just one more thing from my side Chair, 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 59 of 108 
 
I understand that the client has made mention of the 
affidavit that she filed in the complaint against Advocate 
Botes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV NXASANA:   And that she said she dealt therein with 
her evidence not substantially as she would have liked.  
Chair I have not seen that affidavit either, those are the 
constraints…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She should have given you that affidavit. 
ADV 
NXASANA: 
 
 
Those 
are 
the 
constraints 
10 
that…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We got it from her, as I understand it, I 
may be mistaken but we have had it for quite some time 
and I think she – I think that was end of June if I’m not 
mistaken.  Well there are two options now that I’ve 
dismissed the application.  One is whether I should give – 
well I don’t know whether your position would be that you 
are going to withdraw in the light of the dismissal of the 
application or whether you are going to seek to have some 
time to consult with her and that we – I give you some time 
20 
before we resume to consult with her and then we resume 
at a certain time and then we deal with her evidence. 
ADV NXASANA:   May I approach Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja.  Well Mr Nxasana I cannot sit 
here and… 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 60 of 108 
 
ADV NXASANA:  Chair thank you.  I understand that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV NXASANA:  Chair perhaps just one issue Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NXASANA:  Client she is raising one issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NXASANA:  If Chair can clarity that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   Yes Judge Makhubele. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  Chairperson I have noted you read the 
prayers up to a certain prayer.  Yes I understand with the 
10 
PRASA General Declaration of Interest I have an onus to 
provide evidence which I will in time.  But there is a prayer 
specifically seeking the recusal of Advocate Vas Soni SC.  
There is a prayer there Chairperson and if you dismiss my 
application in general you – you… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well… 
MS MAKHUBELE:  The affidavit – my affidavit deals with 
Advocate Soni is the reason why I pulled out of the 
consultation with the legal team and you cannot expect me 
today to be led by him without you first hearing me – my 
20 
reasons why I say he should not be leading me in evidence.  
You can call any person in the legal team to lead me but not 
Advocate Soni. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  Chairperson he – Advocate Soni in this 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 61 of 108 
 
affidavit I have said on the 24 July he is standing there he 
told some untruth about me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  I have submitted evidence.  Chairperson 
cannot simply dismiss me like that without even mentioning 
on the record what I have said and specifically dismiss that 
prayer that Judge Makhubele is talking coherences. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you remember… 
MS MAKHUBELE:  I need a ruling whether… 
CHAIRPERSON:  You remember – you remember I said I was 
10 
going to adjourn to – and when we come back I will give you 
an opportunity to say whatever you might not have said. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us go to – to that part of your affidavit. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  My part of the affidavit where I deal 
specifically 
with 
Advocate 
Soni 
because 
Chairperson 
remember you asked – you said I make myself available to 
consult with the legal team. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  Which is true. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  And then the objections that I had 
withdrawn maybe for the record at that time was and believe 
from my perspective made sense although there was never a 
ruling but I thought we could move along.  But when I met 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 62 of 108 
 
Advocate Soni I deal with it in the affidavit maybe from page 
23 from paragraph 51.  I detail how I met them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  And what broke down the relationship. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  If that relationship did not break down, 
we would not be here today Chairperson.  I was happy to 
provide an affidavit to the legal team but he is the reason I 
pulled out.  And Chairperson has already made adverse 
remarks about my pulling out of that consultation. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  So it is important Chairperson that this 
issue be addressed and I request time to brief my attorney 
properly to present this application alternatively… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The recusal application? 
MS MAKHUBELE:  Yes. Alternatively, you allow me to move 
it which you effectively denying legal representation if I have 
present this application myself.  This must be presented 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well… 
20 
MS MAKHUBELE:  If you say I must proceed today the 
question is who will be leading me?  I can never sit here and 
have a conversation with you.  I have no problem but I am 
not going to allow Advocate Soni. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The recusal application it is a recusal 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 63 of 108 
 
application it is not an application for the postponement of 
the hearing of your evidence.  Those are two different 
matters.  And you remember that I kept on saying I want to 
know exactly which application – or which issue is being 
moved.  You want an opportunity to talk to your attorney and 
brief him about the recusal application? 
MS MAKHUBELE:  Well I do not know Chairperson you have 
already ruled on some parts of the – my Notice of Motion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I – the postponement I have dismissed the 
postponement application. 
10 
MS MAKHUBELE:  Yes but then Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The recusal application. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  Chairperson there is a lot that was said 
about me on the 24 July.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  You would recall. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  And then the point that I am taking is the 
person making those remarks was not telling the truth.  I 
gave you evidence that when Advocate Soni stood there he 
20 
said something that I – I did not return his calls.  I am this, 
this and that and I deal with it and I also deal with his 
conduct when they have consulted with me that looking at 
how he dealt with me in that particular consultation I 
immediately pulled out Chairperson and I believe the 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 64 of 108 
 
application that I have made must be entertained.  You can 
dismiss it but after giving me an opportunity.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  You cannot simply dismiss everything 
that I am making here Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no.  I remember I said I want to – from 
the beginning I said I want to know exactly what we are 
dealing with and so far, I was told the postponement 
application.  No mention was made of a recusal application.  
Now Mr Soni what do you say about the recusal application 
10 
in terms of how we move forward?  Let me hear that? 
MS MAKHUBELE:  Chairperson before you give him an 
opportunity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  I sit here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  I – before they come here, they prepare 
their work. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  Before I go to court, I prepare my work. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  But I managed – I did not sleep. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  I wrote this affidavit after doing my 
oppose motion. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 65 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  They have had this affidavit since – since 
when – Thursday morning.  Today it is Monday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well … 
MS MAKHUBELE:  I do not think it is …. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well… 
MS MAKHUBELE:  Chair it is proper for … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Judge Makhubele. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  For Advocate Soni to respond to my 
affidavit. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  He must file an affidavit about the move. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  No, no, no you have not – you have not 
heard what I say.  I want to hear what Mr Soni has to say 
about the recusal application not the substantive part 
because you – your counsel has not – test it. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  But a judge has filed an affidavit under 
oath. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  Why can he not file an affidavit under 
20 
oath? 
CHAIRPERSON:  No but Judge Makhubele please wait. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I need to hear him as well.  Ms Nxasana 
take a seat and let me hear Mr Soni.  Just put on your 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 66 of 108 
 
microphone Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson of course I stand here in a 
rather invidious position.  Fortunately, though Chairperson 
there are two issues that are involved in everything that 
Judge Makhubele and Mr Nxasana has said.   
First is; what is my role in this commission?  I do not 
play any role in making any decisions.  My role is to lead 
evidence and to challenge evidence.  What comes of that 
evidence Chairperson is in your hands.   
The second issue Chairperson is that it cannot be for 
10 
a witness to say to the commission that it may not – the 
commission may not allow one of its members unless there 
are 
good 
reasons 
not 
to 
participate 
in 
particular 
proceedings.  As I understand it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where is her affidavit that has got this of 
Thursday?   
ADV SONI SC:  If I recall application by Judge Makhubele 
for amendment of the regulations.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Just – just read the – just remind me of the 
relevant parts of that – in the affidavit? 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson at paragraph 52 this is where 
Judge Makhubele starts.  She met Ms Mangata [?] and 
myself and then we had a forensic investigator and then she 
says: 
“At the beginning of the meeting” 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 67 of 108 
 
This is at paragraph 54. 
“The commission’s team seemed to appreciate my position in 
the objections I raised.  I say so because in respect of 
forensic analysis WhatsApp and messages they made a 
concession that there would be no need to do an imaging of 
my phone.  Then we agreed that I should email to Ms 
Mangata [?] copies of all the annexure.” 
That is at paragraph 65.  Paragragh 56. 
“The meeting progressed into or rather degenerated into a 
session of accusatorial exchanges with Advocate Soni who 
10 
seemed to take a prosecutorial posture like despite an 
earlier acknowledgement by the commission that my matter 
was before the JSC and the JCC and that in essence the 
testimony required – required from me related to issues 
before those forums.   
It became a very lengthy and tiresome engagement 
which distressed me and completely made me change my 
initial view when I offered to consult with the team.  His 
behaviour actually confirmed my apprehension about the 
objectivity of the legal team and investigators.   
20 
Advocate Soni attempted to act as a police officer, 
prosecutor and judicial officer.  I do not believe that this is 
the role of the legal team when they take statements.  Over 
and over again Advocate Soni made it clear that he was 
going to cross-examine me on things that he did not believe 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 68 of 108 
 
that I was telling the truth.  He actually sat with me as an 
agent of the witnesses that accused me of wrongdoings at 
PRASA particularly Ms Ngoye, Mr Dingiswayo and Mr 
Mkhatshwa.   
Also, 
to 
mention 
that 
during 
our 
telephone 
conversations Advocate Soni had informed me that Mr Agmat 
would not be testifying.” 
Then at paragraph 60. 
“What broke my patience and tolerance of the consultation 
was the attempt by Advocate Soni while Ms Mangata[?] 
10 
remained silent suppress my evidence which I believe will 
contradict the allegations of the witnesses. I would refer to a 
few examples without revealing what my answer is at this 
stage. 
1. The issue of the authority of the Chairperson of the 
board to intervene as I did. 
b. The delegation of authority from the board. 
c. My first interaction with Ms Ngoye and Mr Dingiswayo. 
4. Contentions – contentious issues that the board raised 
with the legal unit headed by Ms Ngoye. 
20 
5. My interactions with the employees of PRASA who 
testified at the insolvency inquiry. 
All these matters and many more are recorded in my 
notebook which I showed Advocate Soni and Ms Mangate [?].  
I told Advocate Soni and Ms Mangate[?] that I intended to 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 69 of 108 
 
transcribe the notes because some of the issues constitute 
my defence and some saw wrongdoings on par.  
Whenever I raised an issue that is favourable to me 
Advocate Soni would rudely tell me that I should concentrate 
on the allegations that I pushed a pushed a settlement plan.  
This is when I asked Advocate Soni about the expense of the 
commission’s investigations in these PRASA hearings.   
I then learned for the first time that the reason that I 
am before the commission is because Ms Ngoye and Mr 
Dingiswayo had laid a complaint against me.  Why does this 
10 
shock me?  I was of the view that the commission was 
investigating maladministration, irregularities and various 
breaches of government’s policies at state entities and that 
the issues that I have been called to answer to is a result of 
that information.   
I have information relating to irregularities committed 
by some of the complainants as Advocate Soni refers to 
them.  I would simultaneously put my responding sworn 
statements provide these details.   
Advocate Soni became very – extremely agitated 
20 
about my responses then extended some stage he raised his 
voice and uttered the words ‘with respect Judge focus on 
what you have done.’   
In short we did not agree on the approach and what 
should be in my responding sworn statement he then became 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 70 of 108 
 
extremely frustrated and pacing up and down telling me in 
angry and intimidating way that we should forget about a 
written statement and that he was going to simply cross-
examine me when I made an appearance at the commission.  
Consultation started a theme.   
I thought it would have finished by two.  I requested 
to be excused because we were not getting anywhere and 
Advocate Soni 
kept on badgering me with haphazard 
question on everything and frantically taking my answers.   
At some point he challenged me to file a statement 
10 
and implicate someone whose name appears in one of the 
memoranda that I have written at PRASA.  I do not know 
what kind of an investigation this is but clearly there is 
something wrong.   
The commission has been in possession of all the 
information relating to the issues that informed the issuance 
of the Rule 3 Notices against me, the affidavit of Ms Ngoye 
forms the basis of all allegations against me has been in 
existence since 2018.   
According to me the role of the investigators is to 
20 
conduct further enquires on issues arising from any affidavit.  
It does not require me to implicate anyone. The word 
implicate in the commission is used in criminal law sense.   
I left the interview after about six hours of being 
interrogated and in my view being personally belittled and ill-
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 71 of 108 
 
treated despite the very honourable office I occupy and 
despite the process – protests I made.   
When I left the boardroom, I informed Advocate Soni 
that I was going to compile documents with a statement and 
was going to make one of those – and that one of those was 
the authority of the board.  I earlier informed him that the 
board had made certain decisions with regard to the 
allegations that Ms Ngoye and Mr Dingiswayo are making 
and that I deem it relevant that such information should be – 
should be brought before the commission.   
10 
Surprisingly he told me he was not going to pursue 
the issue of authority and that the – and then that – I think 
he was going to – I was making accusations against him.  
Yes my parting with Advocate Soni was on a sour and bitter 
note.” 
That is the extent of the allegations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  Naturally. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  What – what are your submissions 
on the way forward on the recusal application? 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson again the question is, what is 
my role?   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SONI SC:  There are two issues that ordinarily present 
themselves when a witness comes before the commission. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 72 of 108 
 
 
One is the leading of evidence and the other is to 
look 
at 
evidence 
that 
has 
been 
presented 
by 
other 
witnesses. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now I have no intention of leading Judge 
Makhubele because I do not have a statement.  I simply 
cannot lead her.  I have no objection to Mr Nxasana leading 
her on whatever he wants.   
What I am required to do and that is my duty is to put 
to Judge Makhubele what the witnesses have said to the 
10 
extent that they implicate her.  For the purposes of this 
commission and to consider or to present to you or to 
challenge the correctness or otherwise of the evidence or to 
accept that it may well be that that is consistent with the 
probabilities.  That is my only role.  I do not have any other 
role Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.   
ADV SONI SC:  And so the question of a recusal of 
somebody who is asking questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson cannot arise in a situation like 
this.  This is an inquisitorial commission Chairperson.  Of 
course, Judge Makhubele has rights, he has the right to a 
legal representative who is here to protect her but on the 
other hand Chairperson it is part of my duty and Chairperson 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 73 of 108 
 
we do have affidavits from people.   
We have documents to suggest to you where the truth 
probably lies.  That is all my role is and that is the role that I 
intend fulfilling and unless there is some basis to say that I 
am incapable of – of fulfilling that role Chairperson I must be 
allowed to continue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I – okay thank you Mr Soni.  Mr Nxasana.  
Just wait for the sanitisation of the stand before you go there 
Mr Nxasana somebody will come there and sanitise.  Mr 
Nxasana have you got any authorities that you can refer me 
10 
to that deal with a recusal of an evidence leader in this type 
of situation or anybody that can be compared to an evidence 
leader? 
ADV NXASANA:  Not at hand Chair I do not have.  I cannot 
think of any now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Well the Judge might be aware. 
Judge Makhubele are you aware of any authorities that one 
can look at? 
MS MAKHUBELE:  Well Chairperson I listened to Advocate 
Soni and I want the record to note that he has not denied 
20 
any of the factual averments I have made. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  So now the only issue will be to deal with 
the legal basis.  If you can allow us an opportunity to go 
and… 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 74 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And have a look. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  And have a look at this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  So – but – and I feel very distressed and 
embarrassed when my attorney a very experienced person 
keeps on coming there because he has not even read this 
affidavit.  Now he must… 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you should have given it to him. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  Chairperson he – he – he said I – this 
affidavit I filed this – on Friday – Thursday morning.  Even 
10 
your team has not responded to this affidavit.  So… 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no but the commission’s legal team is 
not asking for an opportunity to respond to it.  So you – you 
are within your right to say Mr Soni has not said anything to 
deny what he said there. 
MS MAKHUBELE:  Yes then I – then I consulted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But he has not asked for an opportunity to 
do anything about it by way of an affidavit.  So – so I am 
quite prepared to stand down the matter so that maybe you 
can go obtain authorities and Mr Soni you could look at 
20 
authorities simply on the question of whether a recusal 
application in this situation relating to an evidence leader is 
applicable.  Even if it is not the evidence leader in a 
commission any similar position – any person occupying a 
position that may be compared to an evidence leader.   
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 75 of 108 
 
We are at quarter to one.  I think I will adjourn until 
three to – to – so that I can hear is there are any authorities 
on that legal point.  Okay we are going to adjourn then – let 
us do that and then we resume at three o’clock.   
MS MAKHUBELE:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
ADV SONI SC:  ...all has been a sort of prosecutorial round.  
This is the evidence leader. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m? 
ADV SONI SC:  But the better view, I am told, is that we do 
not play that role.  We are, in fact, legal practitioners 
representing 
a 
particular 
client, 
in 
other 
words, 
the 
Commission.   
 
And the test in that case Chairperson is; firstly, you 
cannot 
have 
a 
recusal 
of 
somebody 
who 
is 
not 
a 
decisionmaker.  You can ask for the withdrawal of the person 
but not the recusal. 
 
The second learning that comes from the Commission’s 
20 
research on this is, as far as legal practitioners go, there are 
two broad grounds on which one can ask for the withdrawal. 
 
One is on account of confidentiality.  They possess 
confidential information.  And the second is that the 
evidence or their role will not be a role performed in good 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 76 of 108 
 
faith. 
 
I am also told Chairperson that as far as - and I say I am 
told because it is been researched.  It was done by the 
Commission’s office, that as far as these matters are 
concerned, it is common for there to be disagreements 
during consultations and that cannot be a disqualifying 
factor. 
 
And the overriding question, really, is one of these.  It is 
fairness to the Commission.  It is fairness obviously, to 
somebody like a witness. So that is the one set of 
10 
circumstances. 
 
The 
other 
Chairperson 
is, 
where 
one 
is 
given 
a 
prosecutorial role.  The test there is, the constitution says 
the prosecutor must be an independent person but that is 
taken at a different level of independence. 
 
All that they get to ensure is that an injustice is not 
done.  They cannot, for example, hide information and things 
like that.  There are three cases that I would like to refer you 
to Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I will tell you what I propose we do at a 
20 
practical level.  I think what we should do is, one, that I do 
not make a decision on this “recusal application” now today.   
 
I fix a date this week by when the applicant in the 
“recusal application” should file written submissions.  And it 
is a date by when the Commission’s legal team must file 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 77 of 108 
 
their written submissions and I make a decision on it at a 
later stage. 
 
But also, there is a possibility if I deem it fit, I may 
decide to deal with the matter at a practical level in which 
case, if I deal with it at a practical level, what I have in mind 
is, if there is somebody who will be available to take over 
from you in regard to this witness then I might not need to 
decide whether the application is a good... has good grounds 
or not because that would mean that Judge Makhubele’s 
concern falls away.   
10 
 
Another approach might be to decide the application, 
okay.  But in the meantime, what I have in mind is that we 
could 
proceed 
today 
but 
you 
would 
not 
lead 
Judge 
Makhubele’s evidence.  You would not question her today.   
 
I will give her a chance to put her side of the story and 
then I would have questions for her and because we are 
starting at the time that we are starting, we... I do not think 
we will finish anyway.   
 
Then we will adjourn to another date in order to finish.  
If on that date you - I have decided that you should continue 
20 
and lead evidence and question her, then that is what would 
happen.   
 
If I decided that that should not happen, then it should 
be somebody else.  If I have decided that for practical 
purposes and reasons, we will just have somebody else.   
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 78 of 108 
 
 
Then Judge Makhubele’s concern will fall away.  So that 
is what I have in mind.  You have something to say about 
that? 
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson, I have nothing to say save this 
that it will ensure that the entire day is not wasted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m-h’m-h’m.  Ja, that is part of the 
consideration. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Where we use whatever time we have 
today.  Thank you.   
10 
ADV SONI SC:  And then in a sense Chairperson, it will  
address 
Judge 
Makhubele’s 
question 
because 
as 
I 
understood my learned friend, she does not want me to lead 
her. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  And so that concern falls away. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes, yes.  Mr Nxasana, let me hear 
what you have to say to this proposed way forward. 
ADV NXASANA:  Chair, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV NXASANA:  Chair, I think that leaves me with a 
decision to make but I think I have, with the leave of the 
Chairperson, have to consult the client first and then 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, do you want to ...[intervenes]  
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 79 of 108 
 
ADV NXASANA:  Because I do not know what kind of 
evidence or testimony ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.  You want to talk to her while I’m 
here. 
ADV NXASANA:  Yes.  Chair, thank you, once again. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV NXASANA:  Chair, it would seem that Chair, therefore, 
that my role will end here because I will just be a – I won’t 
be part ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  A spectator. 
10 
ADV NXASANA:  I will be a spectator.  There is nothing that 
I 
meaningfully 
contribute 
in 
the 
proceedings. 
 
And 
unfortunately, Judge Makhubele will also, again, be left 
without legal representation and she will have to proceed on 
her own.   
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV NXASANA:  Yes.  In the circumstances Chairperson, I 
am reluctantly withdrawing as attorney on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay.  No, thank you Mr Nxasana. 
ADV NXASANA:  Thank you. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Judge Makhubele, Mr Nxasana 
has not been able to say anything about the proposed way 
forward because he is withdrawing.  Are you able to say 
anything about it?  I accept, of course, that it means that you 
are without legal representation.  That I accept.  That is the 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 80 of 108 
 
...[intervenes]  
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Well, if that is the position where 
Chair wants to put me, there is nothing I can do but I can... I 
will have to address on you that, that my best efforts to 
exercise my constitutional rights are being ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Are being undermined Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  You have not made a ruling.  You 
have made proposals but none of those proposals, obviously, 
10 
would have suited my attorney because he would have to sit 
here and...  
 
The regulations say he must assist me active and unless 
I am reading the wrong legislation.  So for me to pay an 
attorney... you can imagine what his fees are.  To come and 
sit here and just... it is not fair Chairperson.  I must say. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  If I have enough time, I can and... 
and then again, it will be whether there is anything legally 
that renders me to be someone who is not entitled to legal 
20 
representation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you ...[intervenes]  
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  If the fact that I am a judge is a 
reason, then Chairperson make a decision.  Then I will deal 
with it but as of now I am exposed.  I came here with an 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 81 of 108 
 
attorney with the best interest and throughout the day we... 
everything will say and I must repeat what I have stated in 
my affidavit.   
 
My letter... in the history of the Commission, there is no 
matter that as simple explanation or anything as dramatic 
will last the whole day Chairperson but ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Just repeat that last point.  I 
did not hear it. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  What I am saying, even on the 24t h, 
my matter lasted the whole day because my attorneys could 
10 
not reach you Chairperson because they have not consulted 
with me.   
 
Even today, the same with Mr Nxasana.  And I am 
saying, I watch the proceedings of the Commission.  There is 
not one matter that last one day, the whole day.   
 
But I accept Chairperson, whatever ruling you make, I 
am under your hands.  I will simply request time to adjourn 
and consider my options. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  Well, as I say that I accept that my 
decision to dismiss the postponement application meant that 
20 
subject to the “recusal”, the so-called “recusal application” 
that was then moved, that may have to be decide at some 
stage. 
 
But I think the way forward which I have come up with 
takes care of your concern when you say because of 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 82 of 108 
 
certain... particularly what happened on the 9t h of July when 
you had a consultation with Advocate Soni.   
 
You have an objection to him being the person leading 
you and questioning you.  And I have said that argument 
decide later if need be. 
 
But we can use part of the day today for you to tell me 
your side of the story and I will ask some questions and we 
do not... we probably will not finish but we will have used 
part of the today. 
 
We will adjourn to another day.  Actually, I do have a 
10 
possible date in mind but we might have to start at two 
because there are other witnesses in the morning on the 
17t h of August which is a Monday and it will go beyond four 
o’clock if necessary, to try and finish. 
 
So I am just mentioning to you what is in my mind, that 
we might do it that way.  And in the meantime, both yourself 
or your counsel can file written submissions on the “recusal” 
point and the legal team can file their written submissions. 
 
And of course, I accept that because you are a judge, 
you may be having matters that have been allocated for you 
20 
for that particular day. 
 
So if any adjournment is made to a specific date, it 
would have to be subject to the Commission consulting with 
the judge president that on that day you can be released. 
 
He has previously said that if he... or previously he had 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 83 of 108 
 
said if he got at least two days’ notice, he would be able to 
make a plan.   
 
So if we adjourn to that date today, that gives about two 
weeks’ notice.  My expectation is that he will be able to 
release you but it can be subject to that.  Yes? 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Chairperson, you did not listen to my 
application in its entirety but you did it piecemeal but if you 
had you would... I have provided my duty roster as annexure 
and this week, JP Mlambo released me because I have 
requested ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no Judge Makhubele ...[intervenes]  
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  No, I want to say that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no, no. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  ...I cannot ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.  The JP is the one who 
allocates matters.  He is the one who... or the DJP but the 
JP has indicated that the work of the Commission is 
important and that he will do his best to release you when 
the Commission needs you.   
 
And I am saying that if I adjourn the matter to a specific 
20 
date, it can be on the understanding that the Commission 
will check with him and I do expect that he will do whatever 
he can to make you available. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  I am not denying that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, so what is your point? 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 84 of 108 
 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  I wanted to tell you that Judge 
Makhubele ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  ...when I leave here... because I 
have my duty roster now.  You do not even to go to... I have 
my duty roster. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  What I wanted to tell you is, this 
week, as I sit here, I have been taken off a roll where I am 
supposed to... on Wednesday, we are attending to a criminal 
10 
trial where the accused persons have been waiting since 
December for me to sentence them and if I lose this week, it 
means they will stay in custody until maybe December or 
even next year. 
 
So whatever you and JP now decide, take into account 
my judicial functions, which at the end of the day, will be 
held against me that I am late with my judgments, I adjourn 
matters for long periods.   
 
So I am on my own.  So for my best interest, once I 
leave here today, I have to go and make an application for a 
20 
longer leave Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  Okay. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Because this means, the first, today, 
tomorrow in court. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 85 of 108 
 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  It is prejudicing me where I cannot 
concentrate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Tomorrow I am supposed to be in 
court.  When am I going to read files for tomorrow?  I mean, 
besides the fact that we have already talked about. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  And then, if you are saying on the 
17t h, for instance, I must come here at two o’clock.  In the 
morning, I must go to court and for a day before, I must 
10 
know concentrate on adjudicating matters.  It will not work 
Chairperson.  Let me ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, he would release you for a day. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Let me talk to JP Mhlango and rather 
that conflict preparation for some time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  If it means two months of work 
because it is bearing on me Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  I cannot... I am not... I cannot 
20 
multitask.  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.  That is fine. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  So let ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] I will tell you what we do. 
JUDGE 
MAKHUBELE: 
 
I 
am 
saying 
that, 
you 
know 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 86 of 108 
 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, what we can do ...[intervenes]  
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  I do not want to set you and JP 
Mhlango or some collision caused. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  But then there is me, then there are, 
besides the litigators, and they have the right to have their 
the judgments deliver at time.  Last week, I was sitting in the 
opposed motions.  I have picked up some judgments.   
 
Now, if I must... now and again matter is stopped here.  
10 
Then those judgments will... and you will be the first, I mean, 
as head of the second in command where you will check that 
these things... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
JUDGE 
MAKHUBELE: 
 
This 
Judge 
Makhubele 
hands 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is not giving judgments timeously. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  So can we... can I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
No, 
this 
is 
what 
I 
am 
suggesting 
20 
...[intervenes]  
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  I am just pleading that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no.  That is fine but this is how I think 
we should do it. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Yes. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 87 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I can fix a date such as the 17t h on the 
understanding that I can be approached to change it if there 
are good reasons to change it to another date.   
 
So once there has been that consultation, you can come 
back if there are good reasons not to proceed with that date.   
But if, after all the consultations, it seems fine, we can still 
continue.   
 
So it will accommodate you talking to the JP and putting 
the proposal that you have come up with as well.  So let us... 
I think what I will do, I will say that your side should submit 
10 
written submissions on the “recusal”, this... by close of 
business, this Friday.   
 
And the Commission’s legal team must submit their 
written submissions by close of business, Wednesday, next 
week in relation to the “recusal application”.   
 
If, in the meantime, I decide that I can deal with the 
matter at a practical level, everyone will be informed.  At the 
end of the today, we will adjourn to a specific date, but on 
the understanding that one, the Commission will be in 
consultation with the judge president.   
20 
 
Two, you might be talking to the judge president, as you 
indicated.  And you will be free to approach the Commission 
with a view to another date being fixed if there are good 
reasons not to stick to the 17t h, okay? 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Can we, maybe to... because you... 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 88 of 108 
 
remember this application I drafted the notice on my own 
without legal... you may say I am a judge but I do not know 
everything. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, you were senior counsel. [laughs] 
JUDGE 
MAKHUBELE: 
 
When 
it 
is 
a 
matter 
you 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  You practised for 19 years or so.  [laughs] 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  When it is your matter, you... 
because when we were disbursing with my... briefly that 
maybe the word “recuse” could be along the context that 
10 
Advocate Soni had described, within the functions of the 
legal casting because there is a definition. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  So it is within the context of their 
functions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  So I do not want us to belabour the 
word “recuse” ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No, no.  I ...[intervenes]  
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  It should be ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, I think we all understand what you 
would like to achieve. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What you want to achieve is that Mr Soni 
should not be the one leading you and questioning you on 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 89 of 108 
 
behalf of the Commission. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Yes, because they are appointed by 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
So 
whether 
we 
call 
it 
“recusal” 
or 
“withdrawal” ...[intervenes]  
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Withdrawal. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I think nobody is making an issue of 
that.  Ja, I think Mr Soni was mentioning it simple because I 
may have mentioned that... the so-called “recusal”, you 
know.  But nobody does not understand what you want to 
10 
achieve. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Yes, it is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  So the substance stays. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Within the definition of their tasks of 
the legal team. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Because they have certain functions 
and they are appointed by you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   You can appoint anyone, you can 
20 
recuse anyone. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   But the one point I want to make in 
that submission, Chairperson, that it is not only – the 
reasons are not only what Adv Soni read into the record, it 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 90 of 108 
 
only concerns how he executed his functions before you 
when he appeared here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On the 24 t h. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   On the 24 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   I was at pains not to use the word 
lie. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   But there is no other description 
unless if I speak in my mother tongue but in the language 
10 
that we are using, it is lies and I have provided evidence 
and so it is not only what happened at the consultation but 
also his submissions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On the 24 t h. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   On the 24 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, that is fine.  So that is the way 
forward then.  We have dealt with that.  Where I might ask 
Mr Soni to assist now as you give me your side of the story 
20 
about these allegations and maybe as I ask questions is 
where I need a certain document he might be able to say it 
is to be found in his bundle at what page but otherwise he 
will not ask you only questions or lead you today.  So this 
is an opportunity for you to just tell me your side of the 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 91 of 108 
 
story, you …[intervenes] 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Well, Chairperson, I also do not 
have documents and I think because when I came here the 
only documents I had prepared – you remember the manner 
of presentation of documents for witnesses is by emails. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes.  Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   So I do not have bundles. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   I may need to familiarise myself 
with the bundle. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   But then again, I will have to make 
it – I will still, on my own – remember now I do not have an 
attorney. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   I do not have an attorney, I will 
have to request you, Chairperson, that is it – to make a 
request to you that I am not refusing to give you my 
version.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   But, you know, I will not finish 
coming to this Commission, the approach that you want to 
take to start today for one hour because remember you 
acknowledged that there are certain documents that – I 
think you, in your words you said the oral testimony was 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 92 of 108 
 
akin to …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Substantially the same as the affidavits. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   But I have a right, Chairperson, to 
look at that because when I look at the definition of 
evidence in the room, it comprises of that oral testimony 
and when you are sitting alone, I will not be there, the 
legal team will be assisting you to summarise the evidence 
and what – I am not saying I do not trust you but you are to 
be assisted by the legal team if arguments and everything 
when you write your final report. 
10 
 
That evidence will find its way there and I have not 
been 
given 
an 
opportunity 
to 
have 
a 
look 
at 
it, 
Chairperson.  And it means you have also acknowledged 
and you said arrangements can be made for me to get the 
results of that whatever they obtained from the cell phone 
service providers.  It means – and I think just before we 
adjourned there were arrangements being made that that 
will be provided.  So it is – the picture will not be complete 
and remember, Chairperson, I mentioned a notebook that I 
said I need to talk about.  Here is the notebook. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, I do not remember hearing about a 
notebook, ja.  What is the notebook about? 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   No, I said there is the evidence 
that I want to supplement, it is contained …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   In the notebook. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 93 of 108 
 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   In the notebook which I must 
obviously transcribe and maybe give to the Commission.  
That is in relation to the evidence of Ms Ngoyi and Mr 
Dingiswayo which part of it is in the statement of complaint 
against Advocate Botes.  But what needs to be beefed up, 
if I may use that word, is what is in here because, 
Chairperson, I can sit and relate the story to you but I 
need an opportunity to properly file a statement.   
And the point I am making is I need to – because 
whether I proceed without – maybe when we adjourn here I 
10 
will be able to convince Mr Nxasana to still represent me, I 
do not know, but my request to you, Chairperson, is that 
can I supplement my statements and then testify on the 
date that you will give and maybe - because it is evidence 
of five people, I do not think we will finish in one day and 
then I can …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it is evidence of five people but I 
will tell you what – as far as I am concerned, the evidence 
is not, as far as I recall, is not wide-ranging, too wide-
ranging because to a very large extent Mr Dingiswayo and 
20 
Ms Ngoyi are talking about the same thing in regard to you 
and 
I 
think 
Mr 
Dingiswayo 
largely 
just 
confirms 
or 
corroborates what Ms Ngoyi says.   
The 
one 
part 
which 
I 
do 
remember 
that 
Mr 
Dingiswayo mentions is that at a certain time, I think 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 94 of 108 
 
November 2017 or maybe – I think November 2017, he 
spoke to PRASA’s attorneys, he wanted to talk to them 
about the Siyaya matters. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the attorney said they had been told 
not to talk to him.  I think to a very large extent that is 
that.  I am not sure that he adds anything that Ms Ngoyi 
has not been saying.   
And then, of course, Mr Mogashoa, I do not know 
how much of his evidence you have a problem with. 
10 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Well, with Mr Mogashoa, actually 
talks about the termination of his mandate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Who terminated his mandate.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Which is not me.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   So the only thing in his evidence I 
can deal with is our interactions.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   I think we had two meetings. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   That is what I will have to 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then Mr Botes, he has given his 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 95 of 108 
 
evidence and then there is Mr Achmat.  So but when it 
comes to Ms Ngoyi, Mr Dingiswayo and Mr Mogashoa, it 
seems to me that certainly with regard to Ms Ngoyi and Mr 
Dingiswayo it is largely the same evidence covering the 
same things. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes.  No, we have – the actual – 
because the issue is – well, now we are talking about the 
matter, but I do not have a problem, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Ja, 
we 
are 
trying 
to 
look 
at 
…[intervenes] 
10 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When you say it is five people, so I am 
saying …[intervenes] 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes, the issue with Ms Ngoyi and 
Mr Dingiswayo, the circumstances leading to the settlement 
of that case. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   That is contained in what I have 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Provided. 
20 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Submitted to Pretoria Bar.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and that is …[intervenes] 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   So the only thing that I am going 
to add there is what is in this notebook. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 96 of 108 
 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   When one has regard to their 
evidence where they say when I arrived at PRASA the first 
thing I asked them was these Siyaya matters.  I am going 
to …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   To add to that.  
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   To lead new evidence and prove, 
Chairperson, that that was not the first thing.  Actually, we 
had interactions about a whole lot of things and Siyaya 
was not the issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Ja. 
10 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   So that is when I am talking about 
transcribing certain things from his group.    
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Which, Chairperson, in all fairness 
must be in a statement so that the Commission is able to 
take it back to Ms Ngoyi and Mr Dingiswayo to say this is 
what he is saying.  I do not know if you will end with me 
but …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, we have – you can leave it to the 
legal team, they know how to do their job.  
20 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   But it is something very serious, 
Chairperson, the allegations I am going to make require 
investigation and I will insist on an investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, when we see them or when we hear 
them. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 97 of 108 
 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is when they can take it from there.  
Maybe what we should do is, if – well, one option is that I 
can ask you some of the questions that I would like to ask. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   For today and still on when the day 
when you come back you can still get a chance to put your 
version as you would have put it today but you – or for 
today you just answer those questions that are uppermost 
in my mind.  That is in another way and I think that is 
10 
questions that you should have no difficulty answering.  Is 
that alright?  H’m? 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Oh, Chairperson …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it fine with you?  It is the two of us 
talking.   
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Oh, I thought it is …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, I am proposing that if you 
think you might have difficulty in just presenting your side 
of the story this afternoon, maybe I should ask you some of 
the questions that I want to ask and then you can answer 
20 
and on the day that you will come back you can still 
present your side of the story the way you would have 
been presented it today. 
JUDGE 
MAKHUBELE: 
 
 
I 
do 
not 
have 
a 
problem, 
Chairperson, but obviously on proviso that I am going to 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 98 of 108 
 
still get …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   An opportunity. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   To attend to the issue of legal 
representation and that the legal representative will still 
have an opportunity to do what they are supposed to do.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, I …[intervenes] 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   But you are entitled to ask me 
questions and as I say, I do not have the documents before 
me but these matters are in my head. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  You can ask me and if I need – it is 
something that I need to refer to a document I will tell you 
that can I have an opportunity. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  To properly look at the documents 
and answer you properly, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, another option is you may have 
heard that we decided that we might have what I call 
20 
evening sessions in order to try and use as much time as 
possible because we are limited in terms of time. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I made the announcement I think last 
week, it has been in the media.  And by evening sessions, 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 99 of 108 
 
what I have meant is, we might have a witness who gives 
evidence during the day from morning – or witnesses who 
give evidence in the morning up to four o’clock and then 
we start with another witness and go up to maybe seven, 
half past seven or eight because we are pressed for time. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is something that I announced last 
week. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So another possibility might be that we 
10 
adjourn now but sit before the end of this week.  We could 
sit on Wednesday.  That would give you time to look at the 
documents and whatever you want to look but we would 
still – and then we would then have what I call an evening 
session but we would still adjourn to a date. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Such as the one that I have mentioned, 
17 t h.  So but we would just make sure that we have got 
something that we have covered. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   What do you say to that? 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Well, Chairperson, as someone 
who knows my story, I would not have a problem to draft 
my own statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Ja, yes. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 100 of 108 
 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Even without – I am saying this 
obviously without prejudice or …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no, I accept, ja.  I accept, ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Because you may think you would 
be able to do it but I may be able to tell my story but 
obviously where my attorneys will help me would be with 
cross-examination of the witnesses.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
JUDGE 
MAKHUBELE: 
 
 
But 
telling 
my 
story, 
I 
…[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, it is not a problem. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   I think you have read my 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I have. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   My documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  I articulate the issues.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja, ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   And because sometimes when you 
still want to brief someone that process itself takes time. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   You have seen that with the 
previous legal team and their witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   But if I have sufficient time on my 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 101 of 108 
 
own 
without 
the 
pressure 
of 
work, 
I 
promise 
you, 
Chairperson, you will have all my statements. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   And I will be able to present to you 
in the manner that you wish because I believe when I file a 
statement you may say it may reduce the length of time 
when I make oral presentation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   So hence, Chairperson, I would 
request that I – the date that you had in mind, at first, the 
10 
17 t h, the in between I will be able to draft – this is a 
promise I am making to you, not through any intermediary, 
that I will be able to give you the statement.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. Yes, no, no, I want us to use 
sometime this week to make some progress but I am not 
saying we should abandon the 17 t h or any other date that I 
might change to.   
So I am saying if the legal team, if we adjourn now, 
you get given the bundles, I think those are the ones 
behind you, get given the bundles.  I suspect that a lot of 
20 
documents that are there are documents that have been 
exchanged that you know because the statements of 
various witnesses and annexures have been sent to you 
but you get to familiarise yourself with the bundles and, of 
course, tomorrow – I mean the rest of the week the JP has 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 102 of 108 
 
given you – has released you. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So we would then say tomorrow you 
have a whole day and then Wednesday we could agree like 
five o’clock.  I think during the day I will hear evidence 
from other witnesses about other matters when they stop, 
then at five o’clock we start with you, you will have had 
tomorrow to familiarise yourself properly with the bundles.  
If by Wednesday when you come, you have prepared your 
statement, it is ready, it is fine.  If it is not ready you can 
10 
finish it – you can make it available when …[intervenes] 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Some other time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but we can continue. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   I do not have a problem with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not have a problem with that. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   It is just regrettable that we would 
waste time with withdrawal application but if you are 
inclined to without making findings to release Advocate 
Soni and his stead get somebody. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Or if we can proceed with you and 
me.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  And because that in itself, having t 
make a decision which – I do not know which way it will go.   
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 103 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   I may now want to still [inaudible – 
speaking simultaneously] that decision.    
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   But I do not know, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, you are right, that is why I 
factored that option in. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   That I might decide that I am not going 
to decide the recusal application because for practical 
10 
purposes maybe I decide that I will let another member of 
the legal team take over from Mr Soni for purposes of 
leading your evidence and questioning you.  So there is 
that possibility, so I am looking at all options. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   And, Chairperson, I – if you 
proceed in the - you know, because I understand you 
already dismissed – I take it as an absolution from the 
instance that I should have indicated that this person and 
that person.  So I do not want to come back with the same 
objection. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Having with evidence view to say 
this particular one, here is evidence, Chairperson what do 
you say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Ja, ja, ja.   
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 104 of 108 
 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  So I am …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you prefer the other option. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   I do not want you to – and maybe 
again, Chairperson, you know, sometimes when you ask a 
question without it being seen as perceived with ulterior 
motives, it is a simple question.  It is a simple question to 
say Ms Ngoyi and – I am not revisiting that but I am just 
saying that when you see me coming back with evidence 
when it is something that can be done amicably, do not 
close my door and say Ms Makhubele is trying to delay the 
10 
functions 
of 
the 
Commission 
but 
it 
is 
up 
to 
you, 
Chairperson, to say what are the charges against this 
woman and who is bringing them?   
The person bringing them holds legal instructions 
from PRASA and you can challenge me but I will beat the 
challenge, Chairperson, because I have had access to 
PRASA documents and I still have this PRASA document, I 
know who did work for PRASA but I do not want to 
embarrass you.   
Hence, I am saying in your privacy with the people 
20 
that you have appointed, you just do your – I am not telling 
you how to do your work. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   But the last thing you want is me 
bringing that hard evidence to you and you now having 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 105 of 108 
 
your option to now indulge me whereas when it is done in 
an open manner to say no, yes, we acknowledge people 
are getting instructions from PRASA, people are being 
briefed by Ms Ngoyi, however – and then I accept and we 
move on, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   But the aggression with which my 
request is being made, it is a challenge, that when I get 
back home, I have mountains and mountains of documents 
from PRASA, I will simply bear your challenge.  So it is 
10 
something that I want you to consider. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, that is fine. 
JUDGE 
MAKHUBELE: 
 
 
So 
that 
we 
deal 
with 
it 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is fine. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   …in an amicable manner and that 
whoever you assign, you ascertain that Ms Makhubele is 
not coming back with now evidence, Chairperson, I am not 
saying – I do not even know who I can – I have already 
disclosed that someone who would be representing me 
20 
here open up about his conflict. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   And I can also tell you that even if 
Adv Maleka had not left, he would not be doing my case 
because my board consulted with him and it is something 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 106 of 108 
 
that I was going to discuss, Chairperson, so I am saying do 
not take what I am saying …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is fine, yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:    With – as a strategy to 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, that is fine.  Okay, I think we 
are agreed about the way forward.  Namely that you will 
file written submissions on the recusal application by close 
of business on Friday this week. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the Commission’s legal team will file 
their written submissions on the recusal application by 
close of business on Wednesday next week. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that we are going to adjourn now 
but we are going to adjourn to Wednesday this week at five 
o’clock.  You will be here at five o’clock and for us on that 
day to do what we were going to do. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now which means if by Wednesday I 
20 
have made a decision at a practical level that somebody 
else other than Mr Soni will be questioning you. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes, me talking to you.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Answering your questions. 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 107 of 108 
 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes 
but 
in 
the 
meantime, 
the 
adjournment to Wednesday is out of the reality that we are 
now at eight minutes to four o’clock. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I want us to use the time that we 
have and we have these evenings that I have decided upon 
and you are quite happy to cooperate in that regard.   
So if there is somebody other than Mr Soni that can 
lead the evidence on Wednesday then that will happen.  If 
not, you will get a chance to present your version, I will 
10 
have questions but you will have been able to go through 
the documents as well, the bundles that the Commission 
will give you.  Alright? 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   I have no objection. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You have no problem, ja. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   To that, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   I will attempt to put together what I 
can. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  No, that is fine.  If in the 
20 
meantime …[intervenes] 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE: For our Wednesday engagement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is fine, that is fine.  If in the 
meantime, if by Wednesday when you come here you have 
put together – you have drafted a supplementary affidavit 
03 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 243 
 
Page 108 of 108 
 
or statement taking into account the contents of your 
notebook, that is fine.  If you have not been able to, you 
will do that later on but we will continue on Wednesday. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  We are going to adjourn 
so the legal team must just make sure that Judge 
Makhubele has got all the necessary bundles so that she 
can prepare properly for Wednesday.   
We are going to adjourn then the proceedings on 
that basis.  The idea of the 17  August still remains but 
10 
whether we adjourn to that date or not is going to be 
something to be looked at when we finish on Wednesday 
but if you want to start talking to the JP about the 17 t h. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes, I would. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You may do so, so that maybe – and the 
Commission will talk to him as well. 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:   Yes.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, we are going to adjourn then until 
five o’clock on Wednesday this week.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 4 AUGUST 2020 
20 
