 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
06 JUNE 2019 
 
 
 
DAY 107 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 2 of 184 
 
PROCEEDINGS ON 6 JUNE 2019 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  However we have also introduced a 
supplementary with – which we seek to refer to in evidence with your 
leave Chair and so what was initially market BB10 is now marked 
BB10[a] and the supplementary bundle is marked BB10[b]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.  Well you said what was previously 
marked Exhibit BB10 is now marked Exhibit BB10[a]? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The previous marking is not on record? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  No it is not Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is your own internal … 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  It is our own internal Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  The lever arch file containing the affidavit of Ms 
Mathane Eveline Makgatho will be marked Exhibit 10 – Exhibit BB10[a] 
and the lever arch file containing her supplementary affidavit will be 
marked Exhibit BB10[b]. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  May the witness please be sworn in? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  So this is a Transnet witness.  You remember we 
20 
were – we had witnesses relating SABC, this is a Transnet witness. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes Chair this witness speaks to Transnet 
matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So we are moving back to Transnet? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Indeed so Chair. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 3 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is important to place that on record so that those 
doing – reading the transcripts know that we have moved from one work 
stream to another. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Mathane Eveline Makgatho. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections to taking the prescribed 
oath? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  No. 
10 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on your 
conscience? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that all the evidence you will give 
this commission is the full truth, nothing but the truth, is so please 
raise your right hand and say, so help me God. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So help me God. 
REGISTRAR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may proceed. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Makgatho please refer 
20 
to the bundle before you that is marked BB10[a] and can you turn to 
page 1 of that bundle.  On page 1 to 35 of that bundle is that your 
statement to the commission? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Can you please move the microphone a bit 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 4 of 184 
 
closer to you so that you are audible.   
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And on page 35 of that bundle is that your 
signature? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And the date that appears on that page, the 
date of the 16 May 2019 is that the date on which you signed the 
statement? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is so Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Can you also then refer to the bundle marked 
10 
BB10[b].  From page 1 to 3 of that bundle is that your supplementary 
affidavit? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Your supplementary statement rather? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is correct Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  On page 3 of that statement is that your 
signature that appears there? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is so Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And the date of the 6 June 2019 is that the 
date on which you signed that statement? 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is correct. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Do you confirm the correctness of the 
statement? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I do confirm the correctness of 
the statement Chair. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 5 of 184 
 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And insofar as your statement in BB10[a] 
from page 1 to 35 do you confirm the correctness of that statement? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I do so Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you.  Can we then return to the bundle 
marked BB10[a]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You will have to raise your voice a little bit.   
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I will do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair.  Please turn to page 1 of 
the bundle.  Please tell the Chair what qualifications you hold? 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I studied at the University of 
Fort Hare.  I did my BCom majoring in economics, accounting and 
business economics.  I then did an honours in economics at the said 
university.  I followed that with a … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on one second.  I just want to check whether 
everybody can hear you at the back. I think you will have to raise your 
voice there are some who cannot hear you. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And bring your microphone a little closer.  Ja that 
should be fine.  Just raise your voice. 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just start afresh where you got your BCom. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I studied and completed my 
BCom at the University of Fort Hare majoring in accounting, economics 
and business economics.  I then went on to study and completed my 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 6 of 184 
 
BCom Honours in economics at the same university.  Later on I studied 
my Masters in Development Finance at the University of Stellenbosch.  
I then did over a period of 25 years or so I then completed the following 
courses that are relevant to my career.  The first one is the Global 
executive Development Programme which I did through the Gibbs that 
is the Investor Pretoria Business School.  This was a Transnet or is a 
Transnet specific executive development programme.  I then went – I 
did financial engineering.  This is a course that covers your typical 
financial market stuff which is like interest rate, option pricing, futures, 
risk management and I did this in 2001 at the University of California at 
10 
their Berkeley campus.  I then studied and completed a course at the 
University of Harvard at Boston USA in Micro Economic Policy 
Management and I did a three months course called Economic Policy 
Formulation at the Clingendael Institute at the Hague the Netherlands.   
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And what is your employment history? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I started off in 1994 as a 
researcher at the National Institute of Economic Policy.  During that 
period I was privileged to be involved in a number of research projects 
including the impact of foreign direct investment on employment, 
consumption and I was also privileged to be part of the team that did 
20 
the quantification of the RDP at that time.  It was around 1994/1995 at 
the beginning of our democracy.  I spent about four years at the 
institute.  It then moved onto National Treasury wherein I was employed 
as a Deputy Director in International Finance.  It was in the assets and 
liability management division.  It is during that time from 1998 that I 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 7 of 184 
 
started being exposed and learning and growing in the financial market 
space.  My duties included issuing bonds in the international markets 
and during that period we spent a whole lot of time engaging with 
investors across the globe, in the far east in the Yen market.  In 
continental Europe in the UK in the Northern Americas and during that 
time Chair I believe that I acquired a whole lot of experience that 
ordinarily I would not have.  And I am also privileged to have been part 
of that team during the two crisis’ that was the 1998 Russia crisis and 
the 2001 Asian crisis which in a way taught us lessons around how to 
prudently manage liabilities.  It was at the time that a decision was 
10 
taken at the National Treasury that even though the sovereign was 
being managed prudently as far as liability management is concerned 
but we did not have a proactive way or a dynamic way of managing risk.  
I was then seconded to be one of the officials to start the risk 
management section and it is within that period we developed what we 
called a dynamic benchmark.  We had key variables that we had 
identified that if you know for instance volatility is at an X level then we 
would know that a prudent way to manage your liabilities is to do YZ or 
whatever.  I was then promoted to be a director of Market Risk and 
Market Risk Chair in this instance refers to interest rate, currency risk, 
20 
commodity risk and the like.  I spent about five a half years at the 
National Treasury.  I then ventured to be on my own and open my own 
consulting firm and I think I spent about four or five years at that – in 
my own company.  And again Chair I consider myself to be highly 
privileged because it is during that time that I was again given the 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 8 of 184 
 
opportunity to work on a number of various projects that were of 
national importance.  I believe one of them was the retail bond and my 
company together with another company we were tasked to develop and 
to market the retail bond which is now one of the standing instruments.  
I was also privileged Chair to be one of the people that were tasked to 
review and analyse the R5 billion loss which SAA had at that particular 
time.  And I was also privileged Chair to have been asked to review all 
the financing structures that all of the – I think there were about 88 
aircrafts of SAA because each one of them had a different and a very 
specific financing project – financing structure.  During the time of my 
10 
self-employment even though I was getting projects I wanted to venture 
into more infrastructure funds – infrastructure finance and as a small 
company it is not very easy to venture into such big projects.  Even if 
you were to be successful to venture into such projects they are by 
their nature very long and you need to have a deep pocket to be able to 
absorb the expenses while you are waiting for a projects to be closed in 
year 2 or year 3.  I then saw through an advertisement an opportunity 
at Transnet for the head of structured finance and I applied that and I 
was fortunate to be appointed.  I joined Transnet in 2007 and I spent – 
I started off as the head of structured finance.  I was then later 
20 
promoted to Group Treasurer and I spent 7 years at the company. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And are you still employed with Transnet? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  No Chair I had to resign at the 
end of 2014.   
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 9 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you were Group Treasurer from 2007 to 2014 or? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  No I was – no Chair I was the head of 
structured finance from November 2007 up to February 2013.  From 
March 2013 to November 2014 I was the Group Treasurer. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair.  From paragraph 6 of your 
statement and following you deal with the role structure and 
capabilities of the Treasury department in Transnet and at 6.1 of your 
statement you summarise the role of the Treasury department.  Can you 
take the Chair through this? 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay the Transnet Treasury 
Chair – Treasury is a – Transnet is a very big organisation Chair it has 
about five core divisions.  Two in the rail space with his your Transnet 
Freight Rail and your Transnet Engineering.  You have your Transnet 
Ports Authority.  Transnet Port Terminals.  You have your pipelines.  
But for – but a decision was taken that the treasury activities will be 
centralised.  Even though each of the divisions had their own finance 
section the treasury activities were all centralised.  So we operated in 
a centralised model.  In a nutshell the function of treasury or the 
objective of treasury was to ensure that the group has sufficient money 
20 
to meet all its operational and capital obligations.  And we needed to 
do that within a board approved financial risk management framework.  
So we had parameters within which we operated in and one of the key 
parameters that we had to make sure that we protect is what we call 
the cash interest cover ratio and the gearing.  The cash interest cover 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 10 of 184 
 
ratio Chair in simple terms is the amount of money that is available to 
pay interest.  And so we – it was decided that a prudent – ordinarily 
you can say that a one to one it is fine but we do know that over and 
above interest payments there are other obligations that have to be 
met.  So a ratio of at least three times is a comfortable ratio.  So the 
benchmark is and I believe continues to be three times the cash 
interest cover ratio.  And another important … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry I just want to make sure I understand that.  
What was the term that you said refers… 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Cash interest… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Cash interest cover ratio. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Cash interest  
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Cover ratio. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Coverage? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Cover ratio. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh oh ratio. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you said that refers the amount of money that 
you keep aside or you identify to pay interest? 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  This is available Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that is available. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  To pay interest.  That  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So it will include the money that 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 11 of 184 
 
the company generates generally. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And any other source. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So but what it means does it mean that you would be 
having a certain amount of money that you set aside and say this is to 
take care of interest that we – we accumulate and have to pay in regard 
to various transactions. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I would not quite say that we set 
it aside but we make sure that it is available. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You identify. 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  We identify that it is available. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You say it is R1 billion. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is always available. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or something. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is the amount of money that 
should always be available. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That should always be available. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Always be available yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I mean is when you say it is an amount of money 
that should always be available maybe not practically but theoretically 
20 
that should not be used for anything else other than? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  No Chair it is not a set aside. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not [indistinct]. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is not a specific. 
CHAIRPERSON:  YEs. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 12 of 184 
 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  No.  Like… 
CHAIRPERSON:  So… 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Like for instance… 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if you have let us say you have as Transnet R20 
billion in your bank account okay.  Would you not say when you say 
that should be available would you not say out of that R20 billion so 
much must be available – a minimum of so much must be always 
available for interests?  Is that not what you talking about? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  No Chair this is a different 
context.  What you are referring to it is a liquidity buffer. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Which we had as R1 billion to 
cover our normal expenses. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So in this instance Transnet had 
about 9 or 10 billion rands worth of interest to be paid annually. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   So there is no way that we 
could have set aside R10 billion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  But the business is able to 
generate sufficient cash. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  So – so when you say should be available I take 
that to mean it might not always be available but that is what you – that 
is the ideal situation. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 13 of 184 
 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is available in one form or the 
other Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh it has to be available in one… 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  In one form or the other it is 
available. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it is not distinct? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is not a set aside. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja it is not set aside. 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you know it is should not be less than a certain 
amount or not? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is a function of what the 
business is able to generate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So a big organisation like 
Transnet that has a high capability of generating cash. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Ja. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  To maintain that level. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is easier and it gives comfort. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Ja. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  To investors, lenders and rating 
agencies that when they lend us money we will be able to pay interest 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 14 of 184 
 
with ease.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So it is just an indication that 
we will be able to pay interest with ease. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So… 
CHAIRPERSON:  But does someone have to keep an eye that that ratio 
stays in a certain way or not really? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is Chair.  It is Group Treasury 
that is tasked. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  That must keep an eye on that. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  In actual fact it is one of the 
KPI’s  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  That are in the Treasury Score 
Card so as the Group Treasurer it would be in my performance contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  Okay thank you. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair.  You have mentioned that 
there were two key financial ratios and you have just explained what 
the cash interest cover ratio entails what was the second key ratio? 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The second key ratio Chair is 
gearing in simple terms it is how much you are indebted.  It is the 
gearing ratio. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What – okay I… 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So it is a. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 15 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay how do you spell that? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Gearing – Gearing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Gearing ratio. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is a gearing ratio. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And just repeat what that represents? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It represents the level of debt 
that an organisation… 
CHAIRPERSON:  That you have 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Has relative to its equity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you. 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And again Chair the more 
manageable your debt levels are the better you are perceived as a 
credit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay thank you. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes and what was the threshold that Transnet 
sought to maintain insofar as the gearing ratio? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The official threshold was 50% 
but then for prudency sake we had an internal mark of 47% this would 
allow us to take any corrective measures before we even hit 50%. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And what were the key outputs of the 
20 
Treasury Department? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay I now go to paragraph 6.2 
Chair in trying to unpack the key outputs of the treasury department.  
The first… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 16 of 184 
 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The first one that I would like 
highlight it is 621 which is developing the funding strategy and plan for 
the group.  You will know Chair that all state owned entities are 
required to develop an annual corporate plan and in Transnet’s case I 
mean most of them would develop a three year corporate plan in 
Transnet’s case we developed a seven year rolling plan.  It is a big 
bundle Chair.  It has strategies for all of our divisions and the pack is 
approved all over the strategies for TFR, TE, TNPA they are all 
approved as one in a package.  But in that pack there is what you call 
the borrowing strategy or the borrowing plan.  It is about a 30 page 
10 
document but it is approved separately because of its importance.  It is 
not approved as a pack.  And it is an input that not even an input it is 
the output of the treasury department.  It sets out how the organisation 
will be funded over the medium term.  It sets out and it identifies all the 
key risk that is facing the organisation and it also includes what we call 
a scenario analysis because when we budget Chair we assume certain 
levels of rates over the medium term and as we know forecast and 
actuals can sometimes differ or they mostly differ.  So we will also 
include a scenario of some sorts and say that should X change from Y 
to G or G+4 then this is the impact.  So it is a very detailed plan.  And 
20 
whilst we are still on that point Chair I also want to highlight the – that 
it was the – it is still the responsibility of group treasury because we 
have a big organisation and it is important that when each and every 
one of those divisions budget they budget using the same parameters.  
So within the Treasury Department Chair we will – we have the 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 17 of 184 
 
capabilities of providing and checking what the economy and the 
market is likely to look like.  So for the seven year plan Chair even 
though we note today that prime is at 10.25 of JIBA at 7. Whatever we 
will then say that in the medium term this is where – today the currency 
is per the dollar, the euro and whatever is at X, Oil is at X.  But over 
the period the seven year period the market expects it to be X-G 
whatever.  So all of those were included and each and every division 
when they budgeted they did not just budget based on what the rates 
are today.  They budgeted to include what the forecast is expected to 
be in year 3 or year 4 or whatever the year might be because remember 
10 
that the capital expenditure plan though we have a one number at a 
particular point in time the execution of that plan spans over a number 
of periods.  So it is very important that when they budget and they did 
so Chair that they would use even the currency they will lose what is 
forecasted to be in the future.  So that is number 1.  Number 2 Chair is 
the management of interest rate foreign exchange commodity and 
create rate risk.  As a nett borrower and because it was anticipated that 
during the period of the MDS Transnet will continue to be a nett 
borrower because of the intensity and the – and the need to spend 
billions and billions of amounts of money for capital so management of 
20 
interest rate was key foreign exchange and commodity and because we 
have half of our fleet the rail fleet at that time I do not know now it was 
diesel so it was very important that we also include that.  And I also 
want to highlight that as a state owned entity and as a corporate in 
general our role is not to speculate on where the rand will be or the 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 18 of 184 
 
commodity price will be.  Our role is to protect the budget because the 
seven year plan is crafted based on certain assumptions.  So our role 
first and foremost was to protect the budget and the integrity of the 
budget because you do not want to plan X and be far off.  We 
understand that there are variances but they should not be too far away 
from what was originally intended.  And then the third point is what you 
were referring to earlier Chair the cash buffer.  We do know that we 
budget but we know that life happens all the time so it is important that 
at any particular point in time should there be an unforeseen expense 
we have a buffer and for the size of Transnet’s organisation a decision 
10 
was made that R1 billion it is a reasonable number to keep.  And 
number 4 is to reduce the weighted average cost of debt.  At the time 
when I left Transnet I think our weighted average cost was around 
10.35 – 10 – not 10 I am sorry Chair not 10.  9 – 9.35 to around 9.4.  
And it is also important that when we look at what it is a basket of all 
the interest rates that have been agreed for different facilities.  So that 
one number that represented the entirety of the debt portfolio was 
about 9.4 so whatever – whatever financing facility that we wanted to 
engage with we wanted to take up we had to compare to where our 
weighted average cost of debt is that is one.  And two we have bonds 
20 
that are trading out in the market that are listed in the JSE.  And we 
will also use that as a reference point because those bonds their yields 
will tell us where exactly is – is Transnet regarded as far as interest for 
a ten year or a seven year or a fifteen year.  Then even during that time 
Chair our bonds were trading at around 9.2% to 9.5 so the 9.4 – 9 – 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 19 of 184 
 
around 9 area was a key reference point for us.  So when we go out 
and issue because it is in my – it was in my performance contract Chair 
that I will reduce the weighted average cost of debt. I think the number 
that we had was about R300 million that relative to the amount of funds 
that are set aside for interest cost we need to at least save R300 
million.  Spend less by R300 million.  And then is the managing of the 
relationship with banks and rating agencies and the relevant regulators 
in this instance it is your Reserve Bank, National Treasury, the Listing 
Authority, be it the JSE or the UKLA and another important point Chair 
is the compliance and governance matters.  Treasury is a highly 
10 
regulated area.  If I am not wrong Chair I think we had about just that 
one small unit within Transnet.  I know that Transnet as a – as a group 
I am sure there are many laws and regulations that are applicable but 
for us Chair – if I am not wrong – I think we had over 40 laws and 
regulations that we had to adhere to and in addition we have laws that 
we have entered into and we have covenanted in a certain way and we 
therefore needed to make sure that we do not breach any of those.  So 
compliance and governance is one of the key things that – that were – 
and in addition Chair we had what we call the critical financial reporting 
controls.  These are your controls that make sure that all of the screws 
20 
- if I may put it that way – are tightened as far as the financial 
management of the Treasury business is concerned.  I think I have 
covered most of page 3. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes, thank you and what was the makeup of 
the Treasury Department when you were with Transnet?  Chair I would 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 20 of 184 
 
like to refer you to Annexure 1.  That would be on page 36 of the 
bundle and the actual document would be at page 37 of the bundle. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Thank you Counsel. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  What is that document at page 37? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair the - page 37 is the 
organogram of the Treasury Department as it was in 2014.  We had a 
team of 40.  32 of which were professionals and the organisation was 
divided into four.  The first one is what we call Front Office.  Front 
Office is where our transaction banking happens.  They are responsible 
for transaction banking.  They are responsible – there is a Deputy 
10 
Treasurer.  I had four deputies reporting to me.  So the first deputy was 
responsible for Front Office.  They will be responsible for cash 
management, credit rating management, your transaction banking and 
your dealing.  Dealing Chair is where your cross currency swap, your 
money market activities happen.  So I think it was about – about 10 of 
them in that – in that department.  The second department was 
Structured Finance.  There were five professionals in that department.  
This is where the loans are originated Chair.  Be it your domestic 
loans, your global loans be it your export credit agency loans, your just 
plan bank loans or your development finance loans.  This is where most 
20 
of the funding – not most – all of the funding activities were executed 
Chair and then … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You say that that – is that the Front Office? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  No, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where is that? 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 21 of 184 
 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Front Office is debt management 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Cash management.  It is 
dealing.  It is credit rating … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And it is economic and market 
analysis.  That is Front Office. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Structured Finance is funding. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is long term finance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is under Structured Finance. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is under Structured Finance 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is where the funding – ja okay.  You said both 
domestic and international? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Both domestic and – across all 
markets. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Thank you Chair and the third 
one is what we call Middle Office.  This area was responsible for 
financial risk management and compliance.  So they were the 
custodians of the – of the Financial Risk Management Framework.  
They are the team that will develop and enhance your Risk 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 22 of 184 
 
Management Framework in terms of how do we manage currency risk, 
how do we manage supplier risk, how do we manage all sorts of risks 
Chair and again Chair it was well resourced as well and supported.  All 
of this departments were supported by appropriate systems as well and 
processes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  By appropriate? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Systems. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Systems? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Systems. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  IT Systems. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And then we had the fourth 
department which is Treasury Operation.  This is where your complex 
Treasury Accounting rests and this is where the financial controls and 
the operational risk – the Middle Office Chair is responsible for the 
financial risk and the Operations is responsible – the Treasury 
Operations is responsible for your complex financial accounting matters 
that relates to your hedges and the like and they are also the custodian 
of your operational risk.  So the IT Systems, the ExCon matters, 
20 
settlement matters, reconciliation they all were in this department.  
Chair the Treasury Department is divided in this manner so as to make 
sure that we do not have a – a player and a referee. You will see in this 
– under this four that you have your – so it is a segregation of duties 
Chair to make sure that those that take risk do not even manage it.  So 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 23 of 184 
 
there was a proper segregation of duties.  There was a proper 
delegation of authority in terms of who can do what when and Chair if I 
may – may I? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Before you continue … 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Just so that we complete the organogram as 
you have provided the four sub units that fell under Treasury reported 
to you as the Group Treasurer? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And what was the skill set and expertise of 
10 
the 40 staff members in that unit? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Thank you Chair.  As I indicated 
earlier on we had four staff members - 32 of which were professionals.  
Chair I believe that we are highly blessed with the level of skills that 
we had.  We had a number of MBAs within our midst.  We had a number 
of those who are CFA - Chartered Financial Analyst – holders.  It is an 
international accreditation of – of finance professionals.  We had a 
number of CAs.  We had mathematicians Chair – Masters in 
Mathematics, Masters in Applied Mathematics.  We had a number of 
LLBs, LLMs.  We had Business Graduates, we had Economists.  So 
20 
Chair we had a mixture of highly qualified and highly experienced and 
these are the 32 professionals that I am referring to and Chair not only 
were they highly qualified but they were also highly experienced.  Some 
of them had investment banking experience.  Some of them had 
Commercial Law or Commercial Contracting experience and most of 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 24 of 184 
 
them had relevant SOC or Treasury experience or trading experience 
Chair.  So we had a mixed experience and qualification but within the 
entire team Chair it – we complimented each other and completed what 
was required in terms of the skill.  So we were sufficiently resourced, 
qualified and highly experienced. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And on average what was the number of 
years of experience of the staff members? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  We had few juniors to be honest.  
I think we had two who had just gone through what we called the 
graduate program but over and above that I think the average was 
10 
about 10 to 30/35 years of experience.  So it was a solid team. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes.  In paragraph 8 of your statement on 
page 4 you again refer to the two rations that you mentioned earlier 
being the cash interest cover ratio and the gearing ratio.  What was the 
importance of those two rations as you have set out in your paragraph 
8? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair the two rations are 
important in – for two reasons.  The first one is that because Transnet 
is a – is a net borrower.  It goes out there in the public market or 
sometimes in the private market to raise money.  So it is important to 
20 
be rated accordingly and in this instance Chair we had made it as a - 
as a performance measure that we want to maintain a stand-alone 
investment credit profile.  I must say Chair that the credit profile 
because the organisation was so well managed it was even above the 
sovereign as a stand-alone.  I know that some SOCs or most of the 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 25 of 184 
 
SOCs they only get investment rated once they – you know – they get – 
the sovereign kicks in.  We did not need that Chair.  We were strong on 
our own.  So – and it was because of the prudency around financial 
money.  So that is one and two when a lender does their credit due 
diligence they assign certain points to certain key matrices and it was 
important for us to maintain healthy matrices so – so that when they 
price us they price us cost effectively Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And we saw that in a number of 
areas that every time we were priced our credit – our stand-alone credit 
10 
profile will come through pricing. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  In paragraph 9 and following of your 
statement you provide a broad historic context of the balance sheet 
status of Transnet.  Without going into too much detail can you tell the 
Chair what the status was during the period mentioned there? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair when I joined Transnet in 
2007 it was at the time where there Four Point Turnaround Strategy 
was been finalised.  You will remember that before 2007 Transnet was a 
big company.  It had airline, it had buses, it had trucks, it had 
passenger rail, it had – I think it even had the – the housing loans.  So 
20 
during 2004 and 2007 all what was defined as nonco was divested and 
during – during the period of 2003/2004 the balance sheet was in such 
an unhealthy state Chair that I believe the cash interest cover was 
negative which meant that there was not enough money to pay even 
interest and the gearing levels were sitting at around 83/84 percent.  
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 26 of 184 
 
So it was therefore important that before you can even embark on a 
huge capital expenditure plan you needed to clean up your – your 
balance sheet.  So when I joined in 2007 the balance sheet was 
cleaned up.  The organisation was refocused and repurposed to what 
we call freight and a logistic company.  At that point in time Chair the 
gearing was now low at 39 percent and the cash interest cover was 
very healthy at 7.9 percent.  I believe Chair that it was at that point 
that the Board and the Executive thought that the time was right to 
reenergise the organisation because it was at a point again Chair when 
there was not much done in terms of a capital expenditure plan.  I 
10 
remember when I looked at the numbers I think spend was around 2 
billion – you know – for maintenance and expansion and for a monster 
like Transnet that is very small.  So a decision was made that Transnet 
needed to be beefed up understanding that it plays a very critical role 
within the economy of South Africa.  That it plays a critical role in the 
competitiveness of the economy and importantly it plays a critical role 
in the cost of doing business in South Africa because if the logistics is 
not working properly and there is inefficiencies it is very expensive to 
move goods from point A to point B and for us to achieve that Chair it 
was very important that our assets are up to scratch.  They are 
20 
maintained appropriately, they are renewed those that need to be 
renewed and I believe Chair that it was at the point that a decision was 
made that Structured Finance has to be a division that forms part of 
Treasury to be able to support the capital expenditure plan.  At that 
point when I joined the capital expenditure plan was 65 billion.  It then 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 27 of 184 
 
moved the following year to 78 billion.  Even at that point Chair it was 
clear that it is 78 billion just for a period of time.  It was clear - at least 
in my mind – when the Executives were discussing that the need was 
much more than that.  So in 2010 the strategy was changed to quantum 
leap even then – even then Chair it was - because I think it was 100 
billion at that point it was still not sufficient to be able to cover all the 
work that is needed.  You will know that Transnet owns and manages 
the ports and you will know that over a period of time the size of 
vessels has grown tremendously such that it needed - the organisation 
needed to make sure that the ports are able to accommodate your huge 
10 
vessels in terms of the quays and the whatever that is needed around 
the port and additionally you needed the right equipment to be able to 
lift – you know – and do whatever.  So those were the areas that were 
being done at – at the ports and Chair even during that time a new port 
– the Port of Ngqura was also executed and I think it was fully 
commissioned around 2010.  So on the rail side Chair our tracks were – 
were old.  I think – I am not a technical person Chair.  So I will just like 
to – our trains I think were on average 25 to 30 years old and they were 
not properly maintained.  So it was very important again Chair to make 
sure that the railway infrastructure and the locomotives our - and 
20 
wagons Chair are also modernised including all the systems that are 
needed to run a railway.  So it was at that time that I was employed 
Chair and ja. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE: 
 Yes 
and 
you 
also 
speak 
of 
several 
committees that were established pursuant to matters relative to 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 28 of 184 
 
CAPEX and augmenting the Treasury Department.  Can you take the 
Chair through the committees that were established as well as their 
purpose? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO: 
 
Chair 
because 
of 
the 
understanding 
that 
even 
though 
Transnet 
is 
a 
cash 
pumping 
organisation the money that the company generates will not be 
sufficient to pay for the capital expenditure plan.  It was therefore 
necessary to enhance and to – to beef up the Treasury Team which will 
be at the core of financing.  The Structured Finance Division was born.  
I was the first one to be employed at that time.  I then capacitated it 
10 
with two more professionals and added two more later and even within 
the other departments Chair at that point a new Deputy Treasurer in the 
Operations Department was employed and another CA was employed 
within the Treasury Operations in Front Office Chair.  When I joined I 
was told that one or two dealers had just been appointed.  After I joined 
Chair the then Group Treasury also employed - and the Deputy 
Treasurer - also employed the Debt Manager because Chair once you 
get to a point where you have a huge debt portfolio you have to have 
resources that actively manage that.  So it was important as well to 
enhance that – that department.  In parallel the processes and the 
20 
governance were - were also improved.  Processes – for Structured 
Finance Chair there were no funding specific processes.  So we 
developed that from scratch and from Treasury Operations Chair when 
Stephen Mamabolo joined there were a number of weaknesses that 
were identified at that point in time and he and his team Chair 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 29 of 184 
 
enhanced the Treasury environment because his area is very key and 
core.  It is like the engine of the organisation – if I may put it that way 
Chair and the Risk Management Framework Chair – I must say that our 
Risk Management Framework is one of the best but even at that point 
Chair we needed to make sure that we keep abreast to the latest 
developments in the Financial Risk Management Framework.  So it was 
also enhanced and in 2013 – Chair within Transnet there are a number 
of – can I? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes before you carry on. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay. 
10 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Insofar as governance and augmenting the 
Treasury Department you have made mention of having employed two 
additional staff members. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Hm. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Were there any committees in place or 
governance structures that were put in place pursuant to augmenting 
the Treasury Department? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay.  Thank you Chair.  The 
structure that was there Chair was what we call FinCo.  FinCo is a 
Sub-Committee of EXCO and FinCo meets once a month and it is a 
20 
committee made up of the Group CFO, all the CFOs of the business 
unit, the Group Treasurer, General Manager Tax, Group Planning those 
are the ones that I can remember and Chair because it is a - it is a big 
committee and it is focused mainly on pure accounting and pure 
reporting matters.  We found overtime that when we came to the 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 30 of 184 
 
Treasury matters the report Chair was not interrogated that much and 
we felt the need to have a Treasury specific committee wherein the 
Treasury specifics will be debated, guidance will be sought, opinions – 
you know - will be received because there is no point in presenting a 
paper and you do not get advice from other people.  So we said we call 
ALCO which is an Asset-Liability Committee specific to Treasury.  So it 
became like your Treasury EXCO.  The intention was over time it will be 
a stand-alone sub-committee of EXCO but in the meantime it was a 
sub-committee of FinCo.  So this was one of the enhancements and 
Chair it did so well because at least for the first time we were able to 
10 
tabel each and every matter that is important within the Treasury 
environment and thrash out each and everything and get opinion from 
all the other experts all the other colleagues and in this instance Chair 
the members of the ALCO Committee was the Group CFO, the Group 
Treasurer, the four Deputy Treasurers, the GM responsible for tax, GM 
Reporting, GM Planning and GM Risk Management, GM Supply Chain 
Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes.  Now in paragraph 17 of your statement 
you set out certain measures or steps that were taken in anticipation of 
the increased funding requirement.  Can you please take the Chair 
20 
through this? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So Chair in anticipation of what 
was going to be a huge capital expenditure plan that requires a number 
of funding activities.  It was therefore important to make sure that the 
group is able to source financing at all times and by at all times Chair 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 31 of 184 
 
you can only be able to source funding at all times if you have 
sufficient diverse sources of funds across the globe.  So we started off 
with launching the 30 billion Domestic Medium-Term Note program - the 
DMTN – which is listed at the JSE.  This program allows us to issue 
bonds – different types of bonds Chair be it an inflation linker, a fixed 
rate bond or a floating rate bond but it allows us to issue a whole lot of 
and – and even commercial paper.  So it was very keen and later on in 
2011 as the capital expenditure – as the capital plan intensified it was 
then upsized to 55 billion and in addition Chair we also launched what 
we called the Global Medium-Term Note Program which is similar to the 
10 
DMTN but this one is a global platform.  It allows us to access all 
qualifying – to access money from all qualifying investors across the 
globe be it in the Far East, Continental Europe and the Americas.  This 
GMTN is listed with the UK Listing Authority.  When the investment plan 
started Chair the Executive at that point did a roadshow across the 
globe as well because we know that we do not produce certain things in 
South Africa and we therefore knew that there is going to be a whole lot 
of imported components.  So the Executives at that time and the Group 
Treasurer at that time did a roadshow across the major markets and 
met with the export accredit agencies and we also had a platform for 
20 
ECA – for ECA Funding and as part of this Chair we also started 
rebuilding 
relationships 
with 
banks 
both 
domestically 
and 
internationally as well as investors Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes, can we turn to page 161 of the bundle.  
That is Annexure MM24.  What is that document that appears on that 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 32 of 184 
 
page? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay Chair Annexure MM24 is 
what we call the Financial Risk Management Framework.  This is 
developed by the Treasury Team and it will get presented to the 
different committees of EXCO and the different committees of the Board 
that are relevant with final approval resting with the Transnet Board.  
This is what we call the Bible of Treasury because it highlights and it 
talks about the governance issues.  It highlights – it identifies all of the 
risks that are faced with in the Transnet business and it also instructs 
how each of those risks will be managed.  One of the risks Chair that it 
10 
clearly highlights is on liquidity that on – for Liquidity Risk Management 
Chair will have a billion just as a buffer – you know – sitting around.  
For anything – for an obligation that is over R2 billion we will make 
sure that we have money six weeks in advance and we will also make 
sure that at any point in time we have at least 8 billion of facilities that 
are available at 24 hour notice.  It is important Chair to do that 
because we - we monitor what we call the AB Ratio.  It is the shortest 
to use this ratio and it has to be on a rolling 12 month basis at least 
1.2.  If you have at least 1.2 you know that at any point in time in the 
next 12 months the organisation has – has sufficient resources and it is 
20 
also important for your growing concern assessment and one of the key 
risk that is mentioned in this Chair is also your market risk that relates 
to currency risk and commodity risk and it also talks to your credit risk 
Chair and it will even go further and say that for you to – to have a 
counterparty it must have a certain stature.  It must have a – a net 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 33 of 184 
 
assess of at least R5 billion.  It must be rated by an international 
accredited rating agency and has – have at least an – an –A rate Chair.  
So it is very rigorous.  It is updated annually and it even includes the 
list of instruments that we are allowed to use. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes and if you turn to page 38 of the bundle 
that being Annexure MM2 the actual document appears at page 39 of 
the bundle. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Page 32? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Page 39.  What is the document that appears 
on that page? 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Oh, okay, so Annexure MM2 
Chair is the – what did you call it – it’s the guidelines, it’s the the 
guidelines for Supply Agreement.  Chair as I indicated before that 
Transnet is a very big organisation, and at any point in time there is a 
whole lot of procurement events happening across the organisation so 
it was very important to have guidelines that should be followed for all 
procurement.  We understood that certain big procurement events and 
the Treasury would be involved but for many of the smaller ones it will 
not be involved, so it was important for us to enhance our processes to 
make sure that even though Treasury may not be physically involved 
20 
there are guidelines on the things that the division should look into, so 
it talks to your approved FX Policy and it relates to the fact that 
wherever possible the divisions must enter into a fixed rent contract.  
First rent, the word fixed is important because sometimes people may 
enter into a rent contract but you find that it’s linked to some index or 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 34 of 184 
 
some rate and therefore it is no longer fixed because it’s subject to a 
movement of some other rate, so it was important to make sure that we 
have that fixed, because as I indicated before our role is not to 
speculate but to protect the budget. 
 
It will even go to a point of saying that if there is an important 
component of an X amount then you need Treasury input and there are 
sign-offs to be sought from your Group Reporting, Group Text and 
Group Treasury, and I also want to highlight that this on page 40.2.1 
this part is also indicated delegation of authority, where it says that 
especially for mega projects that where – in another project Chair 
10 
normally the Treasury would be involved but it will go on further to say 
that before the GCFO can sign off he can – or he or she can only sign 
off after all the relevant finance departments have signed off, to make 
sure that all of the risk have been identified, mitigated appropriately. 
 
And Chair if we go to 2.2 still on page 4 we even say there 
that Chair ...(intervention)  
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Page 40? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Still on page 40. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Paragraph 2.2 we even say 
20 
there that because we understand that there may be a need for 
advance payment but if you can negotiate enough stay away from it but 
if you have to pay an advance payment make sure that there is a 
guarantee at the back of that and it was also another innovation of 
Treasury Chair to say that when you are given a guarantee make sure 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 35 of 184 
 
that it’s not a surety, because there was a practice across the Group 
that Divisions will accept a surety.  We all know that a surety before 
you can exercise your rights under the surety there are a number of 
steps and ordinarily in a supply agreement there is a clear dispute 
resolution mechanism that once you get to a point where you are no 
longer happy you would have followed that and once you get to a point 
of seeing that now I want my money back you really don’t want to be 
dancing around you just want your money back, and therefore it was 
important to even put a word, a form, an acceptable form from a 
Treasury perspective and say that this is the acceptable form, it has to 
10 
be a demand guarantee and it has to be from a suitable financial 
institution rated at least A-minus. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Yes and there are further requirements that 
that guidelines would prescribe and you have summarised those from 
paragraph 20.1 to 20.5 of your statement.  
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Yes Chair, the first one is the 
ZAR fixed pricing which I have highlighted now, and the second one 
Chair is that because by their nature the assets that we buy will not be 
paid in one go, so it was important for us to workshop and to sensitise 
the divisions that when agree to a payment schedule you can’t agree to 
20 
a payment schedule that requires Transnet to pay an invoice every 
week for instance, or every other day, it has to be a bankable payment 
schedule like you know once a month, or once a quarter, and 
importantly as well Chair we find that for important component you will 
find that in certain instances an OEM will set up a subsidiary here in 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 36 of 184 
 
South Africa and in such an instance Chair you also require a parent 
company guarantee because this is just the – a small organisation and 
the IP and the know-how is sitting back home, so the form, the 
acceptable form of the parent company guarantee Chair was another 
innovation that was done by Group Treasury, post 2007, and in 20.5 
Chair is the performance and warranty bonds, we understand that 
projects will be executed over a number of periods and at the end of 
the term when that particular asset is commissioned you also want to 
have a warrantee that it will meet – it will perform according to 
specification that if there are any  defects and they are not remedied 
10 
appropriately then you have recourse using either a performance or a 
warrantee bond. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Yes from paragraph 21 you deal with the 
marketing demand strategy, over which sufficient evidence has been 
provided, and from paragraph 22 to 24 you then deal with the funding 
plan and strategy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you back to her statement now? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Yes Chair, my apologies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay, please always announce when you move 
from one document to another. 
20 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Thanks, my apologies Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, what paragraph now? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Paragraph 21. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   The statement makes reference to the 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 37 of 184 
 
market demand strategy which has been covered sufficiently by other 
Transnet witnesses and from 22 to 24 you deal with the Funding Plan 
Strategy which aspect we will return to.  From 25 you deal with the new 
topic which is the role of Treasury in the acquisition of the 1064 
locomotives and this being during the tender stage.  What was – what 
role does Treasury play in tenders? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Chair there are different stages 
where Treasury plays a role, in the first instance Chair is when a tender 
is – a tender document is still a draft, before it’s even advertised.  For 
mega projects Chair it will come to us for review just to make sure that 
10 
when the tenderers submit their proposal they know that they may be 
expected to do certain services for us so in this instance Chair we had 
a standard wording to make sure that when the tender goes out it had – 
and that wording Chair is part of the Supply Guidelines that we have 
just gone through so we will include that and we will also make sure 
that it also covers the issues around he advance payment guarantees 
and the requirements of the bonds and the quality of the issuers of the 
bonds, and it will also go on further to say that by submitting the 
proposal the bidder agrees to assisting us, because in an instance 
where we choose to use an export credit agency there will be certain 
20 
admin duties that are required, especially around the confirmation of 
the country of origin, because when suppliers produce an asset you 
know sometimes they can source locally or they can use their global 
sourcing structures, so it was important to have all of those out there in 
the open, even before a tender.  It was to make sure that when we 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 38 of 184 
 
decide to finance a project anyhow we can choose you know financing 
through A or through but all of those are covered in the tender 
document, so that will be our role Chair to make sure that all of the 
Treasury requirements are included and we also say where applicable 
please also include ZAR pricing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You said that’s the role of Treasury when you’re 
dealing with mega projects or mega tenders.  What would define a 
project tender as mega? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   I think we used loosely 
300million. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that’s like the minimum? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Ja, correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright, thank you. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Thank you.  Now specific to the 1064 
locomotives acquisition what role did your unit play in the tender stage 
of the 1064 locomotives? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Chair after we have given our 
inputs on the tender documents the tender after the division has 
satisfied itself it will be advertised and between the – during that open 
stage we did not have any role to play, and once the tender has closed 
20 
the division will then assemble what we call a multi-disciplinary team to 
evaluate the tenders, and in this particular instance the evaluation 
happened I believe between November and December, between October 
2013 and December 2013 and from a Treasury perspective two officials 
that represented us were Danie Smith, who was the Deputy Treasurer 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 39 of 184 
 
responsible for (indistinct) office and Tsetse Dlaletsi who was 
responsible for debt management in the front office, so they are the 
ones who formed part of the finance team and evaluated the tenders 
Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Chair it is quarter past eleven, might this be 
an opportune time to take the short adjournment? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, we will take short adjournment and we will 
resume at half past eleven, we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may proceed. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Makgatho before the 
short adjournment you were giving evidence on the involvement of the 
treasury department in relation to the 1064 locomotives.  Now we know 
that evidence has been given that General Electric, Bombardier, CSR 
which is China South Rail and CNR which is China North Rail with a 
short listed bidders.  The next event that you give evidence of is at 
paragraph 30 of your statement in January 2014.  What happened 
during that period? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair normal procedure is that 
20 
once the bidders have been selected then a data room will be set up 
and those that are expected as per procedure to review and negotiate 
will then be able to go to the data room to review the documents.  So 
me as the head of the Treasury and understanding that the procurement 
event is large I needed to personally go and review the document as 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 40 of 184 
 
part of my procedure – as part of my responsibilities – sorry about that.  
And I did exactly that Chair.  I went – the data room was set up at TFR 
offices in Parktown.  So I went there and when I got there I was told 
that the GCFO Mr Anoj Singh had given instructions that I should not be 
allowed into that data room.  That has never happened before Chair 
that I am refused entry into the data room.   
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And who told you that Mr Anoj Singh’s… 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is one of the… 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Sorry let me complete the question.  Who told 
you that Mr Anoj Singh said that you could not go into the data room? 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair it is one of the supply 
chain officials I unfortunately cannot remember his name, it was a he.  I 
cannot remember his name. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And did he say why Mr Singh said you could 
not go into the data room? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  He did not tell me the reasons. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes and what was your response? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So Chair … 
CHAIRPERSON:  But there – I am sorry but you would have asked why, 
why did he say that?  Did you ask that? 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I cannot even – I do not 
remember asking why in turn I just asked him a question and I asked 
him how many treasurers does this organisation have and he said one.  
And I said and who is that person?  And he said it is you Ma’am.  I was 
like okay thank you you have just answered yourself. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 41 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  He said it is? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I was just trying to make a 
statement that there is only one treasurer in the entire.   Transnet 
employs around 60 000 people and there is only one Group Treasurer 
and at that point it was me.  And I did not understand why for such a 
big and risky procurement event I – an instruction will be given out that 
I should not enter the data room.   
CHAIRPERSON:  But what was – he was Group Chief Financial Officer 
10 
that is Mr Anoj Singh? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In relation to Group Treasurer would he be somebody 
you reported to or not?  Would he be entitled to give instructions as to 
what you may do and what you may not do? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  He was my boss Chair I reported 
to him but my performance contract was very clear which he signed.  As 
well as the delegations of authority Chair if we referred to Section 
5.5.01 it talks to mega projects and it is very clear that there is 
procedure to sign off contracts and in this instance it says that the 
20 
Group CFO will – an only sign after sign offs from Group Treasury, from 
Group Legal, from Group Tax, from Group Reporting.  So in as much as 
he was the boss he needed to ascertain himself that Group Treasury 
has indeed reviewed and is comfortable with the contents of the 
document.  So I was by going there I was merely… 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 42 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Carrying out your functions. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Carrying out my functions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the – so which documents specified this function 
for you? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The delegation of authority 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Delegation of authority? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Ja which was approved in May 
2013 and effective from the 1 June 2013.  So in January 2014 that DOA 
was still applicable. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  The – that delegation would it be a delegation to you 
as Group Treasurer of a function or obligation that otherwise would 
have had to be performed by him or carried out by him? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is a delegation that… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now that – who is the original source of the function?  
Is it the board, is it the GCEO, is the GCFO that is what I am trying to 
establish. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair ordinarily the delegation 
rests with the board right.  And the board will in turn sub-delegate to 
the GCO who will then in turn delegate certain activities to certain 
20 
officials depending on the area of work.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So… 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So this was crafted out in the 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 43 of 184 
 
DOA that for this type of activities. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  This is the process.  Sign offs 
are required GCF before a contract a supplier contract can be signed 
the GCFO will sign. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  But before he does – he can 
only do that after  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Sign off from A, B, C, D. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Including the Group Treasurer. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Including treasury.  No he did 
not say treasurer he just said treasury. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Treasury? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay but obviously you were head of treasury. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  As the head of ja yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes what then happened after you spoke the 
officer who had said you could not go into the data room? 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I – Chair I ignored his statement 
because I just said to him that as far as I am concerned I still – I am 
still the treasurer of the organisation and if I were to listen to what he 
is saying I will not be fulfilling my responsibilities.  In any event if Anoj 
has something to tell me he must do so directly.  So I politely told him 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 44 of 184 
 
that I will assume that I did not hear what he told me and proceeded 
Chair and I spent the entire week at the data room.   
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes now while in the data room is there 
anything material that you might have picked up during your review 
process of the documents? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  As I was reviewing stacks and 
stacks and stacks of files because each bidder had many lever arch 
files which were like just  - they were technical, operational, financial 
and my review was just on the financial part because I cannot review 
the technicalities.  I then as I was moving from one bidder to the next I 
10 
then realised some commonality or something similar in two or three of 
the bidders.  On that day Chair when I … 
CHAIRPERSON:  So this is now after the tender had been issued and 
the bids have been put in? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is – it is before contract 
negotiations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  If you go through the contract 
20 
before the negotiations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So normal procedure would be 
that we go through the tender.  We review the tender documents, such 
that when you become part of the negotiating team at least you know 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 45 of 184 
 
what you are negotiating from and what the bidders have offered.  As I 
– as I was reviewing I then realised that two or three bidders Chair 
there was something similar.  Similar from a BEE perspective.  There is 
a name that appeared – one name that appeared in all or two or three 
of the bidders which was a red flag to me Chair.  On that day when I 
saw that I was with Garry Pita who was then – we were both reporting 
to Anoj Singh who was then the GM responsible for integrated supply 
chain management.  I then whispered to him and said hey Garry did you 
see that the beneficiaries are the same for these contracts.  And we – 
we were both surprised I believed and because the data room is a very 
10 
quiet room you cannot be discussing.  I just pointed out and we were 
like hey what can we do?  And we proceeded with our work.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Just tell me more about this.  So these were bids 
belonging to different or submitted by different entities? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you say two of the bids had something common? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Two or three. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Two or three.   
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what was that thing that was common? 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  There was a name Chair in the 
BEE  
CHAIRPERSON:  Section of the… 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Section. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 46 of 184 
 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  That I saw in this bid and that 
bid as I – hey who is – it is like it is the same BEE partners across the 
board I do not know Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Is what was – did this raise in your mind the question 
of how could people who were competing for a bid have the same BEE 
personalities, is that what was concerning you or is it something else? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair because ordinarily 
each and every bidder will have a different BEE party.  But in this 
instance Chair I cannot exactly say what it was but it is one of those 
that… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  It got your attention? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is one of those that – that you 
know got my attention and I was like… 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was something that you felt. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Could be flagged to investigate further. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But Chair I just discussed with Garry and it was 
not even a discussion I was just pointing it out to him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You just mentioned? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Ja and then we left it at that. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was your impression that he shared your surprise as 
well? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Probably Chair because at that 
time I was not aware that he would become I might be shooting myself 
on this one Chair but I am going to say it regardless. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 47 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  He would become Anoj’s 
enabler.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So I was not aware at that point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I thought he was just as 
innocent as me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay, okay. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And when you say enabler what do you mean 
10 
by enabler? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Enabler in the sense that he was 
responsible for Group Supply Chain and you know that Group Supply 
Chain is the custodian of all processes of supply chain and depending 
on what you want to achieve you need someone who can help you to 
make it right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You mean a facilitator. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  A facilitator Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Ja. 
20 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes.  And what then happened after your 
discussion with Mr Garry Pita in the data room? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  We left it at that Chair.  As I 
said I spent a week at the data room and after my review of the 
documents I then sent Anoj an email anyway informing him that I have 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 48 of 184 
 
to TFR I spent the whole week there.  I think at that point I had – I 
think I had done about 70% of what was required to be reviewed by me.  
I further on said to him that – because one particular point of interest 
to me as the Group Treasurer is that point was did their home export 
credit agencies or their home development finance institutions provided 
them with letter of support for financing.  So… 
CHAIRPERSON:  You now talking about the bidders? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Each of the bidders. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Each of the bidders? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  We had.  So I then realised that 
10 
yes there is support but whatever support that is coming from their 
countries of origin it is aligned to what we have already started.  Like 
for instance Bombardier has Canadian linkages.  We had already 
started engagements with Export Development Canada long before the 
procurement and Export Development Canada had already indicated 
together with Investec that they may be willing to support procurement 
that has a Canadian link.  So we already knew that we are sorted on 
that front.  And in particular they had indicated support of I think rand 
equivalent of 600 million dollars.  So we were good on that.  And GE 
again they had a support letter from their home export credit agency 
20 
with is US Exim and again Chair it was aligned to what we have done 
before and we were happy with that.  There – China Development – 
China South and China North they were being supported by China 
Development Bank and again it was aligned to what would – would 
expect.  So I was looking for something extraordinary that they might 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 49 of 184 
 
have included in their bids that we have not thought of.  So I reported 
back and said I have… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you tell us about the report back you said this 
was of particular interest to you what you have just told us the – there 
are respective countries and their support from certain banks and 
development banks in their countries was this a requirement which they 
had to meet in terms of the bids or it was something that would be good 
for them to have or what was the position? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It was not a requirement it was 
just something desirable.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay, okay.  So when you went 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So we would not judge them 
based on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  When you were looking you wanted to see whether 
you could find something extra along those lines. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay thank you.  I interrupted you when you were 
talking about reporting back to Mr Anoj Singh I think. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So Chair I reported back to him 
Chair … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you were talking about you had gone through 
70% of what you needed to go through at the data room and you then 
wrote – sent him an email. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay and then I sent him an 
email and I told him that I was comfortable with what I am seeing.  
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 50 of 184 
 
Specifically from the point that we are – it confirmed that we are 
aligned – our thinking was aligned to what you know – so we had 
already activated certain processes within Group Treasury.  But I did 
not mention that I was told that he did not want me to be part of – or to 
access the data room.  And he responded and said Hello M I am happy 
that you have gone through that – oh and then I also asked him if – 
because some of the bidders had included certain terms and conditions 
that are negotiable by their nature.  So I also said can I talk to the 
bidders directly just to assess certain things?  And he said he advises 
not to.  Which is not a problem Chair because when a tender evaluation 
10 
process is underway there are strict rules in terms of who can speak to 
the rulers so I did not think it is anything untoward.   
CHAIRPERSON:  But is there a particular reason why you may – you 
decided not to ask him about this instruction that you were told about? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I was just testing him Chair 
because I had already established through many of my engagements 
with him that he is not a man of his word.  He would say – he would 
agree on certain things and then when we meet he will change just on 
the spot and pretend as if we have never agreed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So I was testing him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no thank you. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you.  The… 
CHAIRPERSON:  So in – I am sorry.  So in effect in your email to him 
even though you had not completed your process at the – is it – did you 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 51 of 184 
 
say it is data room? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes the data room. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The data room. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Even though you had done 70% in effect your email 
was I am happy I have no issues. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that he could when the documents are put before 
him to sign he would know that you do not have a problem? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is even before the signing. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  We were just reviewing around 
financing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So I was just giving him comfort 
that whatever that Group Treasury is doing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is on the right track. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So he should relax. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You would still come back later on when you clear 
everything. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Thank you. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair.  From paragraph 38 of your 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 52 of 184 
 
statement you deal with the contract negotiation stage.  In the normal 
course of process what would be Treasury’s role in the contract 
negotiation stages of tenders? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair in the normal process 
Treasury will be involved in the negotiations and I will give you a 
couple of examples.  It was not the first time that the organisation 
procures.  It was not the first time that the organisation assemble a 
multi-disciplinary team.  Already there was precedence and there were 
– there was procedure that was developed around supplier agreements.  
We had done I think a 50 like [indistinct] some of the locomotives I 
10 
cannot remember which batch we had followed the same process with 
some of the new multi-pipeline project so it was an embedded process 
Chair and I am not sure if he was aware that there was a process in the  
organisation already.  But it was a process that has been there for a 
few years at least.  So Chair for contract negotiation stage I expected 
that I will be part of that as the Group Treasurer and I had already 
made up my mind that I need to have Danny Smith to be part of that 
because he is responsible for financial risk management so he is a very 
important member of the team.   That Dorothy Kobe who is the Deputy 
Treasurer responsible for structured finance will also be part of that 
20 
because there is – this is a big financing requirement just on its own. 
And the third person that I thought I will also rope in just for learning 
purposes because he had – he had requested that I should include him 
for learning.  It was Tsietsi Tlaletsi who was part of the bid adjudication 
team.  So I was thinking because it is a big transaction we are going to 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 53 of 184 
 
be four from treasury and do our work.  And Chair previously the head 
of structured finance and the head of middle office were always part of 
the negotiations.  And the Group Treasurer will sometimes join if she is 
not too busy.  The then Group Treasurer Chair was Ms Disebo Moephuli 
so I expected the same process to prevail even in this instance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So your expectation that you would be part of the 
negotiation team was based on established practice? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Established practice and… 
CHAIRPERSON:  For these big tenders. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay thank you. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And based on the fact that there 
is only one treasury in Transnet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And the policies and the documents to which 
you have referred us did they also specify that the composition of the 
negotiation team should include the treasurer or they do not say that 
but the practice was there? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is the practice Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It includes the sign offs and 
20 
remember that you cannot sign off a document that you do not know 
how it came to be. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So there - it was included in the 
guidelines and it was also included in the board approved delegation of 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 54 of 184 
 
authority. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes now in view of what you have referred to 
as precedent and past practice what was the role of treasury in the 
contract negotiation stage? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair the role of treasury 
became highly diluted for a lack of a better word.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Talk more about that. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  As I said Chair I expected the 
head of structured finance I expected the head of middle office I was 
10 
going to lead that Chair you know because of – of the  
CHAIRPERSON:  You were going to lead the treasury … 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Of the extent – the financing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Component. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes the financing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of the negotiating team. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair and so I would have 
wanted for four members of the treasury, three co-members and one 
just as an understudy to be part of the team.  And then Chair as it came 
about I then realised that in actual fact my presence is not welcome.  
20 
And Chair these are some of the things that you cannot really say is 
because someone said A, B, C, D.  But it is something that… 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you just… 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  But it is something you will infer 
as you go along. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 55 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  You – it is something you sense? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  You will sense that you are not 
wanted and Chair so I attended a few of those it was a big team Chair.  
It was the technical team, the operations team, the legal team, the 
finance team and within finance team it is reporting it is tax it is 
treasury so it was a huge team Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the negotiation team that you talk about. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  That is the – so there were 
different streams. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  They were different back 
streams.  So we met at the Webber Wentzel offices I think we had 
booked a big board room and some of the smaller rooms for the teams 
to have their own private discussions to negotiate specific things.  And 
then Chair I think I attended or three but then the environment was 
such that it was not conducive for me to be… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you – before you tell us about the environment 
at the negotiations how you expected the composition of the treasury 
team to be in a certain way in terms of established practice.  Now in 
terms of how it ended up being composed that is the treasury team that 
20 
would be part of the negotiations how did that come about?  Was it Mr 
Anoj Singh who simply phoned and said you can come, you can come or 
were you asked to come with your team that you chose? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair I was not asked to come 
with the team that I chose.  We all know our responsibilities within an 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 56 of 184 
 
organisation Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So I expected to be able to say 
that from a treasury perspective these are the officials that we will 
represent.  And if you remember in the – in the guidelines Chair the 
guidelines mentions two officials that have to be included.  It says: the 
financial risk manager and the structure finance official.  So I expected 
that at the bare minimum Chair.  But – so I was not told explicitly that 
you shall not come.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Were notices simply sent to certain people to say 
10 
there is a meeting that will take place at Webber Wentzel or whatever 
the venue was in regard to negotiations please attend or how did 
people get to know there was a meeting which they needed to attend?  I 
think that is where I want.  Because based on what you were – you said 
you were expecting I thought that even though different people within 
treasury may have known their roles I expected that maybe what you 
had in mind is that once there was to be a meeting you as the head of 
treasury would be informed and then you would pass on the information 
to the relevant people who must be part of that.  So I am wanting to 
find out how it came about that some were at the – went to the Webber 
20 
Wentzel and were they the right – were they all the right people or not? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay Chair.  There were some 
meetings Chair that would happen and I would not be invited.  And I 
would like to refer to particular meetings that have – I think it was on a 
Sunday at Regiments offices and in that meeting… 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 57 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  At what offices? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  At Regiments offices in Gauteng. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And in that meeting I am told by 
Danny Smit that they discussed the financial risks. They discussed the 
financing.  They discussed the options.  They discussed the structuring.  
All of those things I am the custodian of.  So I was surprised that such 
a meeting would be held without anyone telling me.   
CHAIRPERSON:  But – but also you said it was held on a Sunday? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair.  There was - there 
10 
was… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was that – was that normal? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It was not normal Chair but 
when it is a hectic time one … 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is possible? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Would expect … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Ja to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  To work long hours … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes or weekends? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Or – ja so.  I was not worried 
about that it is Sunday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  About that part, ja. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Huh-uh. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 58 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay.  So you were not invited to that meeting? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I was not invited Chair and it 
was not the only meeting where I was not invited.  I mean Danie is a 
very polite man. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So he would sometimes come 
and – and just give me feedback and ja, so … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So that is how – so I – I got to 
realise that in actual fact Anoj Singh preferred Danie … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And did not want anybody else 
except Danie. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So that is from a Transnet 
perspective.  In actual … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Fact Chair the – at least in my 
humble opinion Chair - the Finance Team was made up of members who 
I believe would not have the power or the ability to push back on 
20 
certain matters … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO: 
 
Because 
one 
would 
have 
expected that the Finance Team would be made up of people who are 
able to engage and to discuss constructively with Anoj … 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 59 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  But I think in this instance Chair 
he was very strategic. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I think in my humble opinion that 
he chose members that would – would most probably be compliant. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But the – the norm in terms of meetings – negotiation 
meetings – is it that somebody would issue – would circulate notices or 
invitations and then that his how anyone would – would then attend? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair.  Correct Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  And – and would that be the head of the negotiation 
team whoever it is that would normally do that – issue notices to 
everybody that must attend? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It would normally – in the 
previous instances Chair – if my memory serves me well – it would be 
the division who says please come on board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  In regard to this one do you know whether 
there was a standard person who was issuing – who was inviting people 
to come to meetings or issuing notices and whether it was Mr Singh? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair in this instance - which 
20 
was different from the previous procurement event – in this instance my 
assessment is that Mr Singh was in charge of the process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay thank you. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you.  You have earlier referred to the 
guideline which we also referred to just before the short adjournment.  
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 60 of 184 
 
Can I then ask you to turn to page 41 of the bundle – 43 rather – page 
43 
of 
the 
bundle? 
 
At 
paragraph 
2.4 
is 
written 
there 
“Agreements/Letters of Acceptance”.  Can you please take us through 
that paragraph? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair point 2.4 of the guidelines 
instructs that: 
“For agreement that have an FX component of more 
than $3 million must be referred to Group Treasury, 
Group Tax, Group Reporting, Group Legal before 
they can be concluded.” 
10 
And it says again that: 
“All agreements where the Rand value is more than 
R100 million must be referred to the same division 
and sign off obtained before agreements are 
concluded.” 
It says that: 
“Financial risks, accounting, income tax, VAT and 
funding related issues must be considered by the 
relevant sections.” 
It goes without saying that the 1 064 procurement is much more than 
20 
this threshold that is written here and would therefore fall under the 
ambit of this process. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes.  You earlier also referred to a meeting 
that was held at the Regiments Offices.  Did you know what the role 
was – what the role Regiments had in the contract tender negotiations 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 61 of 184 
 
stage? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Molefe I interrupted your questions at some stage 
earlier when I think you had asked a question that required her to talk 
about that - the first meeting that she attended and she felt that she 
was not wanted.  I am just reminding you in case you want to pursue 
that first before going to this one but I leave it to you - before pursuing 
the Sunday meeting one. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Makgatho has covered 
it in additional questions raised by the Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh then – then I am not sure that I heard it.  Please 
10 
just go over that again.  You – you were to attend a meeting of 
negotiations at Webber Wentzel and you were saying something.  That 
is – that is as far as I heard.  Then I interrupted you. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay Chair.  I think I was trying 
to highlight the environment for me and what I sensed Chair.  When you 
are wanted and when you are not wanted the environment and the 
feeling are not the same.  So inasmuch as I attended a few meetings at 
Webber I sensed that Anoj was in charge which is okay because he is 
the Group CFO, right.  He should be in charge probably.  I do not know 
what the agreement at EXCO level was and I also realised that I think I 
20 
saw not I think.  I saw Eric Wood who was around there.  Eric Wood … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  You saw? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Eric Wood the Director of … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO: 
 
Who was 
the 
Director of 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 62 of 184 
 
Regiments at that point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh Eric Wood, yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Eric Wood Chair yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So we proceeded with our 
negotiations.  In actual fact at that point in time Chair we were still 
collating.  You know – when you start with the negotiations you will 
have your points that – you will have your many meetings where we say 
that we are going to – we are going to consider A, B, C, D and this 
would be the approach.  We can tolerate G.  We cannot tolerate and 
10 
this will be the – you know – the middle ground (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  The bottom-line and so on? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes.  So it is like a negotiation 
strategy.  So we are still at that level. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  So this was a meeting of your – Transnet’s 
Negotiation Team alone.  It was not a meeting where you were 
negotiating - Transnet was negotiating with one of the bidders or with 
them.  It was simply your own meeting where you would discuss how 
you are going to go about the negotiations? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The bidders were there Chair … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  But then it was the initial stages 
where we are just … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Finding out? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Finding each other … 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 63 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And I believe that some of the – 
and I think GE - as an example – was going to fly their team members – 
I think – in the next following days or so but we were just picking up 
certain points of importance … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  That would need to be trashed 
out … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And therefore it was – it was 
10 
necessary for the respective work streams … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  To each go to their own rooms 
and say … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  These are the issues that are 
coming out … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And remember that some of 
these points are points that we would have gathered as we reviewed 
20 
the documents … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  In the data room. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So we will highlight all of those 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 64 of 184 
 
points and say … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  This is what we are going … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  This is negotiable this is not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Maybe we – you know – for 
those that are negotiable we can maybe come to a certain point of G or 
X or whatever.  So it was those preliminary discussions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh so – so basically the negotiation team of Transnet 
10 
was meeting with the bidders? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The purpose being just to have an idea where 
problematic areas might be and where - what issues might not be a 
problem and so on so that then different work streams within the 
Transnet Negotiating Team could focus on those issues that relate to 
their work stream and see how they will deal with certain issues.  
Those that might be not negotiable from their point of view and those 
that might be managed depending on what will happen - just identify 
those. 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Now I understand but you say that during that 
meeting – during that session – you sensed that you were not 
welcome? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 65 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you sensed this from how Mr Anoj Singh was 
conducting himself even though you cannot say he did A, B, C, D or he 
said A, B, C, D but you could just sense that he was not happy with 
your presence? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And just adding onto that - do you know why 
Mr Singh may have preferred to have Mr Danie Smit present in those 
meetings as opposed to yourself? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair my impression is that he 
10 
did not want to be challenged on certain decisions and he knew that I 
do not take certain things as gospel truth.  Where necessary I unpack I 
analyse and I challenge if necessary and I do not think he wanted any 
challenges from me.  I think he deliberately chose people who are more 
meek – if I may put it that way – who - because there were a few levels 
below him and – and Chair this has nothing to do with age but in a 
corporate structure when people are like a few levels below you in most 
cases they are not able to  
CHAIRPERSON:  Challenge. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Forcefully challenge … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  You … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And even if they have opinions 
… 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 66 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  But you know they cannot … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  You know … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Force themselves. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  They cannot put their case 
properly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ordinarily I would have imagined that in such a setup 
10 
– in such a meeting – you being Group Treasurer and him – that is 
Mr Anoj Singh – being Group Chief Financial Officer that one would 
have expected that you would be like his deputy if you – if you like.  
You were the most senior person at Treasury after him.  Is that not so? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair and that is what I 
expected.  I thought that I would be the advisor … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  On those matters … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And Chair it became clear to me 
20 
that he preferred advice from Eric Wood. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but now when you say it became clear to you that 
he preferred Eric Wood – Mr Eric Wood’s advice are you suggesting 
that Mr Eric Wood would also be present at meetings that were 
supposed to be attended to by just the Transnet Negotiation Team to 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 67 of 184 
 
talk alone? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair as I have indicated that I 
ended up not been part of the Negotiating Team. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So I am not sure if he attended 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  But the few times that I attended 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  He was hovering around … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And I must also say that the few 
times that I have attended immediately after the meetings at Webber 
Wentzel the team will then congregate … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  At Regiments Offices for a wrap 
up session. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Okay. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair. 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Ms Makgatho can we please turn 
to Bundle BB10 … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or maybe I could just ask this.  So the – the meetings 
that you attended of the Negotiation Team before you decided not to 
take part because you felt unwelcome how many of them were there? 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 68 of 184 
 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I cannot remember Chair but 
maybe … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Two or three? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Maybe three. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair.  Can you please turn to 
Bundle BB10B which contains your supplementary documents?  At page 
2 of your supplementary statement – if you can go to page 2 of the 
10 
bundle at paragraph 6 of your statement you see to make an 
amendment to your paragraph 43 in your main statement.  Can you 
please take the Chair through that amendment? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is important to note that 
Regiments Capital – oh it - it is changing to: 
“Note that Regiments Capital replaced Nedbank in 
the McKinsey Consortium.” 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And that paragraph would be the first 
sentence in your paragraph 43.  Can we then turn to Annexure MM4 of 
the bundle – Bundle BB10A? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  EXHIBIT BB … 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Exhibit – thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  10A.  So what page is that? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  That would be at page 62. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 69 of 184 
 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Are you there ma’am? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Page 62? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Now in line with your correction would that be 
the replacement of the letters reflecting the replacement of Regiments 
in relation to Nedbank? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair it seems that this was not 
the – because the replacement that I am referring to is the replacement 
wherein Regiments replaced Nedbank.  So in this instance Nedbank is 
10 
still a member of the consortium. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes and in paragraph 43 of your statement 
you speak of your discussion with Mr Anoj Singh.  Can you please take 
the Chair through that discussion? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair apparently there was a 
tender process that happened sometime in 2012 wherein a confined 
tender or was it a public tender a confined tender - I do not know - for 
the provision of advisory services and Chair at that point in time I was 
still the Head of Structured Finance but I do not remember my previous 
boss – (indistinct) – who was the Treasurer then mentioning this.  I only 
20 
became aware of this when she was no longer part of the Treasury 
Team.  So in this LOI dated 13 November 2012 Transnet is providing 
the McKinsey Consortium the Letter of Interest for a number of services 
that includes the TFR, GFB.  GFB is General Freight Business.  It 
includes – so this is for the acquisition of 1 064.  It includes 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 70 of 184 
 
procurement and legal.  It includes technical operation and one 
important part from my perspective Chair it included financial and under 
financial it says: 
“Developing finance and funding …” 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  I am sorry.  Are you looking at …? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Page 66. 
CHAIRPERSON:  66, okay. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Sorry Chair for not … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Referencing properly. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It includes: 
“Developing finance and funding options and it also 
includes as a point of the terms of reference 
develop deal structure and (financing, hedging and 
de-risking options).” 
So this was signed on 4 December 2012.  Chair now we are in 2014.  
Around 2013 I became aware that there is a consortium of McKinsey 
but I was not aware that there are certain expectations that they will 
perform in terms of Treasury because one would have assumed that if 
20 
there are any activities that - that falls within your responsibility at 
least you would have been told and since this related to funding and 
financing options this falls within the structured finance and my 
assumption is that the previous Treasurer would have briefed me – you 
know – as the Head of Structured Finance and I do not remember that 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 71 of 184 
 
happening.  So I assume that she was not aware of this.  So Chair I am 
– I am mentioning this part because I was not aware that Regiments 
was contracted and I therefore questioned why Regiments was part of 
that and I was then told by Anoj that Regiments replaced Nedbank. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Anoj Singh.  Mr Singh. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Sorry – sorry Chair.  Mr Singh 
that Regiments replaced Nedbank in the consortium and Mr Singh went 
on to say that they realised by Nedbank being part of the consortium 
there was a conflict of interest.  I am not sure Chair at what point did 
they realise that conflict of interest because I assume that when they – 
10 
whoever evaluated that bid my assumption is that – you know – 
processes to establish – you know – conflict of interest are an 
embedded process of the SCM.  So my assumption is that if there was 
any conflict of interest it should have been raised then but I understand 
that he raised it with McKinsey and my – my understanding again is 
that there was a discussion between McKinsey and Nedbank and there 
was an agreement that Nedbank would indeed be replaced by 
Regiments and all of this Chair is information that I received from 
Mr Singh.  So later on I came – it came to my attention that indeed 
Regiments had replaced Nedbank and Partners.  So my assumption can 
20 
only be that Nedbank accepted to cede its right under the contract. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  When you sought clarity from Mr Singh as to 
the involvement of Regiments did you ever do that in writing? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair I did and I would like 
to refer to paragraphs – to paragraph 46 I believe.  That is that letter. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 72 of 184 
 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes.  Can you also then turn to page 73 of 
EXHIBIT BB10A?  That is the bundle that is before you.  It is contained 
under Annexure MM5. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Page 76? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Page 73. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  What document appears on that page? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is an email that I sent to Anoj 
on January, the 31 s t after having spent a week at the data room. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  January, the 31 s t of which year? 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  2014. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And what are you saying to Mr Anoj in that 
email? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  That the first part of the email … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Singh.  You said Mr Anoj. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Mr Singh pardon me Chair.  Mr Singh. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The first part of – of my 
message to Mr Singh is around the work that I had done in the data 
room and the second part is around our engagement with Regiments.  
Chair I would like to point out that I am asking him this question and I 
20 
am saying here in point 2: 
“Our engagement with Regiments - I am not sure 
how to engage with Regiments on this project given 
the fact that you mentioned during our – our 
15 January call that I should not worry about the 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 73 of 184 
 
terms of reference as they are not relevant and I 
should not link the deliverables to the budget.  I 
understand your point that they are your advisors 
and not mine and they are merely advising you 
through me but without a clear understanding of 
how our relationship with Regiments is governed 
and how expected deliverables are supposed to be 
managed and measured against the terms of 
reference timelines and budget.  This makes my job 
extremely difficult.  I will appreciate clarity on their 
10 
mandate so that we can proceed smoothly.” 
He then responded to my email on 3 February 2014.  He said: 
“Thanks for …” 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   And just to confirm - that response still 
appears on the same page – page 73? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes, carry on. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And then he responds and says: 
“Thanks for the note.  Also good to see that there 
are good options for us to consider.  Please do not 
20 
contact any suppliers at this stage and also let us 
discuss the above plus Regiments issues when we 
next meet.” 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And did you ever discuss these issues with 
Mr Singh? 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 74 of 184 
 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The issues Chair if I may just go 
a little bit back.  Around 9 January 2014 I received a proposal from 
Regiments wherein they were proposing to act as our advisors for the 
procurement of the – for the financing of the procurement of the 1 064 
locomotives.  Their proposal was very vague and I was not sure what 
their value add is.  So I requested them to revise their proposal so that 
it can be clear to me what their proposed value add is and I then 
reported back to Mr Anoj Singh and – and I did that through a call and 
on the call he was not very happy with the fact that I have asked 
Regiments to revise their proposal.  He just said that he – he does not 
10 
understand why am I worried about the vagueness of the terms of 
reference and in actual fact they are not my advisors they are his.  
They are merely advising him through me.  So I must just make sure 
that I work with them.  They are advising him through me.  So this 
email Chair was seeking clarity … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry how are you going to play that role if they 
tell you something you do not understand? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Exactly my point Chair hence 
the email – hence the email.  I was just trying to seek clarity because 
indeed they – they did revise and I was not sure really what their value 
20 
add is.  So afterwards Chair you – you were asking me if we had 
discussions - afterwards – afterwards we had a number of engagements 
Chair and in actual fact it was becoming more of the norm that me and 
Mr Singh would argue all the time around Regiments.  What they are 
doing?  What they are not supposed to be doing and – and I suppose 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 75 of 184 
 
because I was not party to their appointments and the terms of 
reference.  So I was always clueless.  I would just see them there and I 
did not know really what they were doing because as far as I was 
concerned as I highlighted before we had a team of professionals Chair 
– 32 of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So your – your arguments with Mr Singh around 
Regiments was really based on the fact that you did not understand 
what their - what their role was and you did not understand what their 
need – why - why it was necessary to have them around and you were 
seeking clarity and you expected things to be done in a certain way? 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But their – their present was part of what you 
regarded as things not being done in the – in the right way? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And – and this is what the two of you were arguing 
about? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you – were you kind of having different 
expectations?  You were expecting things to be done in a certain way 
but he did not see what your problem was? 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair.  He did not 
understand … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  My point … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 76 of 184 
 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And in actual fact he thought 
that I think me and my team were clever … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Whereas there – there are 
people out there who knows things who are more – which is true Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  There is always … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Someone or some team … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  ...which is – which is much more 
experienced, but at least there has to be value. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mmm, thank you.  Ms Molefe? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Thank you Chair.  At paragraph 49 of your 
statement you then deal with further events that took place relative to 
the negotiation stage, can you please take the Chair through these 
events? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Chair you will remember that I 
had sensed that I am not wanted, but I did not have evidence, but I 
could just see that I was being overlooked or bypassed on matters that 
20 
required my input and my sign-off, and Chair for Treasury related 
matters the DOE is very specific, certain things can only be done at the 
recommendation of the Group Treasurer, and at that time I was the 
Group Treasurer, so I was, I kept on being surprised over and over and 
in this one instance, I believe it was the second half of 2014, I then – I 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 77 of 184 
 
was then provided a copy of Anoj’s diary. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Singh’s diary, we are in formal proceedings.  I 
know that because you worked with him you know you are used to call 
him Anoj but we are in formal proceedings so we have to try and say Mr 
Singh or Miss So and So or Ms So and So. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    I’m sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Noted Chair, I am sorry.  I then 
got hold of Mr Singh ‘s copy of his diary, I believe it was the 13 t h of 
August 2013, he had a few meetings Chair and one important meeting 
10 
for Treasury was his scheduled meeting with Goldman Sachs. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    Ms Makgatho sorry to interrupt, can I refer 
you then to page 78 of the bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That’s EXHIBIT? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   BB108 
CHAIRPERSON:  BB108 yes, page 78? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    Page 78, which is under MM7.  Are you 
there ma’am? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    Yes. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   You mentioned that you got hold of Mr 
20 
Singh’s diary and the year that you mentioned is 2013. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   2014. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    2014, thank you.  This document at page 78 
what document is that? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    Chair this is the diary of Mr 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 78 of 184 
 
Anoj, it records the meetings that he was supposed ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  I guess you mean it’s a page from his diary? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   It’s an electronic diary Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay, okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    It’s a printout from his 
...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  It’s a printout from his electronic diary, okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Chair it records the meeting 
that Mr Singh was supposed to have on that day, you will see that at 
eight o’clock he wanted to meet with Mahomede around the NMPP or 
10 
Mahomed just – or Mr Mahomede ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry, we are dealing with the 13 t h of August 2014, it 
was a Wednesday? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    It was a Wednesday Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   So the first is the NMPP. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    Would that be the handwritten note on the 
right side of that page? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    Correct Advocate 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   And under that would be the heading notes 
20 
is provided there. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Correct Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    Yes you were explaining what is written 
there. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    So Chair for eight o’clock he – 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 79 of 184 
 
this is his handwriting, he is suggesting that he wants to discuss the 
NNPP and I think that he is also suggesting that he wants to see Mr 
Mahomede and I can’t read the next word. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It looks like M-o-c to me, but it might not. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Mec or something, I don’t know 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And NMPP what would that represent? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    New Multi Pipeline Project. 
CHAIRPERSON:  New? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Multi Pipeline Project, it’s one 
10 
of Transnet’s ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh new, on NMPP. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    NMPP Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   And the second point for nine 
o’clock I can’t see, and between ten o’clock and half past ten I can see 
that he wanted to see me, so he has written there under notes my 
name. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is the one at nine o’clock does it look like CPU or 
something? 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Chair I can’t read this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You can’t tell okay but the next one at ten o’clock is 
your one. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Ten o’clock to half past ten is 
me so I assume that I was going to see him before his meeting with Mr 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 80 of 184 
 
Molefe, at half past ten to half past eleven.  And the important one 
Chair is the half past eleven to one o’clock meeting, which is a meeting 
scheduled for Transnet and Goldman Sachs to discuss Exim (indistinct) 
Hybrid issuance.  Now Chair he writes here no Treasury to attend and 
he ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you mean on the right hand column where he – it’s 
written by hand? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that is no treasury to attend? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE 
MAKGATHO:   To attend, and then 
10 
...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    And then he suggests that Mr 
Gary Pita, who was the GM responsible for Supply Chain to attend, Mr 
Vikas Sagar, who was the partner of McKinsey, Mr Eric Wood, who was 
the director at Regiments.  He then Chair in my opinion here he 
replaces the Treasury Team with Mr Pita, Mr Sagar and Mr Wood, so 
Chair all along I was just sensing that Treasury is being sidelined, 
things would happen that falls within the ambit of Treasury and Chair 
for one reason or the other we would not be involved and here I have 
20 
on that data when I received this it was like okay so this is what has 
been happening, this has been a deliberate plan all along. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you viewed this as confirmation of what you had 
sensed? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Correct Chair. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 81 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of you not being wanted. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And now it was like maybe not just you but nobody 
from Treasury? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But maybe for what it’s worth where you read what he 
wrote as saying no treasury it seems no and then an exclamation mark 
and then treasury to attend but you under it to stay no treasury to 
attend? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    Correct Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, and then in regard to the three names which are 
written by hand that you mentioned it looks like there seems there’s a 
question mark against each of those three names, what appears to be 
Gary and then question mark Vikas question mark Eric question mark, 
is that right? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but you could identify all of those people and 
you say they were not people from Treasury? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    Correct Chair 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you say the error there suggests that they were 
20 
to attend that same meeting where it is said no treasury to attend? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    And do you recall whether you were ever 
invited to this meeting? 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 82 of 184 
 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Only at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   On the same document, on page 7 at the 
bottom right corner what does the date and time signify? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   It says 2014-08-12, so it’s 
printed on the 12 t h of August 2014 at 2:48 pm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry have you moved from page 78? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    No Chair we are still on page 78 at the 
bottom right corner of the diary, Ms Mathane was giving as to what the 
date and time signify. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you just wanted her to confirm the date that 
appears there. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    Indeed so Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   And on the left side corner of that document 
what appears there, still on 78? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   On the left hand corner it’s the 
GCFO’s name, Mr Anoj Singh and it says Corporate Johannesburg, 
20 
Corporate is the  Head Office Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    Yes now from paragraph 52 to 54 of your 
statement you speak of events that took place between January and 
February 2014, what happened during this period? 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 83 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry before that, let’s just before we move away 
from page 78 do you have an understanding as to – for whose benefit 
these notes were made here, in other words as you understand it was it 
just notes that Mr Singh may have made just for himself, or was the 
position that maybe somebody would be given this and that person, it 
was important for that person to know that no treasury should be 
invited to the particular meeting. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Chair I believe it was 
instructions for his office or notes for his office to activate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hmm, okay, thank you. 
10 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Thank you Chair. From paragraph 52 to 54 of 
your statement you deal with events that took place in January to 
February 2014, what happened then? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Chair you will recall that in 
January 2014 that’s the time when the planning around the negotiations 
started, and therefore it was the time for negotiating the preferred 
bidders and for a contract of this nature market practice is that we are 
expected to pay an advance payment so we were working on the 
assumption that we will require – we will need to make available funds 
for deposit R4.2billion for the 1064 plus an additional R600million for 
20 
the 100 plus 60.  We now know that at that point in time Chair the 1064 
actually became 1224 because it was the 1064 plus the 60 GE and 100 
CSR locomotives and the total estimated contract at that point in time 
was 48billion.  We were therefore working on the assumption that we 
need to make available 4.8billion for a deposit for all the locomotives.   
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 84 of 184 
 
 
Chair we have attached Annexure MM8 ...(intervention)  
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    Before we go to Annexure MM8 can you 
please go to EXHIBIT BB10B, which is your supplementary statement 
bundle and can you turn to page 2 of your statement.  At paragraph 7 
appears another amendment you seek to make particularly at 7.1, can 
you please speak to 7.1? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    Thank you Chair.  On 
paragraph 52, line – the second line, there is a number there that the 
deposit required for the full contract is projected to be around 
R48billion, we would like to amend that, the R48billion refers to the 
10 
total estimated contract at that point in time and the deposit the correct 
number is R4.8. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Thank you, and at paragraph 52 where you 
make reference to deposit are we to understand this to be advanced 
payments? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Correct. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    Payable by Transnet? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    Correct Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   You were then referring the Chair to 
Annexure MM8 and that would be at page 80 of EXHIBIT BB10A. 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Correct Chair, Chair this is a 
summary of the expected total costs of the 1224 locomotives, the 
expected deposit and again I received this note from Mr Anoj Singh, as 
you can see at the top there there’s my name Mathane and my 
colleague Sello, Sello was the GM responsible for reporting, and in this 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 85 of 184 
 
Powerpoint presentation Mr Singh has made a number of notes, the 
first one is next to the post-mitigation at the far right, he has written 
“cash flow confirm”, so meaning that I need to confirm that the cash 
flows are available or they are being factored into the cash flow 
planning, and the second one under budget FY14 he has written notes 
there to say that impact on the AB ratio.   I would have highlighted 
earlier on that we closely monitored our liquidity situation and we had 
what you call the AB ratio which is an (indistinct) to user’s ratio and at 
any point in time for a ruling 12 month we must achieve at least a 1.2 
times so here he was merely suggesting that we must run the impact of 
10 
these cash flows on the AB ratio, and the third point is the accounting 
opinion, CAPEX and regulation and this is matters that will be in the 
domain of Ms Sello Tsukudu, so hence I have written ST there in green, 
that’s my handwriting Chair in green and the two up there it’s MM, 
that’s for me. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   And at the bottom right corner just next to 
the word page 3 there appears a date there, what is that date and what 
does it signify? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    Chair this is signed by Mr 
Singh, it is  his signature, and it is dated the 20 t h of February 2014, so 
20 
on the 20 t h of February of 2014 the 1064 locomotives were estimated to 
be R41.9billion, and we ...(intervention)  
ADV REFILOE:  Pardon me, what was the estimated advance payments 
payable by Transnet? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The estimated advance payment 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 86 of 184 
 
was R4.2billion and for the entire 1224 it was R4.8billion. 
ADV REFILOE:  Was it R4.2billion? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  R4.2billion for the 1064, but if 
we add the additional 100 and additional 60 the 4.2 increases to 
R4.8billion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that information still at page 80? 
ADV REFILOE:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the 4.2 you’re talking about is that the one on the 
third column from the left, alongside 1064 locomotives? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because at the top there under that column it says 
Rand millions. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair, the 4200 you will add 
six zeros and it will billions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, but doesn’t that heading mislead, a person who 
reads and you must remember I am not a finance person and I am not a 
figures person, a numbers person, I though it you have got Rand 
millions there at the top as you have there I thought any figure that 
says 4200 I would I would say 4.200million because of the millions on 
the heading, is it not misleading? 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  No Chair it’s correct, if it was 
billion it will say billion on top and it will only 4.2 without the other two 
zeros, so now in this instance when it says rand millions it says add 
three zeros at the end. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that’s something that only finance people will 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 87 of 184 
 
know?  But that’s how I should read it? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With all the numbers that I see here. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair, if it’s written millions 
you add six zeros, you must write six zeros and then you will get the 
correct number. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Refiloe you didn’t get confused, I am the only one 
who got confused? 
ADV REFILOE:  No Chair, I managed to follow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know these things. 
10 
ADV REFILOE:  Well from I suppose the benefit of consultation,  
however if we can take it item by item perhaps it might become clearer 
to the Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry? 
ADV REFILOE:  Perhaps if we take it item by item it might become 
clearer to the Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay now that’s alright, but I think I will make a 
note for myself because I might forget the rule that the witness is 
telling me. 
ADV REFILOE:  Thank you Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, so ... 
ADV REFILOE:  Ms Mathane still on page 80 on the far right of the 
document is the heading entitled description, is that correct?  On the 
left, pardon me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry just to – I’m just making a note for myself, 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 88 of 184 
 
you said one must add three zeros? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Six, it’s millions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So now ...(intervention)  
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So 230 Chair you write six 
zeros, so you can write six zeros and you will see now it’s 230million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay, thank you.  Okay, thank you. 
ADV REFILOE:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Mathane on page 80 at the left 
side of that page the first heading that appears in the first column is 
description is that correct? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
10 
ADV REFILOE:  And immediately thereafter appears latest estimate 
pre-mitigation and what follows is mitigation, correct? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct. 
ADV REFILOE:  Then there is a breakdown of firstly the estimated total 
cost and as you move further towards the right the 10% deposits is that 
correct? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct. 
ADV REFILOE:  And for the first class of locomotives is the 60 class 43 
locomotives is that correct? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
20 
ADV REFILOE:  And the estimated total cost is just over 2.3billion? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
ADV REFILOE:  And the anticipated deposit or advance payment is 
2.3billion, 230million. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 89 of 184 
 
ADV REFILOE:  Pardon me, I am having the same issue as the Chair 
had.  And after the 60 class locomotives is the 100 class locomotives, 
correct? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
ADV REFILOE:  That ETC is – to avoid making mistakes the amount is 
3871, what does it translate to? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  R3.8billion. 
ADV REFILOE:  And the deposit? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  R387million, that is 10%. 
ADV REFILOE:  Yes, and ...(intervention)  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me just say something and maybe you have just 
said this that may help you, there under 3871 is another way of saying 
that it’s 3 871 million and that translates to three comma whatever 
billion? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  3871 or another way Chair would 
just have been to round off and just said 3.8billion, which is simpler. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, I understand that, I understand that, but I 
thought 3,871billion might also be three thousand eight hundred and 
seventy one million. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Oh even with this number Chair 
20 
you still add six zeros. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes, okay, alright, thank you. 
ADV REFILOE:  Thank you Chair, and lastly on that ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m getting a lot of crash courses from witnesses.  
Yes? 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 90 of 184 
 
ADV REFILOE:  Thank you Chair, immediately below that is the 1064 
locomotives, and the ETC there is written as 41969 and what does that 
translate to? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It’s fourteen, we can round it off 
and 42billion Chair. 
ADV REFILOE:  And the 10% deposit? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It’s R4.2billion. 
ADV REFILOE:  And the total of the three classes of the locomotives 
under the estimated total cost would be 48billion? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The total cost correct Chair. 
10 
ADV REFILOE:  And the total cost of the deposit .... 
(recording faulty) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is there something that (indistinct).  Let’s just give 
the technicians a few minutes to see if they can stop it.  Okay, I think 
we are five minutes away from taking the lunch break, we should take 
the lunch break and hopefully it will be sorted out. 
ADV REFILOE:  As it pleases Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, we will take the lunch adjournment.  Oh, it 
doesn’t want us to take the lunch, so do you want to use the next few 
minutes. 
20 
ADV REFILOE:  As it pleases you Chair, we may proceed.  Ms Mathane 
you were also just going to clarify that the total 10% deposit or 
advance payments would be R4.8billion, is that correct? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
ADV REFILOE:  Now was this amount of the R4.8billion reflected in any 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 91 of 184 
 
documents in Transnet’s preparation or budgeting per se? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair in anticipation of the 
deposit required we included the R4.8billion in our cash planning cycle, 
as reflected in Annexure MM9. 
ADV REFILOE:  And MM9 would appear at page 82 of the bundle?  Is 
that the document to which you refer? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Correct Chair.   
ADV REFILOE:  And what ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say 82? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  82 Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair Annexure MM9 is 
the cash forecast for as at the 18 t h of February 2014 and you can see 
in row, the row that starts with 24 t h of March to 31 March there’s a big 
lump sum there under CAPEX. 
ADV REFILOE:  So if I’m following this would be under the finance, 
what appears to be the financial year 13/14 and that would be the first 
column on the left side of that table. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair and column number 
five is what is written CAPEX and there’s a big outlay there of capital 
20 
5.2. 
ADV REFILOE:  5.2 what? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  5.2billion Chair.  Chair this is 
important for us to do so that we can see I mean some of the cash 
flows though they were minor happened the first week of April, or they 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 92 of 184 
 
were scheduled to happen the first week of April hence the 303 CAPEX 
outlay during the first week of April up to the 6 t h of April, so Chair once 
we have done these numbers you will see that before the big outlay of 
R5.3billion the last week of March we were all green or black, all the 
black and after that then our cash becomes red, so once we have 
identified in actual we are now moving into the red at the bottom of the 
page we have a number of possibilities that will turn this red again into 
black, so we play around with numbers on a continuous basis to make 
sure that when the time comes for a big outlay it does not 
inconvenience  us in any form or shape. 
10 
ADV REFILOE:  Yes, now in paragraph 54 of your statement you speak 
to events that took place in March 2014, relative to the advance 
payments.  Please take the Chair through this. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So Chair up to ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  That’s paragraph 54 of her statement? 
ADV REFILOE:  Yes Chair, my apologies, paragraph 54 of the 
statement. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So Chair up to the end of 
February ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well do you want her to start, I see we are at one 
20 
already?  Maybe let’s continue after lunch. 
ADV REFILOE:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We will take – it is one o’clock we will take the lunch 
adjournment and we will resume at two o’clock.   
 
We adjourn. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 93 of 184 
 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay please proceed. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Chair before we proceed we need to beg your 
indulgence to sit until possibly five o’clock to try and finish Makgatho’s 
evidence today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay that is fine.  Zonika.  Yes we will sit until 
five.  I assume the witness is available to be here until five.  Ja okay 
10 
thank you. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair.  Pardon me Chair.  Pardon 
me Chair.  Chair there has been a request to take a short adjournment 
between quarter four and four. 
CHAIRPERSON:    That is fine. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And not the usual half past three. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that for comfort? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  The usual break that we usually take Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No it is fine.   
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you let us proceed then. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you.  Ma’am before the short 
adjournment we were at paragraph 54 of your statement where you 
were about to deal with the advance payment that had been paid to – 
been paid by Transnet and just before that you had given evidence that 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 94 of 184 
 
the anticipated advanced payment at 10% would have been around 4.8 
billion and from paragraph 54 you speak of events relative to March 
2014 and the actual deposit for advanced payment that was made.  Can 
you take the Chair through these please? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Thank you Chair.  As I have 
indicated before… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry. Zonika.  Yes thank you. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair.  You may proceed. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Thank you Chair.  As I had 
indicated before up until the end of February we were working on the 
10 
assumption that the deposit required which is the advanced payment for 
the 1064 and the 100 plus the 60G E locomotives was going to total 
R4.8 billion.  We then around March 2014 we were informed I cannot 
remember the exact date Chair but we were informed that the deposit 
that is required is no longer 4.8 billion but it is actually 7.9 billion 
excluding VAT which when we include VAT it went up to 8.4 billion.  It 
then meant that within a period of two to three weeks we needed to 
make sure that the organisation it is able to pay out that money that 
was not anticipated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The 4.8 was exclusive of VAT or inclusive? 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You cannot remember? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I cannot remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO: Chair I cannot remember ja.   
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 95 of 184 
 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And do you know in percentage terms what 
the increase in the deposit was for the respective – for the 4 bidders 
that you have mentioned? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Between the two amounts Chair 
that is equivalent of like doubling from 4.8 billion to 8.4 billion Chair.  It 
is almost double.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well in percentage terms that is about 100% or more? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Slightly under 100% Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Slightly under – ja – probably 
10 
90%. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Perhaps let me ask the question differently.  
There are three classes of locomotives concerned to which you have 
given evidence on the advance payments that would have been 
payable.  And you say that there was an increase of about 2 8.4 billion 
including VAT, is that correct? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Oh now we are going point by 
point right? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Sorry Chair if I may go back to 
20 
the previous attachment? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So I am now – so it is MM10 
page 80.   
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 96 of 184 
 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay.  Counsel is it okay if when 
I am answering your question I refer to MM10 page 80 together with 
paragraph 58 the table on paragraph 58 so that I can cross-reference? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Thank you Chair. On the 20 April 
2014 we had assumed that for the 60 locomotives the deposit required 
is 230 million.  It then turned out later on that the actual deposit 
required is 1.26 billion excluding VAT.  And Chair this represented 30% 
of the actual contract price.  You will remember that on the 20 February 
this – the total estimated cost for the 60 locomotives was estimated to 
10 
be 2.3 billion.  We now get to the – sorry Chair I think I am – it was 
estimated to be 2.3 billion and the deposit was estimated to be 230 
million.  By the time of contract signature the said contract was now 
reduced at 1.7 billion but the deposit was increased to 1.26 billion 
excluding VAT.  This represented 70% of the total price which was paid 
as an advance payment.  And we got to the 100 locomotives on the 20 
February it was estimated to be 3.8 billion and the deposit was 
assumed to be 387 taking 10%.  And now by contract signature the 
contract price had gone up from 3.8 to 4.4 billion and the deposit was 
now 1.32 billion excluding VAT which represented 30% of the contract 
20 
price.  For the 1064 we started off at 43 billion it now went up to 49 
billion excluding VAT and the deposit went to 4.8 billion which 
represented about 9.74 % as an advance payment.   
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  So insofar as what would ordinarily be paid 
as an advance payment being in the region of about 10% of the 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 97 of 184 
 
contract value you are saying that for the 60 GE locomotives 70% was 
paid.  For the 100 CSR locomotives 30% was paid and for the 1064 
locomotives 9.74% was paid? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And do you know why there was an increase 
in this advance payment? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair I would not know as I was 
not party to the negotiations so I do not know the rationale behind the 
increase.   
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  You then deal from paragraph 55 with the 
10 
contract signing stage.  Were you involved in this process? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair as per normal or as per 
procedure once the negotiating team has completed the negotiations 
and the supplier contract has been drafted and is now in agreed form 
normal procedure is that the divisions or the departments will be 
required to sign off as per clause 5.50 – 5.511 of the Delegation of 
Authority wherein it says that before the Group CFO can sign on the 
contract he can only sign after Group Tax, Group Legal, Group Treasury 
and Group Reporting have signed off.  So Chair in this instance Mr 
Danny Smit who was the Deputy Treasurer Middle Office brought me 
20 
the final draft and politely asked me to sign.  And Chair I responded by 
saying that I am not able to sign off your contract that I was not party 
to the negotiations because I was reluctant to sign off something that I 
was not privy to.  So I responded and said that I cannot provide green 
light from a treasury perspective and suggested that he ask Anoj to 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 98 of 184 
 
sign off.  So that is where I left it Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Singh.  Yes okay alright. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Sorry Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes what did he say Mr Smit to – Danny Smit in 
response? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair Mr Smit agreed with me 
that under the circumstances it will be better if the Group CFO signs off 
and we left it at that.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Okay that was Mr Smit agreeing? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And would you know if there was any member 
of the treasury department that signed off on this contract? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair I do not know if any of my 
deputy’s signed it off.  I had assumed that it was not signed off from a 
treasury perspective and if was indeed signed off it would have been Mr 
Smit but as far as I know my assumption is that it was signed off by Mr 
Singh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would somebody that fell under you have been able 
to sign off or would they have known that it was your signature that 
20 
would be required and that before they could sign off they would have 
to check with you whether it was your wish that they should sign rather 
than you? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair normal procedure was that 
if any of the deputies were involved they will sign off and the treasurer 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 99 of 184 
 
as well will also sign off.  So if it was just one person from treasury it 
will be that particular individual plus the treasurer before it goes to the 
GCFO. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the treasurer’s signature was required to be there 
irrespective of who else within treasury may have signed? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you.  From paragraph 60 of your 
statement you deal with what you have entitled Unsolicited Proposals 
from Regiments and from paragraph 61 you deal with the first 
10 
unsolicited proposal.  What was the nature of the proposal made to 
Transnet? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Thank you Chair.  In this section 
Chair I would like to deal with a number of unsolicited proposals and as 
counsel has indicated I will start off with the first unsolicited proposal 
from Regiments which is the advisory services for the 1064 locomotive 
transaction. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes just before that just to round off the item we were 
discussing a minute ago.  The absence of your signature in a contract 
that required your signature as treasurer what would be its effect on its 
20 
regularity and legality, do you know?  In other words would it be 
considered regular for a contract that needed to have your signature 
among the signatures if it did not have that signature but did 
nevertheless have Mr Anoj Singh’s signature as GECFO? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair I would not be able to 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 100 of 184 
 
respond directly because we have never had an instance where  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Where such an occurrence 
happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And the only thing that I know 
for sure is that in the DOA it is stipulated that 
CHAIRPERSON:  YEs. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  That there are certain 
signatories that are required. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Whether it will render  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  That contract irregular. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That you do not… 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Or not I do not know.  I suppose 
the regularity or the irregularity of that 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Will happen according to the 
Transnet’s procurement policy. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  But as far as I know I do not 
think so Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes but what it would mean is that … 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It would imply that the 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 101 of 184 
 
necessary checks and balances for a treasury perspective are not 
there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. It would mean that the agreement is not in 
accordance with the delegations of authority that you are talking about? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And the guidelines Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the guidelines. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay alright.  You want to continue with 
unsolicited bids. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair you were about to tell the 
10 
Chair about the first unsolicited proposal received from Regiments. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair at the beginning of 
January 2014 I received and that was around the same time that the 
teams being assembled to negotiate – to form part of the negotiating 
team.  I received a proposal from Regiments dated the 9 January 2014 
wherein they were proposing to act as our advisor for the 1064 
locomotives.  Chair I have – we have attached MM10 which is the 
proposal that they submitted. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  MM10 would be at page 84 of the bundle.  At 
page – before you move onto the following pages at page 84 of that 
20 
proposal what is the – what is the date of the proposal as indicated at 
page 84? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The date is the 9 January 2014 
and the title of the document is Transnet Terms of Reference for Capital 
Raising 
and 
Risk 
Management 
Transaction 
Advisory 
for 
1064 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 102 of 184 
 
Locomotive Procurement.  And it is on a letterhead of Regiments 
Capital. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes and if we turn to page 86 of the bundle.   
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Would those… 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it is still Exhibit BB10[a]? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes Chair.  If you turn to page 86 of that 
proposal or rather of the bundle.  Is that – would those be the service 
offerings that were offered by Regiments? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair.  The – page 86 has 
10 
about 10 points that identifies and outlines the ten areas that 
Regiments was proposing to give Transnet advice on.  The first one is 
the transaction advisory mandates [indistinct] in will deliver the optimal 
funding structure, funding cost, financial risk management for the 1064 
locomotive acquisition.  You will remember Chair when I started to give 
my evidence MM1 had an organogram is an organogram of the treasury 
structure and within that Chair the optimal funding structure and the 
funding cost falls within the structured finance team and we had five 
professionals under that.  And then the second point under the financial 
risk management solution… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I am sorry.  So what you have just dealt with 
you are dealing with… 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The first point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With the first point. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 103 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  At page 86? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Page 86. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay you say that kind of function the services 
that they wanted to render they fell under one of the units under – at 
Treasury? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The funding part was – is under 
structured finance the financial risk solution it is under the risk 
management in terms of development of strategy and in terms of 
10 
execution it falls under front office. So Chair for this part I just felt that 
we were sufficiently  
CHAIRPERSON:  Capacitated. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Capacitated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And on the second part it says 
‘a detailed evaluation of the economic social and sustainability impact 
of the acquisition will provide funding structure advantages and cost 
advantages.’  So I was like this Chair the impact and the sustainability 
it is covered by the business when they do the business case.  And 
20 
before any project can go out on tender it would have gone through the 
structures like your investment forum.  It will be presented at the 
investment forum, at K [indistinct] and board depending on the amount 
and all of these things would have been ticked out.  And in actual fact 
these are business issues Chair. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 104 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So… 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did not need outside [indistinct] for this? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes the TFR and it would; have 
been by the TFR … 
 CHAIRPERSON:  Already. 
MS 
MATHANE 
EVELINE 
MAKGATHO: 
 
Already 
and 
collateral 
assessment that is number 3 now.  Collateral assessment down to the 
component level Chair when the OEM’s procure or when the OEM’s 
manufacture there are different parts for a specific item.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And they can decide – if it is an 
American company for instance they can decide to source it locally in 
America or they can employ what they call a global sourcing strategy.  
In which case they can go out on an open tender buy some from 
Germany and so forth and so forth.  And Chair this is a part that only 
an OEM that knows the nuts and bolts in that particular item will tell us 
that no in actual fact of origin for this is so – I just did not understand 
that for a table like this is Regiments going to take all the screws and 
say this one is from China, this one is from – I mean it can only be 
20 
done by an OEM and in that tender document Chair we stated clearly 
that by accepting or by bidding you are accepting certain administrative 
work that comes with it and we actually referring to the country of 
origin assessment.  So it is an OEM component Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that where you said earlier on you would make it a 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 105 of 184 
 
part of the tender of the terms of the tender that they undertook to 
assist you? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair as part of the 
guidelines. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is what you were talking about. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And therefore whilst we have 
established then we will know which ECA is more appropriate.  Whether 
is it a German ECA?  Is it a China CCA or whatever Chair.  So again it 
10 
is out of the scope of anyone.  It is an OEM matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is 3 – that is number 3. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  That is number 3.  And number 4 
the application of a best practice risk management framework to the 
transaction that will ensure that all relevant risk are identified, 
quantified and tracked.  Chair earlier on we went through annexure 
MM24 which I said it is the bible of treasury.  The financial risk 
management framework which had just been enhanced to include all of 
this so again we had a team that is more than capable. Again Chair for 
point 4 there was no need.  Number 5 the Optimal Risk Management 
20 
Solution embedded in the acquisition agreement funding structure and 
or risk overlay.  Again Chair it is a risk management function.  It is a 
funding function.  Together with point number 6 which is a 
comprehensive evaluation of all potential funding sources.  Chair once 
we have identified that we need a certain amount of funds.  We will 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 106 of 184 
 
normally go out to market and request indications.  Then the team will 
sit down and evaluate.  Chair this is something that was done with our 
eyes closed.   
CHAIRPERSON:  That is item number 4? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Item number 6. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.   
 MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is evaluation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is evaluation of potential 
sources. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  4 and 5 were also covered? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  4 and 5 are part of the risk 
function and then… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you are… 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And then the funding function. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Treasury was covered on that. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay.  And number 7 it is project 
management Chair.  It does not fall within treasury but the business 
units together with what we call Transnet Capital Projects they are the 
ones who provide project management services Chair.  We do not 
20 
provide project management. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Transnet was covered?  Transnet was covered in 
terms of that? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Transnet as an organisation is 
covered. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 107 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is an organisation yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And number 8 Chair it says 
success will be assured with appropriate resources of okay – it is just a 
programme management thing.  And number 9 Chair is the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  So 8 is not something they were going to do? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is something that they will do.  
It says impact studies, there is somewhere when they – where they 
outline the impact studies.  They are even talking about… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The carbon emission studies and 
10 
so forth and so forth Chair.  This is covered in some form or shape in 
either the business case development by the TFR team or the treasury 
team. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And number 9 it is a proposed 
timeline of 12 months and number 10 it is their fee structure.  Chair 
their fee structure is aligned – it is outlined on page  
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  That would be on page 96. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  96.  And in this instance Chair 
they are proposing a R1 million retainer per month for a period of 12 
20 
months which is R12 million.  And they are also proposing a 20% 
performance fee which will be a fee that – a 20% fee that they will 
generate if they deliver interest savings on new funding.  
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes so in light of the service offerings that 
you have just gone through as [indistinct] the proposed fee by 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 108 of 184 
 
Regiments what was your overall impression of the value add of the 
proposed services? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  My overall impression was that 
the proposal was not too clear to me what their real value add is given 
the human resources, the system resources and the process resources 
that we had within Group Treasury environment.  So I had a meeting 
with Mr Nevin Pillay of Regiments wherein we discussed the proposal.  
I then suggested that he should revise the proposal because I just 
needed to get clarity of what cost how much.  So I needed him to align 
the deliverables with a budget and the timeline.  And I then went back 
10 
and reported my engagement with Regiments to my boss, the GCFO 
and I told him that we had a meeting, I have suggested you know A, B, 
C, D and I am just waiting for Regiments to revise their proposal and I 
will see if it is something that we really need.  Chair he responded with 
annoyance and said that he does not even understand why I should 
worry myself about the terms of reference, about the timelines, about 
the budget.  And in actual fact he further on went to say that in actual 
fact they are not my advisors they are his advisors advising him 
through me.  So Chair it is at that point that I followed his statement 
that they are his advisors advising him through me.  So I followed with 
20 
a statement that I believe we have gone through on page – in annexure 
MM5 wherein I was requesting clarity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that email? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes it is an email Chair.  It is 
MM5. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 109 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it where you said you discussed Regiments issues? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Later, later. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja later. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Where I was seeking clarity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  We have gone through that 
email.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair I do not remember him 
responding and providing clarity but I do know that later on I realised 
10 
that in actual fact Regiments was appointed but I got to know that after 
the fact.  I think around 31 January Regiments was appointed as the 
transactional advisor. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now I thought you – your comments on that document 
at page 86 which tells us what services they wanted to provide - that is 
Regiments – I thought your comments suggested that you were 
satisfied that none of the services they were seeking to provide to 
Transnet were really needed by Transnet. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that – that was your position? 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I am wondering why you did not say to – I forget 
the name of the person from Regiments that you met with why you did 
not say no we are covered - we have got – we do not need any 
assistance in regard to all these services you want to provide.  We – 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 110 of 184 
 
we have people who can do this. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair I did mention that but what 
I also wanted to do was that I wanted him to come up with a come up 
with a core structure for each of these elements and I can say no, no, 
no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay and in your discussion with Mr Singh you did 
not articulate that point that you did not think we need – Transnet 
needed these services that Regiments was offered.  You – you 
mentioned what - that you asked a representative of Regiments to 
revise the proposal and then he responded to you with annoyances you 
10 
have said. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair I did allude to the fact 
that we had internal capacity.  You may not know that over a period of 
time I have had a number of engagements and – and disagreements 
with – with Mr Singh around the role of Regiments in other various 
forms Chair.  So … 
CHAIRPERSON:  So by this time the two of you had had a number of 
disagreements around Regiments? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So – so you – you had a full idea that most of 
20 
the time the two of you were not able to agree on many things relating 
to Regiments? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair and – and here I 
merely wanted an objective way of saying you see this one cost this 
much and … 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 111 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  There is no need. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  We can do that internally and 
this one so much and so on … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And so forth. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but I take it off course that he being the person 
to whom you reported as Group Treasurer was as much aware of 
Treasury’s capacity as you were aware? 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  He was Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So in effect he – he did not need advice.  He 
would know that - what capacity there was within Treasury? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I believe so Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay alright. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair and do you know how much 
was paid to Regiments? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  For that amount of money for – 
for this project this specific terms of reference I do not know but Chair 
at that particular point in time it was around the time when we – we 
20 
also enhancing our cash management processes.  So Chair as part of 
that we are expecting the divisions to achieve a certain level of 
accuracy and therefore Chair we also cascading a performance 
management system of some sort because remember that in the 
Treasury performance contract cash forecasting and – and accuracy 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 112 of 184 
 
thereof is part of our – of the KPIs including the cost of debt and so 
forth and there was an impact that is coming through from the divisions 
and – and we needed a way of making them aware that this is costly 
and you can only do that if you performance contract it.  So we had 
started this – this cash management project and as the colleagues 
realised that they are missing their targets they slowly started coming 
out either to me directly or to my other team members who were 
responsible for cash highlight the reasons why they are not meeting 
their – their projections and one common denominator Chair was that 
more often than not invoices would come to their table with a request to 
10 
process them urgently.  Our normal payment Chair was around 30 days 
except for your small enterprises but generally it was around 30 days.  
So Chair I then asked where – you know – for what invoices are these 
payments for and I was then told that they are mainly for McKinsey and 
for Regiments and I then requested a sub printout – you know – so that 
I can assess what is happening because we were – we were seeing that 
the projections are not met but we could not quite get into the source of 
the problem and Chair MM11 … 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  That would be at page 98 of the bundle 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  MM11 Chair is a copy of the sub 
20 
printout.  So Chair by – by then I was not aware at the extent of 
Regiments involvement across the group and I was not even aware that 
they were receiving so much payments from Transnet.  Just at the look 
of – of - you know – page – page 98 you will see the last line there it is 
107 million.  Just between May 2013 to 31 March 2014 Regiments 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 113 of 184 
 
already was paid R107 million for a number of – of projects that have 
been involved with on – and further on between 1 April and 
16 July 2014 they were paid – they were paid a further R211 million 
Chair.  That is on page MM – MM99.  You will see that Chair that there 
are handwritten sums there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I did this around July 2014 
Chair.  This is my handwriting and … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And the other invoices Chair 
10 
that I have just included there they include Regiments –they include 
McKinsey because these two are just for Regiments – the 211 and 107.  
So I added McKinsey and Chair I was shocked to know that within a 
short – within a short period of time over 600/700 million was paid to 
Regiments and McKinsey for different projects basically.  It ranged from 
the Pension Fund to the advisory services for Maputo Corridor, for the 
locomotives, for TCP and some are just written as – as professional 
services.  So Chair I did not know that they were so entrenched in the 
business and just by going through the payment run I was actually 
shocked beyond words and Chair I was actually – what I could not 
20 
really comprehend is that Mr Singh is the GCFO.  He is the custodian of 
the policies.  He is the custodian of the resources of the organisation 
and he knows that we have embarked on this cash management 
enhancement and he knows that it is costly to budget and then you end 
up having idle cash or you do not budget because people – you know – 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 114 of 184 
 
did not plan appropriately and you end up having to draw on your 
overdraft which is expensive.  He knows that either side of the – of the 
fence is expensive somehow and he knows the importance of cash 
forecasting and what shocked me Chair was that in all of these invoices 
that I was told that they require a few days processing timeline were all 
at the instruction of Mr Singh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You said that you found that Regiments had been paid 
about 700 million over a short of period time (intervenes). 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And McKinsey. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And McKinsey – oh the two of them? 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And McKinsey. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That would have been over how many months more or 
less roughly? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Maybe 15 months. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Ja, around 15 months. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you.  If you can turn to page 99 where 
20 
you state to have written those notes that appear on page 99.  The 
amounts there that you have written out do those denote in millions or 
billions? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Millions Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And can you just confirm from the left side of 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 115 of 184 
 
the document to the right side the amounts that you have broken down 
until you got to your total amounts there? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay Chair.  The first one is on 
the previous page – 107 - and then it is 211 here.  So that is 
(indistinct). 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  107 million. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Million. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Appears at page 98? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  That is on page 98 and then … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the typed one.  Is that the typed number that 
10 
you are talking about? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes on page 98? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is a sub printout Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is a sub – it is a system 
printout. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay right. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So that would have been around 
320 for Regiments and in addition … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So then – I am sorry.  So that 107.7 million roughly … 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then page 99, yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Is 211. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  That is (intervenes). 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 116 of 184 
 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And Chair in addition to these 
payments I was then told that there are other invoices.  You will see it 
is 75, 22, 54 either to McKinsey or Regiments.  So in my calculations – 
I mean – I did a quick calculation at that point in time and I was like 
really that is like 600 to 700 million that has been paid within a short - 
you know – period of time to these two institutions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So 75.0 or 75.0 million and so on and so on? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes it is all millions Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So Chair in a – in a way Chair 
10 
the colleagues that were responsible for payments … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Before you do that we just dealt with – 
with the column to – on the left of where – where you wrote and then 
you have got another column on the other hand with 600 – with a total 
of 616 million.  Is the column on the right hand just a continuation of 
the column on the left or is it two separate columns in terms of the 
amounts? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is – it is two separate columns 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO: 
 
Because 
I ended up just 
focusing on this one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  On the one that adds up to R616 
million. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 117 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, but otherwise that is R616.85 million and then 
there is 363.19 million? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair.  So … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So the total at that point in time 
was 616 million.  So … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh 616.8 million was a total that included the 363.19 
million? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair, yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So Chair what the colleagues 
were – were basically saying Chair and we saw that as it filtered 
through to the accuracy level we started seeing the cash accuracy level 
of 78 percent and normally we would see it at above 90 percent.  
Basically what the colleagues were saying is that yes we understand 
the rationale behind the cash management enhancement.  We believe 
in that but we have a problem.  The boss is the one who is instructing 
us.  So we do not want to be penalised for that. 
20 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And can you turn to page 100 of the bundle?  
What is that document that appears on that page? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Oh this is just a printout of the – 
of Regiments Standard Bank Account details.  This is the – the account 
that the monies were paid into. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 118 of 184 
 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes.  Now at paragraph 68 of your statement 
you deal with the second unsolicited proposal received from Regiments. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am – I am sorry Ms Molefe.  Page 100 you say that 
– that is the account into which payments were made? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The 107 million … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  On page 98 and the 211 on page 
99 and any other … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  That – that came after.  So this 
10 
is their Standard Bank Account. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  This was Regiments … 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Account? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is separated from McKinsey? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  This is just Regiments. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Makgatho from 
20 
paragraph 68 of your statement you then deal with the second 
unsolicited proposal received from Regiments.  Can you take the Chair 
through the nature of this proposal received from Regiments? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay Chair.  I will do so.  The 
second unsolicited proposal relates to the R5 billion loan proposal.  
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 119 of 184 
 
Chair my concerns around Regiments started around 2013 and this 
proposal landed on my desk around the third quarter 2013.  I cannot 
remember the exact time.  Chair as you will know that Transnet has a 
very strong relationship with a number of banks or all of them in actual 
fact and in each and every institution we have what you call a 
Relationship Manager who is a point of contact for us.  So one day I 
received a call from Nedbank represented by Mr Masotsha Mngadi 
asking me if Transnet is looking for money.  So Chair I did not – I was 
taken aback a little but because if Transnet was looking for money I 
was the one who was supposed to know that.  So I was like I do not 
10 
know and in actual fact we are okay.  We do not need money right now 
and his response was that that is what he thought because I have not 
said anything.  I mean we – we had an open line with banks Chair.  I 
mean we call them anytime we - we needed to and he told me that 
Regiments was in the market looking for money on behalf of Transnet 
and he mentioned a number of around R9 billion.  He said that he 
understands that Nedbank is looking for money.  So I asked him how 
does he know.  He says that he knows because one of his colleagues – 
Moss Brickman – is working with Regiments on this.  So Chair it was 
around Thursday or Friday but it was towards the end of the week.  So 
20 
we left it at that.  I was like we do not need money.  We are cash flush 
right now and if I – if we needed money Chair there is a process that 
we followed.  I will then recommend that we go out on tender and we go 
to all the financial institutions.  We will get bids or indications and we 
will choose – you know – whomever is providing us good terms and if it 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 120 of 184 
 
was something urgent – urgent we had access to short term facilities at 
the notice of 24 hours and at that particular point in time I think we 
were over 10 billion – you know - that was available because we were 
building towards having 15 billion of facilities.  So I think at that point 
we had about 10 or 13.  So we were not short of cash and we were not 
short of options.  So we left it at that and Chair on Monday morning 
immediately after the weekend following Mr Mngadi’s call I then 
received a proposal in hard copy from Mr Singh.  The proposal was for 
a R5 billion facility.  The lender was to be Nedbank and what – what 
was fun with the structure Chair is that it was a plain vanilla structure.  
10 
It is a simple loan.  We call it plain vanilla but there was an in between 
structure which meant that Transnet would pay interest and capital into 
the in between structure and the in between structure will then remit 
funds to Nedbank and what was even more alarming for me Chair is 
that the interest rate that this proposal was quoting was much over 
where Transnet will raise an equivalent five year.  In this instance 
Chair I did my sums quickly and the additional interest payment that 
Transnet would have to pay per annum was 150 million and over a five 
year period that would have been a capital leakage of about 750 
million.  I then went back to Mr Singh and said to him that I have done 
20 
my analysis and I do not recommend the structure because it is very 
expensive and we can get funds directly without having to pay this 
premium.  He told me that I should go back and do a recommendation 
same day because the GCE – Mr Molefe – wanted that recommendation 
same day.  Chair we have never reviewed a financing proposal over one 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 121 of 184 
 
day Chair.  We – we take our time.  We analyse and we assess and 
only after we have satisfied ourselves that indeed this is a good 
transaction for the organisation then we will proceed.  So I was – I was 
actually surprised that I would be expected to recommend a five billion 
facility with Nedbank via an in between structure - something similar to 
an SPV though the details were not clear.  Something similar … 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is an SPV? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  To an SPC or but there was 
something in between. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is an SPC? 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Special Purpose Company, sorry 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh SPC? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  SPC or SPV? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I thought you said XPC.  Special Purpose Company? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  You know these acronyms some people use 
them more often than others.  So – so you will just need to tell us some 
of them so that we understand what you are talking about. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Apologies Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  So – so you are saying you were 
expected to consider and make a recommendation of – on a R5 billion 
facility within a day? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Within a day that included a 
capital leakage of R150 million per annum over a five year period which 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 122 of 184 
 
if you add it all it is R750 million.  So now basically I was being asked 
to give away 750 million and do that within a day and he told me that it 
is – it is Mr Molefe who wanted this done urgently. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And were you told what – what the urgency was 
about? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  He did tell me what the urgency 
was all about. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  He was just like no do it do not 
ask question and whatever. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  And … 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So I was like okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And normally a transaction that would cost that much 
about how much time would you normally need in order to be able to 
consider properly and make a recommendation? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I accept that it might not be the same amount of time 
for every transaction but you might have an idea that – for example – it 
cannot take less than a week or something like that. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It cannot take a week because it 
20 
was obviously above my – my delegated authority. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It was also above the GCFOs 
delegated authority. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 123 of 184 
 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I think if I am correct Chair the 
GCEs delegated authority was up to 5 billion … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And anything over and above 
that was for Board – if I am not wrong Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I cannot remember but it was – 
it was definitely above me and him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So Chair it would need to be 
10 
properly assessed and … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  We will write our motivation … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO: 
 
And 
then 
we 
will 
seek 
appropriate approvals as per the delegated authority. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So Chair because he was telling 
me that it is an urgent request coming from Mr Molefe and he did not 
want to listen to my analysis that it is a waste of money … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  There is no need to be wasting 
money.  So I went straight to Mr Molefe because I really wanted to 
(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  You mean you did say to Mr Singh this is 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 124 of 184 
 
– this will be a waste of money or you are saying you knew he would 
not listen to that? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I told him that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You told him? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  That is a waste of money but he 
would … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, you did tell him. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Not listen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  He would not listen and he kept 
10 
on referring to Mr Molefe as wanting it done urgently.  So Chair I then 
decided that I will go to the GCE straight.  So I went to the GCE and I 
said Mr Molefe I understand that you want this proposal executed 
speedily.  Are you aware that 750 million is going to be stolen?  I was 
not shy with words Chair.  I just – you know- said it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The way I – I felt at that point 
and it is because the GCFO was so insisting that it has to be done such 
that (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you were quite clear that … 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And I was quite clear that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was … 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  That there is no need.  In actual 
fact we have a direct relationship with Nedbank.  If we needed money 
from Nedbank we can just do it directly … 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 125 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And I have never worked with – 
with a gentleman called Mr Moss Brickman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Who I know that he works very 
closely with Regiments.  He is employed at Nedbank in that department 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you were taking a clear view that signing this or 
recommending this would amount to facilitating theft? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja and then – and then you told you spoke to 
Mr Molefe about it? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair.  I went – I then went 
to Mr Molefe and – and he asked me to – to give him my analysis.  So I 
said basically this proposal if we recommend it – it means that we are 
recommending that Transnet pays over and above what is normal 150 
million.  I mean roughly it is like 3 percent more and that is 750 and I 
20 
was very direct Chair.  I was like Mr Molefe if I recommend this and you 
approve it are you aware that we are going to jail.  So Chair I was very 
direct because I mean I could just sense and feel that this is just … 
CHAIRPERSON:  It … 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Not warranted. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 126 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  You had had – you were close to having enough of all 
of this or not? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And he responded and said that 
really 750 million.  I was like yes sir it is 750 million and I am not going 
to write a recommendation that 750 million be stolen.  So I do not know 
if it is true that you have given out an instruction but I am telling you 
10 
right now if you execute this jail time is waiting for you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  This is how you put it? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  This is how I put it Chair.  I – I 
did not  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mince your words? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I was just straight Chair.  So he 
said eish Mathane you are right.  No do not worry.  I will handle this 
matter and Chair indeed I believe … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did he appear shocked? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I do not know Chair.  He is a 
smooth operator.  So you can never know when he is shocked or not 
shocked. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, okay.  Did he – you said you did tell him that you 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 127 of 184 
 
understood that he had given instructions that you look at this urgently.  
Did he deny having issued that instruction or did he not say anything 
about it? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair I do not remember giving 
him the chance to respond to the urgent instruction, all that I asked him 
was that is it true that you have given out an instruction that I must 
recommend for R750million to be stolen urgently and oh why, who, so 
we ended up not focusing on the instruction but focusing on the capital 
...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, on jail time, ja. 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   So Chair I believe that he 
handled the matter ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  So you parted on the basis that he was saying okay 
leave it but he would handle it himself. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    He will handle the matter, he 
understood my concerns and I believe that he agreed with me and Chair 
the structure was not implemented. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was not implemented? 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   No Chair it was not 
implemented. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay, hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    And Chair one thing that I also 
would like to highlight in paragraph 77 on page 20 is that to the best of 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 128 of 184 
 
my knowledge Regiments did not have a mandate to talk to banks on 
behalf of Transnet. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because such a mandate wouldn’t be conveyed to 
Nedbank without your knowledge as Group Treasurer, is that right? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Yes Chair, and someone within 
Transnet for Nedbank to be brave to provide Regiment as a proposal 
they can only do that at the back of a written mandate.  So maybe 
someone somewhere gave a written mandate, I don’t know. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    Yes from paragraph 78 of your statement 
10 
you deal with the third unsolicited proposal from Regiments, what was 
the nature of this proposal made to Transnet? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    Chair the third unsolicited 
proposal that was tabled to us ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry please don’t forget your answer, I shall remind 
you of the question.  Initially there was that proposal where Regiments 
wanted – sent in a proposal and we went through that document, I don’t 
know if it was at page 86, with various items which you said Transnet 
really didn’t need, that was the one, and the one that you have just 
finished testifying about was another? 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   It’s another one Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    Okay so that other one might be referred as 
the third one and the one you have just talked about might be referred 
to as the second one.  You are now going to the third one? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    This one here is the third one, 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 129 of 184 
 
yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   I’m just giving examples of 
those that stood out for me.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    In between there were many 
...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  There were many others. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
10 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    Yes so you deal with the third unsolicited 
proposal from paragraph 78 and following in your statement, what was 
the nature of this proposal? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Chair the third unsolicited 
proposal was a shocker of note, it was a hard copy that Mr Eric Wood 
gave us I believe I was with Mr Singh and Mr Singh said that you know i 
must review the proposal.  Basically what ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Singh said you must? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Review the proposal. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    It is our job Chair to do that.  
Basically what Regiments was proposing Chair was instead of us 
following normal practice when we do cross-currency swaps of using 
banks instead of using your normal commercial bank we must use the 
South African Reserve Bank as a counterparty and he said that we can 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 130 of 184 
 
do that and get a cost-effective way of doing cross-currency swaps.  
Chair I am saying that it’s a shocker of note because towards the end 
of the nineties and the beginning of the 2000 there was a policy 
decision taken at Government that the Reserve Bank will not play in the 
forward book market any more, it was so because Chair because over 
time the Reserve Bank had accumulated the forward book through a 
number of activities, the country was not able to build up foreign 
currency reserves because if the currency runs away from the Reserve 
Bank the losses have to absorbed either by the countries, you know 
foreign exchange reserves, or it’s a liability that goes to the National 
10 
Treasury, so Chair this is a policy that was publicised a lot and it was a 
thorn for the government for a long period of time.  At some point Chair 
I believe it sat at around 23billion Dollars, and it’s one of the factors 
that made the currency to be so volatile in the late nineties and early 
2000, because when the country’s foreign exchange reserves are low or 
the liabilities are expected to be even more then it can attract all sort 
of speculative attacks on the currency and Chair these are the experts 
that I was expected to take adv ice form, who could not even 
comprehend or know that this proposal that they are proposing is a no-
go zone given all sorts of unintended you know consequences on the 
20 
fragility of the Rand, which might you know spill over into inflation, 
potentially shock the GDP and we – I was expected to listen to 
whatever proposal that they came up with, and Chair by this time I had 
lost all – whatever patience that I’ve had for Mr Singh and Mr Wood I 
had lost it totally. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 131 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And this was around what time?   
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   It was 2013, because remember 
...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh it was still 2014. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    ...this is all a build-up to the 
1064 locomotives so they were coming with all sort of creative solutions 
and they are thinking that maybe this can be used to (indistinct) you 
know cost effectively which means that we will get a discount from the 
Reserve Bank but it’s not really a discount because everybody else in 
the country will ultimately pay for that, one way or the other.  So Chair 
10 
on this one I didn’t even want to discuss with Anoj because I thought 
it’s just going to fly over his head, I went straight to Mr Molefe. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Mr Singh Ms Makgatho. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Okay Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you worked with him for quite some time. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    Chair it’s because I fought with 
him so much I even forgot that he is Mr Singh, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no, no, no I understand, it’s just that we try to be 
courteous to everybody. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Chair I did not even want to 
20 
discuss the matter with the GCFO so I went straight to Mr Molefe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mmm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    I was like DCE your people 
have outdone themselves this time around, here is a proposal, they 
recommend that we go to National Treasury and present this proposal 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 132 of 184 
 
requesting for the South African Reserve Bank to be a counterparty to 
our swaps and thereafter ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  And you say you were now talking to the  
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   To Mr Molefe straight. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, but I’m wondering, you’re saying you said your 
people? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Yes I was speaking to him and 
– because now Chair I had lapsed it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In terms of your people were ...(intervention)  
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   I was referring to Mr Eric Wood 
10 
and Mr Singh, I was like your people have outdone themselves this time 
around, I mean I’ve seen lots of proposals. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    But I think this time they have 
really gone out of their way. So I was like we are now expected to go to 
National Treasury to present this proposal and thereafter go to the 
Reserve Bank to present this proposal.  I would just like to tell you that 
if you think that this is something to be presented for the National 
Treasury it’s okay but I would just like to put it on record that I will not 
go with you, you will go with Mr Singh and Mr Wood, and by the way 
20 
remember when the LED Open forward book was such a thorn we were 
there, me and you worked for National Treasury, when all of this 
discussions were being held we were there, when the Rand was very 
volatile we witnessed when the (indistinct) short by 10%, we were in 
Treasury, so maybe they have the luxury for they don’t know and they 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 133 of 184 
 
don’t have the information that we have and they don’t know the 
implication that this will have on the rest of the economy, but I do know 
one think, if me and you, if me or you were to go to the National 
Treasury they are just going to laugh at us to be honest, because we 
will just be foolish, so are you going to the National Treasury to present 
this nonsensical proposal.   
 
And on this one Chair he was very decisive, he was no, it can’t 
be done, I will handle them, and indeed Chair it ended there.  I was not 
even worried that even if they were to go and present this to a National 
Treasury I knew that it wouldn’t fly. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the two of you had been at National Treasury at 
the same time at some stage? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Yes Chair, yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    Yes and at paragraph 84 of your statement 
you narrate your further discussion with Mr Molefe in relation to Mr 
Singh? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Oh yes Chair by this time Chair 
and we are still in 2013 Chair by this time Chair we have been busy 
discussion all sorts of proposals for lack of a better word because there 
20 
were no proposals, they were something else, and in my opinion Chair 
the GCFO was doing as he wishes and what I couldn’t quite grasp was 
that the man was running like a loose cannon, and the GCE was giving 
him more and more powers, so I asked him why are you giving the 
GCFO so much powers, you know that he is not a man to be trusted but 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 134 of 184 
 
you are continuously giving him more and more, you are consolidating 
power and you are giving this person who can’t be trusted with so much 
power, why are you doing that?  Because Chair at that point in time I 
believed that even the supply chain was now a consolidated capital, it 
was now consolidated to group all of these functions Chair reported to 
the GCFO. 
 
So I could not understand why he could be given so much 
power and it was Mr Molefe who was giving him so much so I asked him 
as a sister would speak to a brother, I was like this is a time – a ticking 
time-bomb, you can’t give this man so much power and he just you 
10 
know brushed me aside and he said that no he will manage him.  I was 
like really, I don’t think the guy can be managed, you must just cut his 
powers but instead you are doing the opposite. 
 
So Chair I left the discussion at that but it’s one thing Chair 
that I just could not believe that Mr Molefe will give Mr Singh a 
consciously so add  more power, add and just add.   
CHAIRPERSON:  At that stage what was your understanding of what Mr 
Molefe knew about Mr Singh and his role and his role in various 
transactions compared to your own understanding, did you believe you 
had the same understanding of the man or you might have had a 
20 
different understanding? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Chair I believe I had a different 
understand, with Mr Singh, because he is very reckless, I could 
immediately establish that he is a very corrupt guy, so that one I could 
immediately you know get, but now with Mr Molefe Chair as I indicated 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 135 of 184 
 
earlier on, he is a smooth operator, he is very street smart, he plays h 
is balls very carefully, he makes people feel important.  So Chair I 
could not immediately establish that he was part of the mess, but Chair 
on a number of occasions I had one on one engagements with him w 
here I could raise my concerns around the concentration of power to 
someone who in my opinion could not be trusted and on one particular 
incident he even said to me that no man I will manage him but I don’t 
want to ruffle feathers, and I couldn’t understand what those feathers 
were and – but then I slowly Chair I slowly started to doubt him, but 
Chair it was – I worked with Mr Molefe before at the National Treasury 
10 
and I thought he was my brother.  I later learnt that he was actually – 
he is actually not a brother, maybe he might be clothed like a brother 
but he is not a brother.   
 
And I later learnt Chair because there’s always red flags 
sometimes you choose to ignore, sometimes not, and with the passing 
of time the GCFO was very consistent Chair, I mean he was just onto it, 
he was just consistent but with the GCE ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Meaning consistent on his path? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   On his path of destruction. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On what he was doing? 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    Ja, he was very consistent, 
and he was pushing and he was pushing hard, you know pushing his 
arrogance so it was fights all the time, so now with the GCE he was not 
fighting, at least with me, he was very calm and every time we had an 
engagement and we were fighting with Mr Singh he would be the one 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 136 of 184 
 
who would be calming the storms, so he appeared neutral and I couldn’t 
quite tell whether he was on this side or the other side but with the 
passing of time Chair if it’s a zebra it’s a zebra you will see it by the 
stripes, right, so with the passing of time I began to slowly see that 
they are the same game players, it’s just that the other one is a rough 
player and the other one is a smooth operator, but otherwise it is the 
same mission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that was roundabout when, when you came to 
that realisation about him? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Chair in 2013 I was, towards 
10 
the end of the 2013 I was asking these questions and I was not quite 
getting the answer, so I parked, but then it’s when the 1064 
locomotives were being negotiated, especially around the financing I 
concluded that no, they are playing the same game. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Thank you Chair.  The next matter that you 
deal with is McKinsey and Co.  In paragraph 86 of your statement you 
speak to events that took place between April and May 2013, what 
happened during this period? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    Chair this is another 
20 
unsolicited proposal form McKinsey.  Soon after I was appointed Mr 
Singh introduced me to Mr Vikas Sagar who is one of the partners or 
was one of the partners of McKinsey, I am not sure if he is still part of 
McKinsey, and he suggested that I should have fortnight meetings with 
him, he will give me whatever advice that I need and I can use him as a 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 137 of 184 
 
sounding board, and he further ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  That was Mr Singh suggesting that to you? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Yes so every fortnight I was 
expected to meet with this guy, so he further suggested that Mr 
McKinsey, as we all know it’s a global company, it has experts all over 
the world, it has resources and so forth and so forth, so Chair I didn’t 
have a problem with that because I meet with institutions all the time, 
they share ideas, I share ideas with them, I share with them the plans 
so I didn’t have a problem with that,  
CHAIRPERSON:  But it does seem strange to me.  
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    Chair you know at that point I 
didn’t make too much of it to be honest. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because I – at Treasury I mean you were Group 
Treasurer of Transnet, and if ever you needed advice you would know 
where to go, I would take it. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Yes chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why should you be given somebody and be told meet 
fortnightly as opposed to – I could understand if the suggestion was 
you know he is an expert on this and that if you’re an expert in the 
State you need some expert advice feel free to talk to him, but this 
20 
fortnightly thing seems strange to me, why – is there going to be a 
need to meet so regularly with a particular person? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    Chair to be honest I didn’t 
make too much of it at that point in time, I met with him the first time 
around, I can’t even remember what we discussed, but I think Chair we 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 138 of 184 
 
met at the most three times, because after the third meeting I realised 
that no I really don’t need to be meeting with this guy because 
...(intervention) 
CHAIRPERSON:  But when you met him for those three times or so did 
you meet him because you needed some expert advice as such or you 
were just getting to know him because Mr Singh had suggested he 
might be somebody that might be helpful, in other words was there a 
need for – did you need some advice as such or it was more just 
getting to know him better.  
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   It was a general discussion 
10 
Chair there was nothing that came out of those meetings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   That was a wow, hence the 
decision that you know we should continue with this, and it was a 
mutual agreement between the two of us that you know there’s no need 
for us to be meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay okay. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    Yes then you speak of the credit rating 
methodology that you were pursuing in Treasury.   
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Yes Chair as I indicated earlier 
20 
on that we were always looking at ways of enhancing our processes 
and making our value add and our contribution to the organisation much 
better, and one of the things that was at the heart of Treasury is 
making sure that we maintain a strong investment rating, and Chair you 
may know that as a State Owned Entity there’s a part that is within the 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 139 of 184 
 
control of management and there’s the part that is outside but within 
the government, the government’s control, and in our analysis Chair we 
realised that in actual fact in as much as we say that we are a State 
Owned Entity 76% of our standalone credit profile is within the control 
of management and so we therefore needed to have a tool that will help 
us to direct strategic discussions around the group, and we thought 
that having a tool that will help us have a shadow rating for Transnet 
will help us to pre-empt you know what the rating agencies would given 
where the operations are, so – and Chair towards the end of 2012, 
beginning of 2013 Citibank had proposed that they can offer us a credit 
10 
rating advisory free of charge.    
 
Chair I would want to emphasize that investment banks do that 
all the time, because they have resources and the provide that as part 
of their value add, so they had said that you know that they can provide 
us with this value add, and when I took over the role of Treasurer I then 
sensitised our CFO that we are looking at this process we like it, I am 
going to enhance the team.  I was thinking that I will just reconfigure 
and move people around and we will have a separate investor relations 
type maybe one or two people who will focus on stakeholder 
engagement. 
 
20 
 
So I shared this with Mr Singh, that this is what Citibank is 
proposing and it was indeed aligned with our thinking, so I was still 
exploring how do we get around this process.   
 
Chair later on, and it became a trend, later on McKinsey 
suggested a meeting, and i met with Mr Vickers and he proposed that 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 140 of 184 
 
they can offer us credit rating management services.  So Chair so I was 
like okay so what exactly do you – how do you aim to do that and how 
much will it be, and he came back later on and presented a proposal, 
the proposal Chair is MM12, it is in Annexure MM12, on page 102. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   And it’s titled “Building a World-
class Treasury Function Follow-up Discussion and Proposal”.  It is a 
follow-up to the meeting held on the 26 t h of June 2013, so Chair in this 
proposal ...(intervention)  
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    Before you continue Ms Makgatho what is 
10 
the date that appears on that document? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    It is written the 3 r d of July 
2013. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   At the bottom but on top there it 
is written working draft last modified 03.07.05 South African Time so 
maybe it’s from my own computer Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    And just above the date of July 2013 there 
appears a follow up discussion, a follow up discussion and proposal 
rather. 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    Yes. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Was there any other prior engagement with 
McKinsey? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Yes Chair it happened on the 
26 t h of June it was a high level discussion, it was around the same 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 141 of 184 
 
topic. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    Yes, were you involved in these 
engagements? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    Correct Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Can we then turn to page 104 of that 
document. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   So Chair from page 104 to page 
107 McKinsey proposes a fourteen week assignment wherein they will 
help us to develop a shadow rating tool, and Chair what was of interest 
to me was that their proposed fee was set at 1.1million excluding VAT 
10 
per week which would have meant that over a period of fourteen weeks 
we would have had to pay R15.4million excluding VAT for a credit rating 
review assignment, and Chair I would further like to highlight that Mr 
Sagar was very proud to tell me that the R1.1million a week fee is 
highly discounted because I am known to be a tough negotiator and he 
further went on to say that if it was your boss I would have made it 
much, much, much higher. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   When he was referring to the boss who was 
it with reference to? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:    The GCFO, Mr Anoj Singh. 
20 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   Yes did you engage Mr Sagar any further? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   After this Chair I just felt that 
this was just too much, in actual fact we have you know resources, in 
actual fact this proposal Chair helped me to be decisive because after 
this proposal I was very decisive, I made a decision immediately I was 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 142 of 184 
 
like I am going to use my team, I don’t need this, this is just you know 
you don’t even need a degree in maths, you just need to know 
arithmetic, my team can do this, so I went back to the GCFO I said 
there’s a proposal from McKinsey but I have declined it because I will 
use the internal team for A, B, C, D reasons and Chair he was livid.  He 
didn’t understand why I didn’t want to use McKinsey, he accused e of 
not wanting to use external resources, of pretending as if I know it all, I 
don’t know it all Chair, but I was surrounded by very intelligent, very 
dedicated highly qualified and highly experienced people so I didn’t 
need to know it all, all that I needed to do was to tap onto the 
10 
resources that were available. 
 
So Chair I was actually surprised that he will not be happy 
because I felt that we needed to be commended for saving the company 
R15million but instead we were being chastised that we don’t external 
counsel and we want to do everything ourselves.  Chair I am proud to 
say that the team indeed delivered, it took us about three months to do 
the shadow rating model and Chair it was spot on.   Our internal rating 
outcomes were aligned to the SNP rating, and the outcomes of this 
Chair was presented at Alco, at Finco, Exco, and the Board Chair 
because we were so proud of the outcome. 
20 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    Yes, can we then turn to EXHIBIT BB10B at 
Annexure G from page 168. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   BB10? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:   BB10B, that’s the supplementary bundle, 
from page 168. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 143 of 184 
 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Okay Chair ...(intervention)  
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:    Yes you earlier mentioned that you had 
engaged Citibank insofar as credit rating methodology, now from page 
168 and the pages that follows are several documents, can you identify 
those documents please? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Chair at page 168 and 169 it’s a 
draft confidentiality agreement, because remember that Citibank had 
volunteered to provide us, to help us with the services free of charge 
but in the course of doing that we were going to exchange some 
confidential information and it was therefore important to do that within 
10 
the confines of the NDA, so it’s some sort of the NDA, on page 170 this 
is a letter that was sent to Ms Miapudi when she was still the 
Treasurer, here Citibank the second bullet point they are saying that 
they can provide the services free of charge, save for the expenses 
that they would have to spend if they fly in people from London or from 
New York and the third one Chair is the engagement letter, I believe it 
was still addressed to Ms Miapudi because she was still the Treasurer 
then, so Chair ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that at page 170? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So we are now on 171. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So this is the engagements that 
we had with Citibank, so Chair maybe I might be wrong Chair but 
maybe the GCFO might have taken some points on this and suggested 
for McKinsey to give us a proposal.  I am saying that Chair because 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 144 of 184 
 
later on we were also busy with the hybrid instrument.  When I started 
the discussion Chair I indicated that the gearing ratio was one of the 
key ratios that we had to look at, and therefore with the spent and 
execution of the capital planning it was clear that the gearing ratio is 
now in its forties and maybe it will edge towards fifty, so it was 
important to start thinking out of the box and we thought that maybe an 
issuance of an instrument like a hybrid instrument which has the 
characteristics of both equity and debt, if we can issue it we can get 
the points for both debt, but importantly equity, you know just to solve 
that gearing problem, and Chair we worked free of charge with one of 
10 
the investment bank, BNP Paribas, we did their accounting opinion, we 
did the text opinion, the credit rating opinion, because Chair we also 
wanted to make sure that if we decide to implement it can pass the 
accounting opinion, the text opinion and all sorts of opinions Chair, and 
Chair I believe that at one stage he asked one of my deputies for the 
proposal and later on Regiments came with a similar proposal, highly 
diluted but it had you know – so it was a trend that was beginning to 
come up that we will work, we will do stuff and then later on Regiments 
will come with something similar but highly diluted. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Now the documents that you have referred to 
20 
relevant to Citibank can you please confirm the month and year of 
those documents? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The documents, the first one 
was around November 2012, at that time Chair I was still the Head of 
Structured Finance, I believe Ms Miapudi was promoted already to the 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 145 of 184 
 
Group CRO and I believe that probably at that time, I don’t know if she 
was still the Group Treasurer or not, but I do know that in January 2013 
when we had the conference call she was no longer the Group 
Treasurer, so we didn’t move on that assignment until I was appointed 
Group Treasurer. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes, and you have stated that you reverted to 
Mr Singh on the proposal that was made by Mr McKinsey of the credit 
rating methodology? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   Yes Chair, and as I indicated he 
was not happy that I have decided to use my own team instead of 
10 
McKinsey that I had made a decision Chair, I was very decisive, you 
know the R15million helped me to be the decisive and I implemented 
the way I saw fit. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And is that where the matter ended? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  That’s where the matter ended 
Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  The next aspect that you deal with relates to 
China Development Bank, in paragraph 91 of your statement you talk to 
events that took place in February 2013, what happened during this 
period? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we back to EXHIBIT BB10A? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  My apologies Chair, yes we are back to the 
statement, EXHIBIT BB10A. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, you will find it helpful many months from now 
when you prepare submissions and you want to know what we were 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 146 of 184 
 
dealing with now. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair, we are at page 23, 
paragraph 91. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair we are back to 2013.  
Chair some time towards the end of February 2013 I believe it was the 
20 t h of February 2013, I received a call from the GCE’s office that I was 
requested to join the meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  From who’s office? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The GCE’s. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:   That I was requested to join the 
meeting, I was told that there’s a Chinese delegation so I went upstairs 
and indeed Chair there was a Chinese delegation and it was a big 
group from ...(intervention)  
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Can you – sorry – can you recall who was 
present at the meeting? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  At the meeting Chair from 
Transnet’s perspective the meeting was led by Mr Brian Molefe in his 
capacity as the GCE, the Siyabonga Gama, the CFO of TFR was 
20 
present, Mr Richard Vallihu, the CEO of Transnet Engineer at that time 
was also present, the GCFO Mr Anoj Singh was present, the 
Department of International Relations and Cooperation was represented 
by the DG, Ambassador Gerry Matjila, and there were other colleagues 
from Transnet Engineering and TFR and of course Chair I was also part 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 147 of 184 
 
of the meeting.  
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And what happened at this meeting? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The Chinese Chair presented a 
draft tripartite corporation agreement and the parties to the tripartite 
agreement were Transnet, China South Railway and China Development 
Bank and it attached SMM13. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Chair it is now quarter to four, I don’t if this 
would be an opportune time to take the short adjournment? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let’s take a short adjournment, ten minutes, 
fifteen minutes? 
10 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Fifteen minutes should be fine Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ten minutes should do? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Fifteen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Fifteen, okay we will take an adjournment of fifteen 
minutes, we will resume at four o’clock.   
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you may proceed. 
20 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Makgatho before the 
short break you were about to take the Chair through the document that 
appears at page 110 of the bundle under Annexure MM13.  What is – 
what is that document that appears on that page? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair the document on page 110 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 148 of 184 
 
is the draft co-operation agreement that was presented on that day.  
Chair it expresses CSR and CDB’s interest in assisting Transnet to 
execute the MDS and financing of some of the projects and it included 
procurement of services. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And what is the date of the document? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair it is a draft the date is 28 
March but I suppose it is – it is written 28 March because it was the 
date that was scheduled for the brix summit.  So I cannot remember 
whether it was a Brix summit … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is 28 March 2013. 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  2013 I cannot remember whether 
it was the brix summit or just the Chinese official state visit.   
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes now in – throughout the document there 
appears several headings entitled article 1 to 15.  If you turn to page 
112 article 1 provides the context to the agreement and this starts from 
page 111.  At the last sentence of article 1 on page 112 appears to be a 
summary of the context to the agreement what was the context? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair I would like to refer you to 
page 112 the first paragraph line number 5.  The line – the sentence 
that starts with the three parties.  It records as such: 
20 
“The three parties agreed to push forward the 
upgrading of rail transit equipment by enhancing 
cooperation and fully utilising the advantages for the 
purposes of creating jobs and promoting economic 
development in South Africa and even South African 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 149 of 184 
 
an multi-lateral benefits.” 
And article 2 is labelled cooperation principle.  It read as thus: 
“The 
three 
parties 
will 
cooperate 
under 
this 
agreement centred on the 
industrial upgrading 
strategy of South African Rail transit equipment in 
the principles of equality, multi benefits working step 
by step, consent of three parties led by early 
planning based on projects and taking financing as a 
key.” 
Chair I would also like to highlight article 3 which is the cooperation 
10 
contents.  It reads as such – as the following: 
“The procurement and refurbishment of electrical and 
or diesel locomotives and freight [indistinct] the 
localised research production repairs sales and after 
sales on the parts of the above vehicles.” 
And it says that the cooperation amount for – in article 6 Chair  
“The first phase of cooperation amount is 5 billion 
and CDB will offer financing support for the projects 
under this agreement and within this amount.” 
Chair I would also like to refer you to page 113 articles 8 and 9.  Article 
20 
8 reads: 
“Transnet and CSR are responsible for carrying out 
the project and CDB is responsible for providing 
financing to projects pursuant to the conditions of 
CDB’s credit policy.” 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 150 of 184 
 
And lastly article 9. 
“The ways of financing offered by China Development 
Bank include but not limited to direct loan syndicated 
loan and on lending.  The terms of the loan shall be 
finally be determined in the loan facility agreement 
which include the borrower, length of maturity, 
interest rate with [indistinct] conditions, etcetera.” 
Chair in a nutshell what was tabled on the day was a co – a draft 
cooperation agreement which included – which expressed CSR and 
CDB’s interest in assisting Transnet to execute the MDS so it included 
10 
executing and financing of the projects.  So in a way it included the 
procurement of goods and services.  They expected the GCE to 
respond on the spot about this cooperation agreement and he politely 
responded by saying that as Transnet has had not enough time to 
review this document he suggested that a working committee be set up 
to review and negotiate the agreement for the parties. He further said 
that he highlighted the fact that Transnet is governed by strict laws be 
it the procurement or the requirements of the PFMA and it is required 
by law to follow certain processes in procuring goods and services.  So 
he suggested… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So they thought he could just agree on the spot? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Ja Chair they thought we could 
talk about this thing ja just.  So Chair because for me it was the first 
time that I have had this engagement.  I thought that was the very first 
meeting that Transnet is having with CSR and CDB.   
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 151 of 184 
 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes in paragraph 93 of your statement you 
deal with areas of cooperation that were apparently previously agreed 
to. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair.  It then came to my 
attention that in actual fact that Transnet and CSR had already agreed 
to cooperate to identify by identifying certain areas in the rail business 
as per Annexure MM14. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And that appears at page 117 of Exhibit 
BB10[a].   
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  In the letter Chair it is a letter 
10 
on Transnet’s letterhead dated the 16 January 2013 signed by the GC… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say 117? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  117 Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Page 117. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So it says: 
“Dear Mr Fung Xinhua.  The subject is cooperation 
between China South Rail and Transnet SOC Limited.  
As agreed in our meeting Transnet SOC Limited 
would like to confirm that a team from both Transnet 
20 
Freight 
Rail 
and 
Transnet 
Engineering 
was 
formulated to formally cooperate with China Rail – 
with China South Rail cooperation.  The Transnet 
team will meet with the CSR team to identify areas of 
collaboration between the two entities and formulate 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 152 of 184 
 
a process to be followed on achieving their agreed 
goals.” 
And then it goes on the last paragraph goes on to identify the officials 
from Transnet and Transnet Engineering.  And it signed by the GCE Mr 
Brian Molefe on the 16 January 2013. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE: Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And this draft agreement that we just referred to that 
was in March what was – that was March 2013 ne? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  March and the meeting that I am 
referring to is February 2013.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So it was an agreement 
anticipating the state visit in March around the 27 to the 30 March 
2013. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay.  But this is the background that you say 
you unaware of? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  This is the background.  I was 
unaware that you know certain things have already happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay.  So Chair as a follow up 
20 
to this meeting to this letter dated the 16 January 2013 the rail working 
committee was established and the Transnet Rail working committee 
identified areas of cooperation after having considered future business 
requirement of both TFR and TE as per Annexure MM15. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And your Annexure MM15 appears on page 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 153 of 184 
 
119 of BB10[a].  
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So Chair this is a memorandum 
signed by GM Marketing Strategy Mr Thobama Joga on the 20 February 
2013.  This is the date that I suspect our meeting happened on.  So it 
says Chair as a purpose: 
“The purpose of this memorandum is to update and 
request the Group Chief Executive to approve the 
specific areas of cooperation between Transnet SOC 
Limited and China South Rail which were identified 
or developed by the committee comprising of 
10 
delegates from both Transnet Freight Rail and 
Transnet Engineering.” 
And then it goes on to start with background.  And the background now 
dates back to the 12 December 2012.  It says that:  
“On the 12 December 2012 a meeting was convened 
between Transnet SOC Limited and China South Rail. 
In the meeting it was agreed to establish a 
committee 
comprising 
of 
delegates 
from 
both 
Transnet Freight Rail and Transnet Engineering 
operating to formally engage China South Rail on the 
20 
cooperation and also identify specific areas of 
cooperation.” 
Chair… 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Now this – sorry to interject.  On the 12 
December 2012 were you in attendance at the said meeting? 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 154 of 184 
 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  No Chair I was not. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes please proceed. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair I would like to proceed to 
page 120 paragraph 6 and paragraph 7.  Paragraph 6 to paragraph 20 – 
no not 20 – 12.   
CHAIRPERSON:  6 to 12? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  6 to 12. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It says: 
“Listed below are the identified areas per division.  It 
10 
starts with Transnet Freight Rail.  Running of 
operation.  China South Rail will share their model of 
controlling the network and train plan in order to run 
an efficient railway systems and methodologies 
which are employed by China South Rail for planning 
and operation and China South Rail methods of 
operating or managing theirs to ensure a highly 
efficient train schedule railway.” 
Number 7 it is management of safety. 
“Sharing of information on safety standards between 
20 
Transnet and China South Rail.” 
Number 8 is  
“Cooperation in people development it is look at the 
introduction of a student exchange programme 
between Transnet and China South Railway which 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 155 of 184 
 
will focus on engineering [mechanical electrical and 
electronics and leadership management].”  And China 
South Rail management of their rail related training 
institute/academy 
sharing 
best 
practice 
in 
competence development for movement operations 
engineering technical and artisan fields and look at 
how China South Rail conducts training evaluation 
impact analysis and tools.” 
And for areas identified for Transnet Engineering it said it records 
supply chain synergies.  That is number 9. 
10 
“Sharing of information on supplies of critical 
components for all Transnet Engineering products. 
Negotiate better prices through joint procurement of 
critical spares components and supply of components 
by CSR to meet Transnet Engineers requirements in 
compliance with Transnet’s governance structures.” 
Number 10 is development of [indistinct] capacity in South Africa. 
“Jointly developed [indistinct] capacity to meet the 
local needs produce [indistinct] products for both 
domestic 
and 
export 
market. 
 
Cooperate 
in 
20 
developing a market for these products.” 
Number 11. 
“Development 
of 
new 
products. 
 
Transnet 
Engineering and China South Rail will jointly design 
and develop new products for domestic and export 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 156 of 184 
 
market shared the best practice in rolling stock 
design.” 
And Number 12. 
“Is Transnet Engineering and China South Rail to 
collaborate 
in 
research 
and 
development 
for 
innovative solution development of RND capacity 
through exchange programmes and jointly develop 
new products and solutions for the rail industry.” 
And the GM of Marketing and Strategy recommended for the Chief 
Executive to approve the specific areas of cooperation.  It is signed by 
10 
the GM on the 20 February 2013. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Now you earlier made reference to a working 
committee that was to be established as proposed by Mr Brian Molefe. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair.  Based on what the 
Chinese delegation expected at that meeting of the 20 February Mr 
Brian suggested that instead of the contents of the agreement being 
discussed he proposed that a separate working committee be set up to 
negotiate the framework agreement. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And were you a part of that committee? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I was then appointed to lead 
20 
that negotiating team Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And what happened after your appointment? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I then worked on the tripartite 
agreement with Transnet’s legal advisor Ms Gosiame Khoele as well as 
the GM in the GCE’s office Ms Phyllis Difeto.  Chair we basically turned 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 157 of 184 
 
around the document and removed all procurement related matters and 
we therefore excluded CSR because by including CSR then the 
procurement is included so we excluded CSR and any reference to 
procurement was removed.  And we then recorded that Transnet has its 
own governance processes that is legally obliged to follow and this is 
recorded in clause 2.3 of the agreement which stipulates as follows: 
“All of the above will be…” 
CHAIRPERSON:    I am sorry where are you reading now? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I am now reading paragraph 95 
of the statement the bottom of page 24. 
10 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Apologies Chair we are now back at the 
statement page 24 of the bundle at paragraph 95.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Yes thank you. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So clause 23 reads as follows: 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Clause 2.3 you said? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  2.3 correct. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Advocate thank you for that.   
“All of the above will be achieved without comprising 
on some governance and effective processes which 
20 
each party is required to follow.” 
We felt it was important Chair to record this so that it is clear that even 
if there is a cooperation agreement of some sorts it merely records the 
willingness of the parties to cooperate in future.   
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And… 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 158 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now the document which has got that recording is 
where because I can see the extract at page 25 of – extract of clause 
2.2 but where is the actual document where you recorded what you say 
you recorded? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I am looking for it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You say you refer to clause 2.3 and I looked on my 
page and I saw only 2 – clause 2.2 so that is why I am trying to see 
where you were reading from. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So Chair it is – Chair it is 
Annexure 17. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  17? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Page 138. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh 138? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay one second.  This document starting at page 
135 is it an amended version of the document that you referred us to 
which you said the Chinese expected Mr Molefe to agree to on the spot 
but he did not or is it a different document? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  This is a revised document of 
the one that … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of that document okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So this is the one that we 
ultimately presented for signature. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The committee that you were leading? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 159 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine.  Okay.   
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Did the parties then sign the cooperation 
agreement? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair but the day before the 
signing of the cooperation agreement the Department of Public 
Enterprises raised an objection on how clause 2.2 on page 138 so I am 
referring to page 138 of the bundle and paragraph 96 of the statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The DPE raised an objection on 
how clause 2.2 was worded.  We then changed it through an 
10 
amendment because at that time Chair you know with state visits 
documents are signed ahead of time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So when the objection was 
raised the documents were already signed.  So we then did a site letter 
and just to record that we have agreed to amend the clause and it was 
agreed that later on a formal amendment will be done.  So Chair the old 
clause 2.2 read as follows: 
“In recognition of CDB’s mandate and subject to the 
provision of this agreement throughout the term of 
20 
the 
MDS 
Transnet's 
concerned 
to 
identifying 
opportunities contacting and informing potential 
Chinese suppliers who are likely to be relevant.” 
So Transnet consents to CDB.   
“CDB will identify opportunities contact and inform 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 160 of 184 
 
potential Chinese suppliers who are likely to be 
relevant 
to 
participate 
in 
whatever 
open 
and 
competitive tender process prescribed by Transnet.” 
Chair in my humble opinion I was of the view that this clause is benign 
because as I had stated before country specific export create agency or 
country specific DFI’s they support their own.  They can only finance an 
institution by supporting their own home companies.  So we have had 
many instances before Chair where we work with an export credit 
agency of a certain country and we have [indistinct] we share the 
strategy of Transnet and I remember in one instance we had the export 
10 
development Canada.  We had a number of engagements with them a 
number of face to face and a number of [indistinct] wherein they had 
invited their own companies that are in the rail business right.  
Because they wanted to finance Transnet but they can only do that if 
they finance procurement from Canada or an institution with Canadian 
links.  So Chair we went through the process with the EDC they invited 
many of their companies I do not even know who – what their names 
are and we gave them the names of the portals where South Africa 
advertises its procurement and so we thought that this clause is 
benign.  It does not do any harm to us we have said many times before 
20 
that we seek to diversify funding sources and we have proved over and 
over that ECA’s provide cheap funding.  And therefore we thought it 
was very benign and Chair the DPE was very unhappy, extremely 
unhappy and they said – they did not like this clause. I do not know 
how they understood it so they suggested that we change it to read as 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 161 of 184 
 
follows: 
“In recognition of CDB’s mandate CDB will identify 
opportunities contact and inform potential Chinese 
companies in respect of Transnet projects and 
businesses based on publicly available information.” 
Chair the only thing that has changed here is publicly available 
information but in all our engagement Chair when we share we share 
publicly available information.  The Transnet strategy is something that 
is there on the website I mean the annual report and the presentation 
of MDS are available on the website Chair. And then it went and – it 
10 
went on to say: 
“This cooperation is not limited to the MDS.” 
So I am not sure what the significance of this line is.  Because as far 
as Transnet is concerned the capital expenditure plan was well within 
all of the capital plans were within the MDS.  So I do not know what 
other projects are outside of the MDS.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I do not know what the Department of Public 
Enterprises may have had in mind but when I saw the – when I saw the 
clause I also got concerned.  I got concerned from this angle that if in 
regard to procurement matters when requests for proposals are issued 
20 
anybody who qualifies can submit a bid why would it be necessary to 
have a specific arrangement with a specific entity.  So maybe that may 
have been their concern as well purely from the point of your 
perceptions. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay Chair. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 162 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  To say could give rise to a perception that there is 
something special that there will be special treatment given to those 
who will be identified by this partner in this particular agreement.  
Which might not necessarily mean that is what was going to happen but 
simply that it could give rise to that perception. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that is the only thing I can think of that maybe 
they might have thought that it might create the impression that if you 
are identified by Transnet’s partner you enjoy a certain advantage 
compared to somebody else.   So – but as you say maybe that was not 
10 
really – that certainly was not your – you did not have that concern.  I 
would have – I may have been more comfortable with an arrangement 
which directs them to publicly available information without necessarily 
that being part of an agreement where you cooperate but I do not know 
if it is something we should bother about or maybe you were just 
mentioning? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair I was just mentioning 
it because to be honest after the document was revised I did not think 
there was anything funny with the wording. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I thought – because different 
organisations work differently.  I thought it was just a recordal of hey 
we like other maybe we do not maybe we will work together but it does 
not give anyone any preferential rights. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But in the end I think at a practical level if your 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 163 of 184 
 
intention was not give anybody any preference it was to that publicly 
available information would be used and they would be treated like 
everybody.  Maybe in the end it would not matter whether it was your 
version of the clause or their version what would happen is the same 
thing. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The cooperation agreement 
Chair was signed on the 26 March 2013 at the Union Buildings in the 
presence of both the former President Zuma and the President of the 
10 
People’s Republic of China President Xi Jinping.  Chair on that day 
there are many agreements that were signed.  I know that the mining 
companies were there, the banks were there so it was a big South 
Africa / China moment.   
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And at Annexure MM17 on page 135 would 
that be the signed Cooperation Agreement? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  On page? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  1-3-5. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes from 1-3-5. So this is the 
version that was printed before DPE raised an objection. 
20 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes before we get to the objection. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Just to clarify the parties to that agreement.  
It is China Development Bank Corporation page 1-3-5.  Are you there? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct, ja. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 164 of 184 
 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  China Development Bank Corporation as well 
as Transnet SOC Limited? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes.  You then continue to deal with another 
objection that was raised by the Department of Public Enterprises.  
When was this objection raised? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The second objection Chair was 
raised on 15 August 2013.  The Minister of Public Enterprises wrote a 
letter to our Chairperson and suggested that Clause 2.1 and 2.2 be 
amended.  The Minister indicated that the two clauses might be 
10 
construed as giving CDB preferential rights or right of first refusal and 
that those two clauses may pose a risk for Transnet and the DPE in 
implementing supply development and localisation drive. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Before you deal with the letter further can we 
turn to page 146 of the bundle under Annexure MM18? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Is this the letter that the Minister of Public 
Enterprises sent to Transnet? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And you were about to articulate to the Chair 
20 
what the concerns raised were? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair the Minister was not 
happy with – with the process of negotiating the Cooperation 
Agreement.  Chair as I stated before we had a meeting on 20 February 
and the state visit was going to be around 26 March.  So we did not 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 165 of 184 
 
have much time and therefore we did not have time to adequately 
consult with the DPE and I also understand that my seniors were also 
not sure why the DPE would be concerned that there was not – we did 
not consult them sufficiently because the initial meeting according to 
them was organised by the DPE. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Can we go …? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well if the initial meeting was organised by the DPE 
and they never went back to them to update them the DPE would be 
legitimately concerned. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Probably Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Probably Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I cannot ask you to start something the next thing I 
hear you are signing and I – you have not come back to me … 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To say okay this is how the negotiations are going.  
This is what we are agreeing and here is what we will sign. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I think that that would – that would be a legitimate 
concern. 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Okay Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And then the Minister … 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Before you – you proceed Ms Makgatho.  If I 
may weave into the Chair’s question can you go to page 146 of the 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 166 of 184 
 
bundle?  The second paragraph there which starts with: 
“On 26 March 2013 …” 
That is where the first concern is raised by the Minister of Public 
Enterprises.  Can you please read that paragraph? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe before you read it just in terms of what I have 
said – what I have just said - that would be if in asking you to do 
whatever I expected you to come back to me but you could have a 
situation where I say you – you do this and go ahead and finalise it. 
You do not have to come back to me.  So there could be that 
understanding.  It depends on a lot of things.  Then I should not be 
10 
concerned if you have gone ahead and signed if that was the 
understanding that you do not have to come back to me. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair but the – for me Chair 
and I suppose it was the same with the legal advisor because we did 
not have that background. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  We only got to hear about all of 
this around August … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  When this … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  So maybe there … 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Concern was raised that in 
actual fact why are they complaining because they are the ones who 
started these meetings (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Maybe … 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 167 of 184 
 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe there was a problem of communication as 
some stage. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair there was indeed 
a communication (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So the second paragraph reads 
as follows: 
10 
“On 26 March 2013 Transnet informally notified the 
department through an email regarding its imminent 
intention to enter into a Cooperation Agreement 
with China Bank on 27 March 2013 – the following 
day.  The email notification is attached hereto for 
reference.  Although I understand the rationale for 
the Cooperation Agreement I believe that Transnet 
engagements with any of the BRICS Countries 
should not be viewed in isolation.  The Cooperation 
Agreement between Transnet and China Bank is of 
20 
strategic importance and envisages cross border 
transactions and as a result the department should 
have 
been 
officially notified in 
advance 
and 
afforded an opportunity to express an opinion.” 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes and at page 147 - overleaf – the first 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 168 of 184 
 
paragraph on that page details the second concern raised by the 
Minister of Public Enterprises.  Can you please read that paragraph? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO: 
 
“Furthermore 
the 
department is concerned with certain provisions of 
the Cooperation Agreement which may pose risks 
for Transnet and/or the department with respect to 
the implementation of the supply development and 
localisation drive.  The department as Government 
shareholder representative intends to embark on 
several initiatives aimed at growing the country’s 
10 
industries by implementing certain initiatives in 
connection with the preferential procurement policy 
framework of 2008 and a competitive supply 
development program.  Clauses 2.1 and 2.2 of the 
Cooperation Agreement pose certain risks and may 
hinder the department’s initiatives as they may be 
misconstrued as granting China Bank the right of 
first refusal in respect of Transnet’s Market Demand 
Strategy.” 
And it goes on further to say: 
20 
“To this end I hereby request Transnet to reopen 
negotiations with China Bank with the view to 
amend the Cooperation Agreement and address the 
departments 
concerned 
failing 
which 
the 
Cooperation Agreement in its current form must be 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 169 of 184 
 
terminated.  In the meantime Transnet must 
schedule a briefing with the department to explain 
the salient terms and the objectives of the 
Cooperation Agreement 
in 
the 
extent 
of 
the 
contemplated exclusive rights to China Bank and 
Chinese suppliers as has been the practice in the 
past.  Transnet must adhere to the relevant Section 
54 Provisions of the PFMA and the SMF in relation 
to any contemplated significant transaction, yours 
sincerely.  It is signed on 15 August 2013.” 
10 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes.  Now do you have any knowledge as to 
whether the negotiations were reopened as requested in this letter? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair to the best of my 
knowledge negotiations were not reopened as the then Transnet 
Chairman Mr Mafika Mkhwanazi responded to the Minister in a letter 
dated 12 September seeking to clarify the intent of the Cooperation 
Agreement as per the attached MM19. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the letter – the paragraphs of which we have – 
you have read reveal that the Minister of Public Enterprises at that time 
was Mr Gigaba? 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes.  You were referring the Chair to the 
response that was provided by Mr Mafika Mkhwanazi to Minister – the 
then Minister Gigaba’s letter and that appears as Annexure MM19 which 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 170 of 184 
 
is at page 149 of the bundle. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes.  I would like to read the 
first paragraph and the third paragraph.  I will jump the third. 
“Your letter dated …” 
So this is a letter from the Chairperson of Transnet to the Minister. 
“Your letter dated 15 August 2013 refers.  On 
24 January 2019 Transnet SOC …” 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Please pardon me – the year I am reading 
there is 2013 not 2019. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Sorry Chair. 
10 
“On 
24 January 2013 
Transnet 
SOC 
Limited 
received 
an 
email 
(see 
attached) 
from 
the 
Department of Public Enterprises inviting Transnet 
to an interdepartmental meeting convened by the 
Department 
of 
International 
Relations 
and 
Cooperation to be held on 4 February 2013.  As a 
follow up to this meeting Transnet met with China 
Development Bank delegation on 20 February 2013.  
The aim of the meeting was to explore possible 
collaboration between the two entities ahead of the 
20 
Chinese State visit to the Republic of South Africa.  
At the meeting CDB tabled a draft tripartite 
agreement between Transnet, China South Railway 
Cooperation and CDB and included procurement of 
goods and services.  We request that CSR and 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 171 of 184 
 
procurement related activities be excluded from the 
Cooperation Agreement as Transnet has robust 
procurement governance processes that have to be 
followed before any supply contract can be entered 
into with any company.” 
And then paragraph 3 goes on to say that: 
“CBD 
then 
proposed 
a 
bilateral 
Cooperation 
Agreement.  This was negotiated and changed to 
ensure that all financial reputational legal and other 
risks identified and eliminated.  To that extent the 
10 
agreement records in Clauses 2.3 and 2.4 that 
Transnet is required to follow a fair equitable and 
transparent process in its tender process.  We also 
noted the Department of Enterprises discomfort on 
Clause 2.2 and amended the clause as per the 
department’s request.  We have attached the 
agreement as amended for ease of reference.  The 
amendment was signed ahead of the official signing 
ceremony in the presence of Ms Kgomotso Modise - 
DDG Transportation.” 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you okay? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Just one minute Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Let me know if you need – you need a minute 
to adjourn for a few minutes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  …to the following paragraph. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 172 of 184 
 
“It 
is 
not 
the 
intention 
of 
the 
Cooperation 
Agreement to give CDB exclusive rights to the 
procurement of goods and services and neither 
does it give CDB first right of refusal on the 
(indistinct) strategy.  We agree and acknowledge 
the importance of the MDS in supply development 
and localisation and the role that Transnet’s 
procurement place in building the manufacturing 
sector of South Africa.  The company’s procurement 
policies are aligned to the country’s Preferential 
10 
Procurement Policy Act and our strategic plans are 
in support of the national development plan.  We 
take our role as both the enabler and the driver of 
economic growth and competitiveness serious in our 
strategy and action plans are in support of 
Government policies. We see ourselves as an 
integral part of the Government and will not engage 
in activities that are not in support of the country’s 
priorities.  This is reflected in the way we do 
business with outside parties.  We do acknowledge 
20 
that entities from abroad carry their national 
mandates.  The information that we share with such 
entities is similar to the ones that we share with 
both 
domestic 
and 
international 
investors 
on 
Transnet’s future plans.  Such investors may at 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 173 of 184 
 
times 
share 
the 
plans 
with 
their 
respective 
suppliers based on publically available information 
and we normally record such a possibility.  This 
should not be construed as Transnet giving away 
confidential information as we share information 
with 
lenders, 
banks, 
development 
finance 
institutions and (indistinct) agency in the normal 
course of business.  Clauses 2.1 and 2.2 merely 
acknowledge and records such a possibility without 
giving any preferential treatment.” 
10 
And he closes off by saying that: 
“I trust that the above explanation will give you 
comfort that we did not give preferential treatment 
or first right of refusal to any company.” 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And do you know whether there was any 
further engagement between Transnet and the Department of Public 
Enterprises? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair to the best of my 
knowledge the negotiations were not reopened. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And the agreement was not terminated? 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Then in paragraph 102 of your statement you 
deal with the financing of the 1 064 plus 160 locomotives.  Can we refer 
to EXHIBIT BB10B which is your supplementary bundle and at this 
bundle we will refer to page 1 paragraph 5?  Page 1 at paragraph 5.  
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 174 of 184 
 
You have sought to introduce the context relating to the locomotive 
funding strategy with reference to several documents.  Is that correct? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And the first document is your Annexure 
MMA.  Is that correct? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And this annexure appears in EXHIBIT BB10B 
at page 4 with the actual document being contained from page 5? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  What is that document at page 5? 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair as I have highlighted 
before when I was dealing with strategy and the funding plan the way 
we did business was that we will anticipate big spending and the Head 
of Structured Finance was a member of the investment forum and me in 
my capacity as the Treasurer I was a member of KPIC.  KPIC was a - is 
an EXCO Sub-Committee and it has delegated authority - I think – up to 
400 million for business units and I believe 800 million for TFR because 
it is a huge organisation and therefore would have had sight of the 
activities that are costly that are coming.  So we always prepared 
ourselves ahead of time and Chair normal practice was that we will 
20 
start our activities 12 to 18 months before the required funds are 
needed understanding that there are processes, there are negotiations.  
So there are the processes, the announces, the negotiations and then 
the approval processes as well take time.  So we will take – we will 
start stuff early on.  So Chair by April 2013 we already knew that a big 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 175 of 184 
 
procurement is coming up soon.  So we started thinking around how we 
are going to handle this big procurement event both from a financing 
perspective and from a Financial Risk Management perspective and 
Chair page 5 of the supplement shows that on 7 April 2013 I sent 
Mr Singh an email after having had a chat with him around rough ideas 
on financing and as well as on the kind of risk that we need to monitor 
and mitigate.  The practice was that annually as part of the corporate 
plan we will – we will draft the funding plan and strategy but then for 
each of the big projects we will then have during the course of the year 
have a specific strategy to execute that project and therefore Chair this 
10 
was just the beginning of saying that we are aware that there is a big 
procurement happening and we are preparing ourselves to be ready and 
I am – I am just merely alluding to the fact that we are aware that it is 
estimated to cost 38 billion using calendar year 2012 prices and I also 
say that in the third line that: 
“This amount excludes any still price movement 
implications.” 
Also assuming that a locomotive uses a lot of steel and therefore any 
adverse movement will have a negative impact and then I also say that: 
“The acquisition of the 1 064 will be funded using a 
20 
mixture 
of 
cash 
generated 
by 
operation 
and 
external borrowing.” 
And I give an example of what is available that we can use and I say 
that: 
“We are building up our facilities.” 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 176 of 184 
 
And I say that: 
“An amount of about two to 3 billion using the 
numbers as per April 2013 should be sufficient to 
cover the short term needs of the project and for 
long term finance we can use the ECAs, the DFIs 
and the South African Asset Managers because they 
had indicated appetite over a prolonged period of 
time for long assets.” 
So Chair I am not specific which – which export credit agency we will 
use.  I am just saying US Exim, ECGD if it procurement from the UK 
10 
Hermes, if it is procurement from Germany and so forth.  So I am just 
saying that we can even think of using an ECA wrapped bond.  An ECA 
wrapped bond is a bond that is issued listed but it is the back of a 
guarantee from one of the ECAs.  Hm … 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And – sorry to interrupt you. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Sorry Chair. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  What would be an ECA? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  It is Export Credit Agency. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And EDC? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  EDC is Export Development 
20 
Canada. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm … 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  ECGD … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you must give her a few seconds.  She wants 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 177 of 184 
 
to drink something, okay. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Are you fine ma’am? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Thank you ma’am. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  So you have just explained EDC.  What does 
ECGD relate to? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair I cannot remember what 
ECGD stands for but it is the UK equivalent. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes.  You may proceed. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And Hermes is the German ECA.  
(indistinct) is the Chinese one.  So I was just mentioning this and then I 
10 
said for the DFIs we can explore KFW which is German, the African 
Development Bank, the French Development Bank, China Development 
Bank, DBSA, JBIG – JBIG is the Japanese (intervenes). 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes and there were some acronyms before 
that.  What does DFI stand for – D …? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO: 
 
Development 
Finance 
Institution.  So all of this - KFW is a German DFI.  AFD is the African 
one.  The French Development Bank is called AFD.  DPSA is our very 
own.  JBIC is Japanese Bank of International Corporation – I think. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes, thank you.  You may proceed. 
20 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And then I also go on to say that 
we can even tap the local market.  At that point Chair we were also 
exploring the possibility of having a locomotive bond.  Up to that point 
Chair we were issuing only general bonds.  We never had a project 
specific.  So we were exploring as well.  So – and I highlight in this 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 178 of 184 
 
email that we can even think about a locomotive specific bond that is a 
capital market bond secured by locomotives and in certain instances 
maybe covered a - which is an ECA wrapped bond.  So I was 
suggesting two specific bonds that can help to reduce costs further.  So 
Chair I then say that - I go on further to say that: 
“The fleet cost is based on a set of assumptions 
including the timing of contracting the exchange 
rate assumption and a mix of local and foreign 
content and therefore there are a number of risks 
that we need to monitor closely.” 
10 
And I say it is the currency risk, it is the commodity risk especially 
around steel prices, it is inflation, it is volume growth and implications 
on revenue (indistinct) because remember that these plans are 
supported by assumptions around certain businesses or certain revenue 
that will be generated.  So if volumes do not pick up then we will not 
have - the business will not be able to generate sufficient cash and 
then we also say that: 
“The timing of actual cash flows versus planned 
might have implications on the funding.” 
And that is where the bridge finance will come into play – you know – to 
20 
close that gap if necessary and then we go on further to say that: 
“There are new regulations around Basel 3 on swap 
cost and banks now have additional terms and 
conditions and additional costs that they need to 
include to cover their regulatory requirements.” 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 179 of 184 
 
So Chair – so –and then I go onto say that we must also think around 
the possible increase of the expected total cost on the two ratios Chair 
– the cash interest cover ratio and the gearing ratio.  What will be the 
impact?  Is it manageable, is it negative and so forth and finally the 
positive – the possible impact of the cost increase on our liquidity – on 
our liquidity ratio especially around the AB ratio which is the 1.2 times 
that we are targeting over a 12 month rolling base.  So I just highlight 
at a high level that these are the financing points that we must consider 
and on the Financial Risk Management aspect these are the points. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  And did you receive any response from 
10 
Mr Singh? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I do not remember.  I do not 
remember receiving a specific response. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  At the opening of that email you say there 
and I quote it verbatim: 
“Dear Anoj, herewith the note as promised.” 
Is one to understand that Mr Singh was expecting this note? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes Chair.  We had a discussion 
before and I said that I will write him a quick – a quick note and then I 
will follow it up with a formal memo. 
20 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Can we then turn to page 7 of the bundle?  
Still on EXHIBIT BB10B at your Annexure MMB.  What appears at page 
8 of that bundle? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Chair I then follow up the email 
note with a memorandum.  Chair again because we do not – so the 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 180 of 184 
 
memorandum is dated 12 April 2013 and I put now in – in detail what I 
had in the email of 7 April 2013.  The subject is “Funding Options for 
the 1 064 Locomotives”.  I then discuss – I give background of the 
locomotives and how much is expected to be spent over the next few 
years.  I then go on to discuss and to say that the funding sources will 
be grouped into the bridging finance.  Understanding that these types 
of procurement always needs a deposit of some sort.  I then follow up 
and say that: 
“We will consider…” 
In paragraph 6. 
10 
“We will consider long term funding sources.” 
And I start with the Domestic Medium-Term Note Program which was 
the core of our financing program.  I go on to say: 
“The export credit agencies and the development 
agencies.” 
And then I go further to say that: 
“We 
can 
even 
consider 
project 
specific 
or 
transaction specific bonds.” 
This is where I was talking about the project bond, local bond or an 
ECA wrapped bond and then under 6E I go on to say that: 
20 
“We can even go to bank loans but the challenge 
with bank loans is that they are limited in tender is 
three to five years and an asset like a locomotive 
has a long life span anything between 20 to 30 
years.  So when you finance such an asset you 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 181 of 184 
 
must always try to match the life of the asset with 
the life of the liability.” 
And then I also say that another possibility is a lease but over the 
years because this is not the first time that we will be procuring 
locomotives and for each of the procurement of locomotives we have 
always done a lease versus buy analysis and we have always found 
that a lease on a total cost of ownership basis turns out to be more 
expensive.  So I say that we can recheck again but over the years we 
have found it to be more expensive than a pure buy decision.  So I say: 
“The team will do an analysis of a buy versus a 
10 
lease option.” 
I go further to say that: 
“We must consider the following risk which I have 
highlighted in the email before.  Your currency, your 
still prices, the impact on interest cover, the volume 
inflation.” 
And so forth Chair.  So Chair what I am trying to say here is that we 
started thinking around the financing for the – for the locomotive SADS 
first quarter of 2013/2014 and Chair I need to bring to your attention 
that despite us having had many memorandums that we had drafted for 
20 
the GCFO I do not remember having a single memorandum signed.  My 
other memorandums Chair will be acknowledged and will be signed off 
and for one reason or the other Chair and it is only with the passing of 
time where a trend was now established that the other memorandums 
will be safely received, acknowledged and signed off but anything that 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 182 of 184 
 
related to the financing of the locomotives for one reason or the other 
the memorandums will be lost.  Even around … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is now memorandums from you to the Group 
CFO? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and this happened only with regard to 
memorandums to him? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  Yes, but only - no the other 
memorandums … 
CHAIRPERSON:  In regard to this specific one? 
10 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  For 1 064 … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  The memorandums would get 
lost. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  So for the financing part and for 
the financial risk management part and it is a trend that – it is a pattern 
that I only realised later that in actual fact the other memorandums I do 
not have problems but with these particular ones for one reason or the 
other they always get – so such that I cannot provide you with a 
20 
memorandum that I can say here is a financing memorandum that was 
signed.  The following annexure – if I may?  Counsel may I? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Chair – pardon me.  I am informed that there 
is no live feed by the - the technicians are struggling with the live feed. 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  And it is 5 o’ clock. 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 183 of 184 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  In any event we are passed five – we have gone 
beyond five.  What is your assessment of how far we are from 
finishing? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  I would say about an hour Chair.  However… 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is still going to be an hour? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes – tomorrow’s witness is scheduled from 
10 o’ clock and I have been advised by Mr Mokoena that he might take 
the whole day. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  So if we might propose to you Chair to start 
10 
at nine tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How is your availability tomorrow? 
MS MATHANE EVELINE MAKGATHO:  I am flexible Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are flexible.  There might be some difficulty in 
starting at nine tomorrow and then on Monday we is it aviation or is it 
the special witnesses? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  It is still Transnet Monday and … 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is still Transnet. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  It is still Transnet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No I think tomorrow we might have to continue 
20 
at 10 and we might just have to start later with the other witness and 
hopefully the –that witness will be available to continue on Monday  
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  No, he is not Chair.  I am advised that the 
witness is not available the following Monday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He is not available on Monday but he should finish in 
06 JUNE 2019 – DAY 107 
 
Page 184 of 184 
 
one day as you understand the position? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  As I understand it … 
CHAIRPERSON:  His evidence. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Provide he starts at 10. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, if he starts at 10? 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let us – let us start at half past nine tomorrow 
and continue with this witness and then we will see how we go.  We 
might be able to find another 30 minutes somewhere to make up for the 
– we will eat into the time of the next witness if we need one hour.  So 
10 
we will go into that witness’ time by 30 minutes and we will see where 
we can find 30 minutes during the day and then we take it from there. 
ADV REFILOE MOLEFE:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Let us stop – let us adjourn now.  So we will 
adjourn for today and then we will continue at half past nine tomorrow 
morning.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 7 JUNE 2019 
 
