 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
06 MAY 2019 
 
 
 
DAY 89 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 2 of 87 
 
PROCEEDINGS COMMENCE ON 6 MAY 2019  
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Pretorius, good morning everybody.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Are you ready?  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes we are Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Chair as foretold last week we 
are ceasing the evidence in relation to Law Enforcement Agencies but 
only for a period. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  We commencing this week and in 
the next few weeks with evidence in relation toTransnet.  
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  That will be followed by 
evidence in relation to other state ow ned entities where after we will 
resume with Law Enforcement Agencies.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Subject to such changes we may make to that 
arrangement in terms of bring in implicated persons so that programme 
will stay like that until there is a change.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  We will address you on that this 
week as discussed.  For today I will do a very brief opening to firstly 
inform you Chair and the public of the nature and structure of Transnet 
and to give a very brief introduction to the categories of evidence that 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 3 of 87 
 
we will lead in this the first phase.  That will be followed by what has 
been referred to in short hand as a gap analysis.  Transnet is one of 
those state owned entities that has instigated and has been subject of 
a plethora of forensic reports and these will be analysed by Ms Sello 
for the rest of the day after the opening.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Chair you have before you a file.  
In that file it does not have an exhibit number because it is not 
evidence.  You have the slides or copies of the slides which constitute 
the opening and then you have an executive summary of the gap 
10 
analysis together with the complete presentation which will be 
summarised by Ms Sello later today.  The opening will deal with a 
number of topics Chair and I am on page 2 of that document.  Firstly 
there will be a brief overview of Transnet business structures and 
functions.  The structure of Transnet and the nature of its business is  
far more than just a rail freight business.  Something which one is not 
necessarily aware of and we will therefore give an overview of what 
Transnet is or purports to be.  Then we will deal very briefly with key 
changes in governance structures and executive management of 
Transnet.  You will recall Chair the evidence of Barbara Hogan who 
20 
spoke of governance issues in Transnet and fundamental to the 
understanding of any state capture that you may find is how the acts of 
corruption that might be proved were orchestrated as part of a state 
capture project and that relates to governance, appointments and 
dismissals.  We will then very briefly and I stress very briefly deal with 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 4 of 87 
 
the summary of allegations of state capture, fraud and corruption in 
Transnet particularly those concerning which evidence will be given.  
And here Chair it is important to understand some of the features of 
Transnet and similarly Eskom and other state owned entities to a lesser 
extent.  There are issues that we know have been investigate d.  So for 
example we will come to the question of the purchase of 1064 the 1064 
locomotives.  There are issues which we know have been identified but 
are still to be investigated.  But importantly Chair there are also issues 
probably still to be identified which will in the future require 
investigation both at the hands of the state owned entities, Law 
10 
Enforcement Agencies as well as of course at the hands of the 
commission.  So we by no means purport to have a complete 
understanding of the nature and exte nt of fraud and corruption within 
Transnet.  For that reason Chair the evidence in Transnet will be 
presented in two phases.  The first phase which will take up 
approximately thirteen witnesses over the ensuing weeks.  Will cover a 
limited range of topics.  Most if not all of which have been the subject 
of intensive forensic investigation to date.  You will hear of the 
Werksmans Report or Reports.  You will hear of the MNS Reports and 
there are several MNS Reports and you will hear for example of the 
20 
Fundudzi Report and others and Ms Sello will give a more complete 
picture of the nature and extent of those reports and the extent to 
which there are matters yet to be identified and investigated and 
matters which have already identified but must still be invest igated.  
And what is important Chair to note and this will be raised with 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 5 of 87 
 
witnesses in the next few days and the next few weeks is that Transnet 
has selected and prioritised topics for investigation.  Large value 
transactions.  The investigation to that ex tent or the investigations to 
that extent have been internally controlled.  They are not externally 
controlled.  And in fact time constraints that the commission is obliged 
to abide will limit the nature and extent of the investigations that 
Transnet can present within the life span of the commission and will 
limit the nature of the investigations in fact that the commission itself 
can undertake.  Page 3.  Transnet SOC Limited Chair is a public 
company and it is established in terms of the legal succession to the 
10 
South African Transport Services Act of 1989 which has undergone 
several amendments obviously since that date.  It is a state owned 
entity with the government as the sole shareholder and that 
shareholder is represented by the Minister of Public Ente rprises.  
Transnet is not only a freight transport company it is the custodian of 
the railways, the ports and importantly pipeline networks and we will 
talk about pipeline networks in due course.  It is the largest freight and 
Logistics Company in South Africa and it connects various industries 
such a mining, manufacturing, distribution import and export of goods 
and commodities.  So it is an integrated freight transport company and 
20 
when one talks of logistics one is talking about the detailed 
organisation and implementation of quite a complex operation.  It is the 
management of the flow or movement of goods including commodities 
between a point usually a point of origin and a point of consumption or 
export in order to meet customer requirements.  It is far more than just 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 6 of 87 
 
moving of goods it is the organisation, the logistics dealing with those 
goods and the management of imports and exports.  It is comparable 
and asset size to some of the top 10 listed Johannesburg Stock 
Exchange companies.  It has approximat ely 51 000 employees and a 
capital base of R380 billion.  It is a crucial component of the South 
African economy.  It stimulates economic growth or ought to stimulate 
economic growth through employment, investment and capital projects 
and social upliftment.  It is the repository of vast amounts of tax 
payers’ money.  Transnet has five operating divisions and they are 
supported by a corporate centre which is at present head quartered in 
10 
Waterfall Estate Midrand.  No longer in Parktown.  That move itself may 
be the subject of investigation but enough said for the present Chair.  
There are five operating divisions as we have said.  There is Transnet 
Freight Rail, Transnet Rail Engineering, Transnet National Ports 
Authority, Transnet Port Terminals and Transnet Pipelines.  To deal first 
with Transnet Freight Rail this is the largest operating division within 
Transnet and as far as the public concerned the division which defines 
Transnet in the public eye.  It operates and maintains an extensive rail 
network across South Africa and connects with other rail networks in 
the Sub-Saharan region.  So it operates approximately 22  000 
20 
kilometres of rail track across South Africa.  It itself as division 
employs approximately 28  000 people and it was able to generate in 
2018 approximately R43,7 billion in revenue.  The next slide will give 
an indication of some of the logistics which will be relevant in evidence 
to come.  If one looks at the diagram on the right hand side you will 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 7 of 87 
 
see the coal line export from Mpumalanga to Richards Bay which is a to 
put it mildly very busy freight line and is the subject matter of some 
investigation in relation to the purchase of locomotives to service that 
line.  And then on the left hand side of that map one will see from 
Sishen at the top of the orange line to Saldanha – there Chair – the red 
line which is the iron ore export line.  Now both of those lines require 
specialised locomotives in order optimally to facilitate the export of 
vast tonnages of coal and iron ore.  So for example in 2 018 Transnet 
Freight Rail transported 77 metric tonnes of coal – 77 million I think 
that should be.  I will correct that Chair it is not 77 metric tonnes, 77 
10 
million metric tonnes of coal and a lesser but significant amount of 
metric tonnes of iron ore on the export iron ore line.  Those should be 
millions.  So the principle lines that are important Chair for the 
purposes of evidence to come will be the export iron ore line, the 
export coal line from Mpumalanga to Richards Bay, the iron ore line 
from Sishen to Saldanha and locomotives were also purchased for 
general freight purposes and that is the spider web of rail connections 
that you see in the map as a whole.  If we can go to page 8.  One of 
the biggest Transnet capital expenditure projects amounting to  R54 
billion that is 1/6 t h of the total assets of Transnet was the acquisition of 
20 
firstly 95 then 100 then 1064 locomotives.  Those locomotives included 
electric and diesel locomotives for use on the heavy haul lines that is 
the coal export line and the ir on ore export line and the general freight 
routes which you have seen on the map on the preceding slide.  The 
evidence to be led will cover procurement irregularities, significant 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 8 of 87 
 
procurement irregularities, alleged fraud and corruption relating to the 
procurement of these locomotives and payment therefore.  This aspect 
of the evidence has been subject to detailed forensic reports which will 
be summarised and presented to you Chair.  But the extent of the 
alleged corruption there runs into billions of rand Chair.  If we may 
move on then to Transnet engineering which also plays a role in the 
issues relating to the purchase and payment for locomotives.  It is the 
advanced manufacturing division of Transnet.  Its core business 
includes engineering, manufacturing, assembly of locomotives and the 
assembly of the 1064 locomotives is relevant here, maintenance 
10 
services for the rail industry locally and globally.  Transnet engineering 
manufactures and remanufactures locomotives, freight wagons and 
passenger coaches.  It is also assembles locomotives, parts of which 
are manufactured abroad.  And it also maintains and services related 
products.  The alleged corruption which is the subject matter of the 
various reports in relation to the purchase of electric and diesel 
locomotives involved amongst others and this evidence will be 
presented to you in the course of the next week or so Chair senior 
Transnet executives and board members importantly financial advisors 
and international suppliers acting in collusion.  If we may  go to page 
20 
10.  Transnet engineering operates six main establishments really they 
are something perhaps different from just factories situated in major 
city centres throughout South Africa.  And there will be evidence in 
relation to the locomotive issues of a so called relocation of the 
manufacturing 
processes 
to 
be 
conducted 
by 
two 
locomotive 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 9 of 87 
 
manufacturers China North Rail and Bombadier to the Durban factory of 
Transnet engineering.  The initial costs for that so called relocation it 
was really establishment was and estimated to be R9.7 million at least 
as concerned China North Rail.  Those costs escalated astronomically 
to total approximately R1.2 billion.  And the entity BEX which 
calculated those inflated costs or allegedly inflated costs from an 
original estimated R9.7 million to R647 million for China North Rail 
there was a similar cost for Bombadier that entity was paid R67 million 
for its troubles.  Now there are two issues in relation to this issue.  It is 
a complex issue and it will involve complex  evidence but in very broad 
10 
summary the question arises whether any cost should have been 
incurred at all.  Or whether the cost of establishing not relocating 
strictly speaking but establishing a manufacturing base in Durban 
should have been part of the overall tender price.  But even if it was an 
extra justifying a variation to the original contract the prima facie 
evidence and the actual evidence which you will hear will show that the 
cost of R1.2 billion was just an enormously unjustifiable and hugely 
inflated cost which should not have been incurred at all and in fact the 
recommendation has been to date that payments in respect of that so 
called relocation should stop.  So it is not as if there – and terminology 
20 
here too is important.  Relocation assumes  that there is an existing 
manufacturing operation in one location and that manufacturing 
operation is lifted up and moved and placed in another manufacturing 
operation.  That did not happen.  It was merely the establishment of 
manufacturing operations or assembly operations for the locomotives 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 10 of 87 
 
that were managed under the various contracts that will be discussed in 
due course.  So the ultimate costs that we are talking about here are in 
excess of R640 million for relocation or plant establishment for China 
North Rail on the one hand and a similar amount in excess or R600 
million for Bombadier.  The contract for the manufacture of 1064 
locomotives was established after tender processes with four original 
equipment manufacturers.  Bombadier, China North Rail, China South 
Rail and General Electric Chair.  Only two of those are involved in the 
so called relocation issue.  If we may move then to page 11.  Part of 
the Transnet establishment is the Transnet National Ports Authority.  
10 
You will see in the right hand side of that slide Chair a diagram 
showing the location of the ports under the control of the Transnet 
National Ports Authority.  They are Richards Bay, eThekwini or Durban, 
East London, Nggura, Port Elizabeth, Mossel Bay, Cape Town, 
Saldanha Bay and a larg ely inactive operation at Port Nolloth.   
Transnet controls the land within all the ports and has a role as the 
planner to improve, develop and maintain port infrastructure.  It also is 
responsible for the provision of port services and facilities and may 
obviously enter into agreements with or licence other parties to provide 
services at those various ports.  It makes and applies rules that control 
20 
navigation within the limits of the South African ports and the 
approached to them and its mandate is to provi de safe a secure ports 
and to protect the environment within port limits.  Transnet National 
Ports Authority employs approximately 4178 persons.  Controls 9 
national ports around South Africa.  There will be evidence led in 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 11 of 87 
 
relation to one particular proje ct undertaken under the auspices of 
Transnet National Ports Authority.  The allegations are that there were 
irregularities and corruption relating to the procurement of CCTV 
security cameras from an entity called Neotel which was a project 
intended to upgrade security in the national ports controlled by 
Transnet National Ports Authority.  Then there is a related division but 
a separate division within Transnet and that is Transnet Port Terminals.  
So whilst the port authority or the ports authority is respo nsible for the 
maintenance and development of the ports the physical ports 
themselves the logistics in relation to freight at the ports and from the 
10 
ports and to the ports is controlled under the auspices of the port 
terminals.  So the Transnet Port termin als a separate division but 
related as we have said is responsible for commercial services relating 
to freight including imports, exports, trans -shipments and containers as 
well as automotive parts and vehicles.   It services a range of customers 
they include the general shipping industry which in turn use the ports.  
They include vehicle manufacturers for import of parts and export or 
vehicles Agriculture, the steel industry, the mining industry, freight 
forwarders and cargo agencies.  And the port terminal s division has a 
staff compliment of over 7000 persons.  An important component of port 
20 
terminals infrastructure and capital base are as one will know if one 
has ever been to a port the cranes that operate the loading and 
unloading of freight onto and off ships.  There are allegations of fraud 
and corruption in relation to the acquisition of ship to shore cranes 
from entities spelled ZM – ZPMC and Libor and again vast amounts of 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 12 of 87 
 
alleged money wasted in essence are involved.  This matter is still 
under investigations and form the subject matter of phase 2 of the 
evidence or part of phase 2 of the evidence to be led before you Chair.  
If we may move then to the next final division of Transnet that is 
Transnet pipelines.  The importance of the pipelines divisio n to the 
economy of South Africa Chair is often not foremost in the public eye 
but Transnet pipelines is a vital part of the economic network servicing 
South Africa.  Transnet pipelines operates, manages and maintains 
3800 kilometres of a high pressure und erground petroleum and gas 
pipeline network in South Africa.  Its extent can be seen in the map on 
10 
the right hand side of that slide.  It essentially operates from KwaZulu 
Natal to Gauteng the economic hub Gauteng and their various offshoots 
and offtake stations along the way.  And its importance strategically to 
the economy of the country Chair is that it is central and critical in 
maintaining a reliable continuous and efficient supply of crude and 
refined products oil and gas to industry and to the public  at large.  It is 
a vast operation Chair.  It is a multipurpose pipeline.  In other words it 
is able to transport various goods in large volumes over long distances.  
It is buried well underground and it covers a distance of over 550 
kilometres.  As stated it is designed to transport liquid petroleum fuel 
20 
from Durban to Gauteng and neighbouring regions.  It can – is able to 
transport two diesel grades and two unleaded petrol grades as well as 
jet fuel from Durban to Gauteng.  The next slide is just anecdota l Chair.  
It is a factual collation or statistics in relation to the extent of the 
Transnet pipelines operation – apologies for the spelling error in the 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 13 of 87 
 
heading there Chair – but it is able to transport 1 million litres of fuel 
per hour through its pipeline operation.  Its structure and manufacture 
is vast.  A number of detailed issues had to be attended to in its 
construction, river crossings, wetland crossings and the like.  It is 
ranked amongst the largest multiproduct pipelines in the world.  
Importantly Chair – and this is a matter that is perhaps a matter that 
ought to be looked at but we do not have direct evidence at present.  It 
was initially forecast to cost about R12.7 billion.  Perhaps not 
unsurprisingly 
and 
predictably 
Transnet 
has 
spent 
by 
201 7 
approximately R30.4 billion – almost – well two and a half times the 
10 
initial cost and costs are apparently increasing continuously as time 
goes by.  There have been allegations of fraud and corruption and 
these are the subject of investigation.  They dea l at page 21 - thanks – 
Chair this section of the opening will deal with general allegations at a 
– quite a high level of summary in regard to the investigations and 
reports of state capture, fraud and corruption within Transnet.  The 
allegations of corruption at Transnet and where this Commission will 
ask its questions, present its evidence and make submissions to Chair 
in regard to possible findings that you can make ultimately centre 
largely on procurement.  These include questionable transaction for 
20 
port cranes, locomotives, IT services and also importantly Chair 
advisory financial management and consulting services.  You will hear 
in due course Chair of the existence a Transnet of a capable, highly 
skilled and well populated Treasury Department which wa s at a stage 
completely 
side-lined 
in 
favour 
of 
external 
advisory 
financial 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 14 of 87 
 
management and consulting services at huge cost to Transnet and the 
taxpayer.  Many of the contracts which will be examined Chair were 
awarded by consignment.  That is without an o pen tender and the 
allegations that will be examined concern allegations of kickbacks to 
front companies related amongst others to members of the Gupta family 
and these were paid often under the guise of promoting BEE or 
empowerment partners.  Those are th e allegations that will be 
examined and those are the allegations which in the evidence will be 
questioned and testified to.  What is important about these deals in 
addition of course to the loss or the alleged loss of finances and money 
10 
to the tune of billions of Rand is that accompanying these allegations 
or the circumstances which form the subject matter of the allegations of 
corruption is an ongoing systematic weakening of the governance 
structures within Transnet.  I have mentioned but one example of t he 
side-lining of a perfectly competent well regarded Treasury function 
within Transnet.  There will be evidence of appointments to boards that 
were in appropriate.  There will also be evidence of the centralisation 
of procurement functions decision making  powers within Transnet and 
that evidence will be given in due course.  One example I will deal with 
in a moment.  So on page 23 we highlight some of the implications of 
20 
what has happened in the past decade or so within Transnet.  Firstly 
the situation or the direness of the situation within Transnet has been 
compounded significantly by the outsourcing of internal Treasury Audit 
Enterprise Data Management and other corporate functions to a related 
network of private firms with corrupt or allegedly corrupt i nterests.  So 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 15 of 87 
 
what has happened is that rather than perform the functions internally 
through outsourcing - and in some cases unnecessary outsourcing the 
evidence will be – of for example Treasury functions.  A set of 
relationships was created which enabled  corrupt activities or alleged 
corrupt activities to take place.  You will hear evidence …  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry – I am sorry Mr Pretorius.  You referred a 
minute ago to the centralisation of power in Transnet including hurrying 
and procurement powers. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may need to flag that so that in due course 
10 
somebody could just go back to Ms  Phumla Williams’ evidence in terms 
of what happened at GCIS and see whether what she said happened 
there is in anyway compared to the centralisation of power in relation 
to … 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Procurement here … 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Once … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That will be talked about. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair.  Of course once  – and 
this is a central function of this Commission’s inquiry …  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Is to detect whether there are 
patterns. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Which indicates a degree of 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 16 of 87 
 
organisation rather tha n … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Just random …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And disconnected acts of alleged 
corruption …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And we will certainly do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, because I do recall that she alleged that after 
Mr Mzwanele Manyi had been appointed as head of GCIS he changed – 
10 
made certain changes which ensured that the power relating to 
procurement was centralised if I am not mistaken but I am not sure.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  That is precisely what happened 
and I will come to the detail or at least to some extent to the detail in 
due course but … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Two things happened really 
within Transnet is that a special committee at board level was 
established 
under 
particular 
designated 
personnel 
about 
whom 
allegations of corruption abound at board level.  That is the BADC – the 
20 
Board Acquisitions and Disposals Committee.  At the same time the 
divisions within Transnet – the five divisions about which we have 
spoken – were disempowered in relation to procurement so that all 
decisions relating to procurement could be made by – in essence – a 
few individuals and the allegations are that they were “captured” Ch air.  
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 17 of 87 
 
You will hear in a moment Chair of a massive capital expenditure 
project involving billions – hundreds of billions – of Rand and within 
those projects costs burgeoned over a period of time and it is arguable 
and the question will be asked whether tha t increase in costs over a 
period of time within the various projects for example on the so called 
relocation from an initial nine million to less than 100 million to 1.2 
billion from locomotives 38 billion to over 50 billion whether those 
increases of costs were connected to attempts for private gain and the 
conclusion which will be examined is these events - which will be 
examined in evidence Chair - the question must be asked the important 
10 
functions that Transnet must perform for the economy of South Afr ica 
has its ability to perform those functions ultimately being weakened or 
has it been enhanced and there will be evidence to show that the 
former is the case but it is a question at this stage that will be posed.  
There is no doubt Chair that money has b een lost. The circumstances 
and the elements of fault in the organisation are matters for 
investigation – vast amounts of money have been lost.  So there is no – 
there is no doubt that the finances have been affected but there is also 
the important consequence of the weakening of Transnet as an 
institution in its capacity and ability to deliver on what is its important 
20 
function for the economy of the country.  So one matter that will be 
examined over the period of the evidence to be presented and a matter 
that will concern you – Chair – is what governance and structural 
reforms might be necessary to ensure that Transnet and other State 
Owned Entities are able to perform their function within the South 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 18 of 87 
 
African economy because the allegation is that Transnet h as been 
abusing.  Its structures have been weakened in order to facilitate the 
export of billions and billions of Rand offshore to parties who certainly 
should not have enjoyed that benefit.  Chair on page 25 of the slides 
we deal with some changes in Government and Executive Management 
within Transnet from May 2009 onwards.  At this stage apart from 
certain comments that I will make in a moment we seek to draw no 
conclusions – certainly seek to draw no final conclusions – at this 
stage in relation to appointments and dismissals.  Merely to record that 
they occurred - to highlight the presence and position of certain 
10 
individuals within these changing structures and to ask the question as 
to whether these appointments and dismissals were somehow related 
organisationally and functionally to the series of alleged corrupt acts 
that followed and the money flows which occurred as a result.  Between 
May 2009 and October 2010 the Department of Public Enterprises 
Minister concerned was Ms  Barbara Hogan who has given evidence 
before you Chair and on page 25 you have the persons involved in the 
Ministry assisting her in that function.  She has given evidence about 
the circumstances which she confronted whilst she was Minister of 
Public Enterprises.  The events, the relationships and their outcome for 
20 
her position as Minister of Public Enterprises.  If I may then go through 
to page 26?  One will see there the Acting Chief Financial Officer who 
interestingly was appointed a week or so after the resignation of 
Ms Maria Ramos from Transnet in 2009 as Acting Chief Financial 
Officer – he will feature largely in the evidence that will be given.  In 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 19 of 87 
 
November 2010 Minister Gigaba was appointed as the Minister of 
Public Enterprises and that appointment – and that is at page 27 – 
brought about significant changes in Governance and Executive 
Management within Transnet.  So for example one report to which you 
will be referred in due course puts it as follows:  the word “repurposing” 
arises and that word in this report broadly means the appointment in 
Governance and Executive Management of a particular State Owned 
Entity in order to direct its activities towards illegal gain.  In other 
words the question that this Commission will ask is whether this 
repurposing took place.  In other words  whether these dismissals, 
10 
whether these appointments were directly intended to further the 
project of state capture, corruption and fraud.  One of the reports puts 
it as follows and of course the sentiments expressed which I am about 
to quote now will be the subject of evidence and investigation.  So at 
the moment we put it as a question for investigation.  The report states:  
“This repurposing began with the appointments of 
Boards 
and 
Executives. 
 
Minister 
of 
Public 
Enterprises Barbara Hogan resisted this emerging 
undue 
influence 
on 
appointment 
which 
likely 
accounted for her dismissal only 18 months after 
20 
her appointment.  Malusi Gigaba replaced her as 
Minister of Public Enterprises in November  2010 
while he was an early vocal supporter of using 
procurement budgets of state owned entities to 
pursue economic transformation often the result 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 20 of 87 
 
was 
to 
unduly 
benefit 
elites 
including 
local 
politicians, wealthy international corporates and a 
foreign family that would become billionaires as a 
result.  Starting with the new board headed by 
Mafika Mkhwanazi who has admitted to a personal 
relationship with the Gupta family.  There would go 
on to be many individuals with ties to the Guptas 
who would be appointed to Transnet’s Board and 
Executive Team.” 
The allegation in that report and summary Chair is that these 
10 
appointments from a Ministerial to an Executive level were designed to 
and influenced by external interests.  That is the allegation that will be 
the subject matter of interrogation in the evidence to follow.  Cer tainly 
as far as the nature and purpose of Government and Executive changes 
commencing in November  2010.  At page 28 one will see the Executive 
changes that happened under the watch Minister  Gigaba.  We have 
mentioned Mr Mkhwanazi who was the Chairman of t he Board of 
Directors between 2011 and 2014.  Importantly - and a name that will 
feature prominently in the evidence over the next few weeks - is the 
appointment of Mr Brian Molefe as Group Chief Executive in 2011.  
20 
What is interesting as a feature about t hat appointment is that it was 
forecast in the New Age Newspaper three months before it actually 
occurred.  In relation to his particular appointment and the processes 
followed there has been a great deal of controversy and evidence will 
in due course be led concerning how Mr Molefe became to be 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 21 of 87 
 
appointed, the processes followed in his appointment and whether 
these were proper – to put it bluntly – or not.  It was on 
7 December 2010 about three months before his appointment the New 
Age without quoting its s ources said: 
“The New Age has it on good authority that Molefe 
will be appointed CEO by the Board.”  
That newspaper correctly predicted other appointments to the new 
Transnet Board including that of the Chairperson Mr  Mkhwanazi – no - 
Chairman 
of 
the 
Board 
Acquisitions 
and 
Disposals 
Committee 
Mr Mkhwanazi is different from the Chairman of the Board.  One will 
10 
see that the Executive Manager under the watch of Mr  Gigaba included 
Mr Molefe, Mr Anoj Singh who was appointed permanently as Chief 
Financial Officer in 2010, Mr Don Mkhwanazi who was Chairman of the 
Board Acquisitions and Disposals Committee.  That is the Procurement 
Committee that I spoke of earlier Chair that was centralised and 
wielded enormous decision making powers in relation to the vast 
procurement projects that took place and then Mr  Iqbal Sharma 
succeeded him as Chair and you will hear of him in due course.  In fact 
we are informed Chair that it was Mr  Iqbal Sharma that nominated 
Brian Molefe for appointment as General Chief Executive or Group 
20 
Chief Executive and you will learn in due course that Mr  Sharma played 
a central role as Chairperson of the BADC.  Mr  Sharma as Chairperson 
of Transnet’s Board Acquisitions and Disposals Committee and Mr  Essa 
were business associates and the evidence is th at certainly Mr Essa or 
a company in which Mr Essa was involved a company called Tequesta 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 22 of 87 
 
you will hear - that is T-E-Q-U-E-S-T-A - benefitted enormously from 
what the reports allege is quite an improper deal to the extent of tens 
of millions of Rands.  If I may just mention that it was under the watch 
of Mr Singh as General Chief Financial Officer that the contract in 
relation to the 1064 locomotives ballooned – it is alleged in the reports 
unjustifiably – from an amount of R38.6 billion to well over R50 b illion.  
Then over the page on page 29 Chair Minister  Lynne Brown was 
appointed as Minister of the Department of Public Enterprises in 
May 2014.  On page 29 one can see those in the department who were 
mandated with the task of her Ministry and its functio ns.  On page 30 
10 
one will see the changes in Executive Management.  You will hear 
evidence in relation to the General Chief – the Group Chief Executive 
Mr Siyabonga Gama, Mr Garry Pita the Chief Financial Officer, the 
Group Treasurer Mr Ramosebudi and the C hairman of the BADC 
Mr Stanley Shane.  They will all featured prominently in evidence.  The 
evidence will be that all the persons who I have named - who apart 
from Mr Anoj Singh - came onto the scene under the watches 
respectively of Minister  Gigaba and Minister Brown played a significant 
role as Senior Executives in the circumstances which have given rise to 
the allegations and to the findings of corruption in the various reports.  
20 
I may just mention Chair a relevant section of the Governing Legislation 
which is a matter that perhaps bears interrogation.  It is the Legal 
Succession to the South African Transport Services Act Section 17 
which 
gives 
the 
Minister 
responsible 
powers 
but 
clearly 
also 
concomitant duties.  It reads: 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 23 of 87 
 
“Without in any way derogating from the provisions 
of Section 15 should the company …”  
That is Transnet. 
“…act in a manner contrary to the strategic or 
economic interests of the Republic of South Africa 
the Minister may direct the company by means of a 
written notice or by any other mea ns that he may 
deem desirable to discontinue such activity within a 
reasonable period which shall be stipulated in the 
notice or other means of communication employed.”  
10 
And it may be an interesting part of our investigations to determine 
whether and if so which and when notices under that section were 
issued because one of the most important aspects of the investigations 
to date and in future will be the question of oversight both Ministerial 
and Parliamentary.  As you know Chair Parliament has through its 
Committees already embarked upon investigations into State Owned 
Entities.  Just bear with me a moment please Chair.  On page 31 at  
least one of the key changes in the manner in which Transnet was 
governed is highlighted.  You will hear Chair of the establ ishment of the 
Board Acquisitions and Disposals Committee under the watch of 
20 
Minister Gigaba and continued under the watch of Minister Brown.  It is 
that committee that as we’ve said exercised wise precision making 
powers in relation to procurement within Transnet. 
 
That procurement took place against a background of what is 
highlighted on page 32 and that is the market demand strategy of 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 24 of 87 
 
Transnet.  Essential to that strategy Chair was rather than responding 
to customer demand, or market demand, a decision was made on the 
part of Transnet to create demand, and I will deal with that in due 
course, but for the moment what is important is the allocation of 
R300billion to capital expenditure, a fertile ground for what is alleged 
to have transpired and what is fo und to have transpired in the many 
reports which will be placed before you.  
 
The market demand strategy was an investment program well 
intentioned to expand and modernise the country’s rail, port and 
pipeline infrastructure over a period of seven years in order to promote 
10 
economic growth in South Africa.   
 
The question will be asked is has that result been achieved.  
So R300billion was earmarked for a capital investment program, 
immediate question may be posed was that capital investment program 
properly utilised for the benefit of South Africans or was it to some or 
even large degree money thrown away.  
 
 
The underlying intention was to increase the operations of 
Transnet, increase its capacity so that it could generate market 
demand, so that if there was a n efficient export rail service it would 
attract customers rather than merely meet existing demand.  It was 
20 
obviously aimed at maintaining financial stability and strength, it was 
aimed at productivity and operational efficiency.  Important in the 
Transnet strategy was a desire to encourage a shift from road to rail.  
The benefit to the economy, the maintenance of the road framework 
which is overburdened by freight at present is obvious.   
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 25 of 87 
 
 
Not only might that reduce the cost of doing business, the 
logistics of freight movement but also would have a beneficial 
environmental effect, and mostly importantly properly managed the 
project would have enabled economic growth, job creation, skills 
development, 
localisation 
of 
production 
empowerment 
and 
transformation opportunities.   And the question that is posed Chair is 
whether that market demand strategy and the related capital 
expenditure plan of well over R300billion albeit that it was clearly 
sound in its objectives and principles whether that was exploited for  the 
purposes of State Capture, fraud and corruption, whether through the 
10 
dismissals and appoints, the weakening of oversight and governance, 
the centralisation of decision-making in regard to procurement, 
arguably in the wrong hands, has undermined a mark et demand 
strategy that arguably was for the great benefit of the country.  
 
And so the question will be asked whether that program 
rendered Transnet in short a prime target for looting.   
 
So Chair on page 35 we say that during this first phase of 
evidence approximately 13 witnesses will give evidence, that evidence 
will 
cover 
not 
only 
allegations 
but 
findings 
of 
procurement 
irregularities, fraud and corruption relating to a number of procurement 
20 
categories of issue. 
 
Firstly there are the contracts for the  purchase of the 95, the 
100 and the 1064 locomotives, contracts between Transnet and Chine 
South Rail as well as China North Rail.  There will be evidence of the 
appointment of financial advisors, McKinsey, Regiments and Trillian as 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 26 of 87 
 
advisors to Transnet, the nature of those relationships and the cost of 
those relationships to Transnet and ultimately the taxpayer and 
importantly the proprietary of those contracts.  I mentioned the so -
called relocation of the locomotive manufacturing operations from 
Gauteng to KwaZulu Natal, contracts and other transactions with Key 
Systems, contracts and other transactions with Neotel.  On page 36 we 
highlight the nature of evidence to be led in relation to the procurement 
of the 95 locomotives contrary to procurement proced ures and policies 
of Transnet.   
 
Also the separate category of issue, the acquisition of 100 
10 
locomotives by confinement to China South Rail for R4.84billion, which 
involved not only failure to comply with procurement procedures within 
Transnet but unilateral changes to the business plan by senior 
executives and misrepresentations made to the Board of Transnet.  
 
Then in 2014 the massive procurement contract involving the 
manufacture and purchase of the 1064 locomotives.  That is the 
contract that was split between four manufacturers, China South Rail, 
Bombardier, General Electric and China North Rail.  
 
Some of the issues that will be discussed is that these 
manufacturers or original equipment manufacturers were obliged to 
20 
source up to 60% of their components  from South African sub -
contractors, this did not happen.  This whole process was overseen by 
the Board Acquisitions and Disposal Committee.  
 
The costs at page 38 of this operation increase significantly 
from R38billion to R54billion.  Whether this was jus tifiable at all, 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 27 of 87 
 
whether increase in costs was permissible in terms of the original 
contractual arrangements is a matter that will be raised and has been 
raised in the report, but much of what occurred in the increase in costs 
was not so much the increase in costs of the equipment or the original 
equipment and its assembly but the financial dealings, the cross -border 
financial dealings, the interest rate swaps, very complex evidence that 
will be given, hopefully clearly by someone other than – or led by 
someone other than myself Chair, in a way that can be understood.   
 
The relocation I’ve dealt with, the involvement of McKinsey, 
Regiment and Trillian as advisors, in which relationships were sourced 
10 
arguably the loss of billions of Rands to Transnet as a re sult of the 
finances relating to payment for the deals, and what is of some concern 
potentially is why the Transnet Treasury Department was sidelined 
completely in this operation when according to the evidence it was 
capable of doing the work that McKinsey, Regiment and Trillian were 
employed to do. 
 
There will be evidence Chair of tens of millions of Rands paid 
to companies that did nothing for it, just simply paid, arguably just 
looted or stolen.   
 
Then on page 39 we deal with the Neotel contract, the en tire 
20 
digital communication network services was outsourced to Neotel 
during the period 2009 to 2019.  As part of that operation an amount of 
R300million was spent in purchasing certain network equipment from 
Neotel under a Master Services Agreement.  R34mi llion was paid to an 
entity called Homex, again as a “success fee” for facilitating that 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 28 of 87 
 
contract which was worth as we said R300million.  A new Master 
Service Agreement was signed in 2014 which again resulted in 
payments being made to Homex totalling an a mount of R41million as a 
success fee.  The question is not whether that was a payment of an 
amount of money in excess of what ought to have been paid, but 
whether it should have been paid at all.  In other words whether the 
amount of R34million and R41million was simply looted from the coffers 
of Transnet for no value whatsoever, that will be the question that will 
be asked. 
 
Similar to the over R70million paid to Tequesta in relation to 
10 
the 1064 locomotives deal entity in which Mr Essa had an interest and 
we know that Mr Sharma and Mr Essa were business associates.   
 
So Chair there are a number of transactions here where one is 
not only talking of payments that have involved the ballooning of 
manufacturing costs, but matters where the allegations have been , and 
the reports have shown that no money should have been paid at all and 
yet it seems that tens of millions of Rands were in fact paid, and that 
is, those are questions the veracity of which and the allegations in 
relation to which will be examined in e vidence over the next few weeks. 
 
Then Chair we have in relation to Key Systems on page 40 
20 
allegations of the favouring of particular bidders who ought not to be 
have been favoured in the awarding of contracts and the intervention of 
the 
Board 
in 
overruling 
the 
procurement 
processes 
and 
recommendations of the evaluation team, disregarding the business 
owner, that is the division from which the contract emerged, or for 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 29 of 87 
 
whom the services were to be rendered and I’ve mentioned the 
disempowerment of the divisio ns and the business owners.  That 
contract was ultimately set aside and declared irregular by the High 
Court. 
 
Chair there are as we have tried to stress a number of other 
matters, besides the matters already subject to the reports that appear 
to indicate that notwithstanding the attempts of Transnet itself, of 
Parliament and of independent investigators to uncover what happened 
in Transnet over the period of time that is the subject matter of the 
evidence that we have been mandated to place before you Chai r, 
10 
whether there is not too a vast amount of unknown matters still to deal 
with and investigate, whether we will have the capacity and the time to 
do so certainly mechanisms should be in place to ensure that a 
complete and thorough investigation into all p rocurement within 
Transnet takes place and that will be the subject of further 
investigation, but many reports including Gupta Leaks Chair indicate 
the presence of other (indistinct) besides that which we foreshadowed 
in this opening. 
 
Chair I see it’s quarter past eleven. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, we will take the tea adjournment and we will 
20 
resume at half past eleven.  We adjourn.  
INQUIRY ADJOURNS  
INQUIRY RESUMES  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Thank you Chair. There are 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 30 of 87 
 
some housekeeping matters which we will deal with tomorrow morning 
that have arisen this morning.  I need not trouble you with them now 
but for the present Ms Sello will present the gap analysis on existing 
reports into the matters relating to Transnet.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.  Ms Sello. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair and thank you Mr Pretorius.  
Chair with your leave may I start by handing you two indices in a little 
pack.  I am going to suggest that the Chair retain these two indices for 
the duration of the Transnet evidence.  It will make reference to the 
various reports and volumes much easier.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you.  You have Chair to your right 
volumes of reports that are being submitted on behalf of Transnet.   
CHAIRPERSON:  To my left. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  To your left, my right. My apologies Chair.  To 
your left indeed.   
CHAIRPERSON:  There is nothing to my right.  Yes.  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And Chair just to point out a few things before 
I deal with the respective  reports. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
20 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  There is a total of 17 separate documents.  
Combined they run to 26931 pages.  We tried to think of a way to make 
them presentable to you without necessarily subjecting you to 26000 
pages and we have come up  with the following system which we hope 
will meet with your approval.  You have been provided with 16 of the 17 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 31 of 87 
 
and I will explain shortly why reports excluding their respective 
annexures.  That is what make the report so voluminous.   Except for 
the reports we call the MNS Reports.  The reason for that is that there 
will be evidence led specifically on the MNS Reports where the 
annexures during the course of the hearings become pivotal.  What we 
have done instead is to provide you with a report and a list  of all 
annexures relating to that report what pages they would appear at 
except that the annexures are provided electronically.  Your volumes as 
you currently have therefore Chair would run from Volume 1 to Volume 
17.  This is excluding those annexures.  If that meets with your 
10 
approval Chair I suggest that we approach the matter in that way?  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja that is fine thank you. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Secondly Chair in the file that Mr Pretorius 
handed you today the Chair will realise that it is in three parts.  The 
first part if the presentation that Mr Pretorius has just given.  The 
second part is what we call the executive summary of the gap analysis.  
And the third part is the full gap analysis.  We have tried to create an 
executive summary for purposes of presentation today. [Indistinct] as 
we tried we did not reduce it to as much as we had hoped we would be 
able to.  The two indices I handed up to the Chair in a red folder they 
20 
relate in – they relate to the main gap analysis which is the third 
document in your folder.  So the pages will correspond.  What we have 
done for the executive summary is to paginate afresh the executive 
summary starting with page 1 and that is for ease of reference during 
presentation.  We have not tampered with the original t yped numbering 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 32 of 87 
 
of the document which will correspond with the index as I have given 
and with the main presentation.  That way the Chair is able should he 
so desire and if he has made any notes on any page to substitute page 
5 or page 15 of the main presentation with the one he has made notes 
on.  Thank you Chair.  Before I get into the respective reports I need to 
point out that the reports that we present today do not purport to 
constitute a result of thorough investigation of all Transnet affairs.  As 
we go through the report the Chair will notice that each investigation 
had a specific scope and mandate and at times there would at first 
blush appear to be overlaps and duplications but as we go through the 
10 
reports the Chair will notice that what would appea r as duplications or 
overlaps have got a rational explanation.  If now the Chair would have 
regard to the executive summary.  I will move Chair to page 5 of that 
executive summary and at – just to give an overview of the gap 
analysis itself and to indicate  that there are 19 reports in total that we 
have deemed relevant to the affairs of Transnet.  We have tried to 
classify them in a coherent fashion that would make it easier to follow.  
We have divided the presentation into three section a, b and c where 
section a are what we call reports by public organs and at times 
presentation by Eskom to the Portfolio Committee.  Section b are the 
20 
forensic reports.  The actual forensic reports following investigations 
and section 3 just highlights certain relevant court  cases that will be 
dealt with or that will be – will be covered in the course of testimony 
before you Chair.  Now if I may then turn over to page 6 and deal with 
the first section, section A which are reports by public organs.  The first 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 33 of 87 
 
report at page 7 is just the front page of the Public Protector’s state of 
capture report.  This report is relevant for Transnet but to avoid 
prolixity we have not included it in this presentation because it has 
served before you already as Exhibit A.  That will then take us to the 
second report which is the Public Affairs Research Institute Report 
starting at page 9.  This – this report was generated on 24 August 2018 
following research conducted by the Public Affairs Research Institute 
PARI for short.  If the Chair would have regard to page 10 we explain at 
point 2 thereof the limitations of that – this report and it states that the 
authors of this reference book have set out to provide an independent 
10 
accessible concise and fact based account of some but not all of the 
alleged instances of governance failure and corruption at Transnet.  
Only on reading of the report the limitations or the report are clear and 
one understands specifically which alleged instances of governance 
failure have been dealt with in the report.  At p age 11 we list the 
specific transactions that the PARI report covers and it’s the A 
transactions that appear on the screen.  Some of these transactions 
have also been considered by other investigators.  The difference 
between what PARI did and what other i nvestigators – how the other 
investigators conducted their investigations is that PARI relied in the 
20 
main on the Gupta – some of the Gupta leaks emails and 
documentation that was in the public domain already.  As we deal 
further with these reports we will deal with some of these transactions 
such as the procurement of locomotives, Neotel, Regiments, T-
Systems.  And the reports in respect of each one of them further on in 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 34 of 87 
 
the report are based on investigations of original documentation.  To 
the extent therefore that there may be contradictions between the 
original investigation and the PARI report the explanation is that the 
investigators used original documentation obtained from Transnet and 
other reliable sources.  We express a view at page 12 whether Chair  
you can con – you can accept this report and our view is that yes you 
may with the [indistinct] that we understand that it is based on the 
Gupta leaks not the entire HDDH record and publicly available 
information.  With that qualifier we submit that it ma y be admitted.  
They – we note that further investigations need to be conducted by the 
10 
commission itself to give credence or deal with some of the issues or 
finding that the PARI report have made with reference to their own 
material and the entire HDDH rep ort.  The second document Chair at 
page 13 is headed Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and 
Transnet and dated 20 – 12 February 2019.  This in fact is a 
presentation made by Transnet to the Portfolio Committee on trade and 
industry.  In essence to give a report of steps it had taken following the 
various investigations into Transnet and these are then listed at page 
14 the steps thus far taken by Transnet Chief amongst which has been 
the institution of criminal cases where relevant someone has been 
20 
issued to those employees who are suspected of wrongdoing in an 
attempt to recoup the monies lost to Transnet and some have also been 
issued to the companies Regiments, Capital and Trillian – and Trillian 
who had transaction advisors in what as Mr Pretorius  has indicated was 
the 1064 acquisition process.  We list further on senior Transnet of 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 35 of 87 
 
former Transnet officials who the reports have pointed to as having 
committed some irregularities and summons have been issued to the 
people listed therein.  At page 15 is a table that on its own is – would 
not make much sense.  The purpose of this table is to give a sense of 
the 1064 acquisition process and notwithstanding its [indistinct] 
purchase price that by March 2018 – by December 2018 none of the 
contracts had been executed to the full.  There are still a whole lot of 
outstanding deliveries and these are some of the problems for Transnet 
as they continue to increase costs.  These first then three documents 
Chair are what we call Section A and they are to be found in Volume 1 
10 
of your report.  If I then proceed to page 17.  Page 17 is the start of 
Section B the forensic reports.  And the first is at page 18 which is the 
Werksmans Report, acquisition of 1064 locomotives.  Page 19 reflects 
the mandate that was given to  Werksmans by the Transnet board at the 
time and this included inter alia to establish whether the processes 
followed in procuring the 1064 locomotives were in compliance with 
Transnet policies and procedures as well as National Treasury 
regulations.  To review and validate submissions made to the 
[indistinct] adjudication committee and the board in respect of the 
procurement of the 1064 locomotives and to ascertain amongst other 
20 
things the reason for the increase in the estimated total costs to 
establish whether prices were inflated after hedging and determine 
whether escalations and contingencies were added.  The mandate was 
broader than that Chair we just highlight the key issues that are 
addressed in this report.  And at page 20 we reflect the conclusion  and 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 36 of 87 
 
the view is that the – the report is subject to limitations.  It is apparent 
from the report that the report must be considered inconclusive.  
Werksmans was frustrated at every turn. It did not enjoy any 
cooperation and – from the management and board  of Transnet at the 
time and was denied access to relevant information.  In the 
circumstances it could not make any conclusive findings in respect of 
the mandates that I have referred to.  The next report appears or 
before I get to the next report the Werk mans Report is the last of the 
reports in your Volume 1 Chair.  So that completes your Volume 1.  We 
then get to page 21.  At page 21 we deal with reports prepared by MNS 
10 
attorneys.  MNS attorneys investigated and have submitted six separate 
forensic reports.  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It may be a useful idea to have another copy of the 
index that you have given me. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That can be put at the beginning of this – these 
reports which will tell me without me having to lo ok for the separate 
bundle in which volume which report belongs.  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  I will do so Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Will do. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  I am not at page 21 and dealing with the MNS 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 37 of 87 
 
reports.  There are a total of six forensic reports submitted by MNS 
Attorneys.  The first is a procurement of Transnet 1064 locomotive – 
locomotives.  The second concerns the alleged irregularities relating t o 
the appointment of the transactional advisors in respect of the 
acquisition of the 1064 locomotive tender and financial transactions 
concluded pursuant thereto.  In that respect there are two separate 
volumes.  The third was an investigation into the pro curement by 
Transnet of 95 on the one hand and 100 locomotives and these – the 
results are reflected in two separate volumes.  And the last is the 
relocation of the manufacturers to Durban.  Turning then to the 
10 
procurement of the 1064 locomotives themselve s.  This report starts at 
page 22 dated October 2018.  The mandate as reflected at page 23 of 
MNS and the Chair would immediately realise that the mandate in large 
part corresponds with the mandate given to Werksmans.  It was to 
investigate the same issues  that Werkmans had investigated.  The 
reason for this as – at the time of engagement of MNS the whole 
investigation had to be redone.  MNS enjoyed better access to the 
information held by Transnet whereas Werksmans was not able to do so 
a year previously.  So any – there may be one or two contradictions 
between the two but as we work through the MNS reports through 
20 
witnesses it will become apparent why it is a [indistinct] arrives at a 
different conclusion should that be the case to the conclusion drawn by 
Werksmans on the same issue.  In the main as far as 1064 is 
concerned Mr Pretorius brought to your attention Chair that insofar as 
1064 – the acquisition of 1064 is concerned there was an – a 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 38 of 87 
 
significant increase in the cost of acquisition from R38 billion  to R54 
billion.  MNS was to investigate the cause of that increase and to 
determine whether the reasons advanced for the – for the increase 
were reasonable and justifiable.  This is contained in the report and 
MNS has drawn its conclusion and when we pres ent the witnesses in 
respect of MNS we will take the Chair slowly through the process of 
how this price [indistinct] from R38 billion and to R54 billion and will be 
able to demonstrate why it is at the end of the day MNS draws a 
conclusion that the increas e of over R15 billion was unjustifiable in the 
circumstances.  If I then turn over to page 24 – from page 24 to 26 we 
10 
highlight the key findings made by MNS in this report and as I have 
alluded to just before bullet point 3 it deals significantly with the 
increase in the ETC from R38 billion to R54 billion.  In this case MNS 
notes that Mr Gama was a signatory to the memorandum that 
misrepresented to the board the true reasons and extent of their 
increase from the initial ETC to R54 billion.  The initial ETC  being 
R38.6 billion.  This was misleading because it is apparent that hedging 
and forex escalations were already included in the initial ETC of R38.6 
billion.  The hedging and forex escalations were advanced as to some 
of the reasons to justify the increase.  At point 4 it states one of the 
20 
reasons for the increase was the batch pricing.  Mr Gama attended the 
BADC meeting of 26 February 2014 but he failed to inform the BADC of 
the increase and the reasons for the increase of the ETC.  At 26 we 
deal with the board’s failure to obtain the Ministerial approval of that 
increase in the ETC.  The decision to commit Transnet to batch pricing 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 39 of 87 
 
arising out of split – the splitting of the award.  And at page 26 we deal 
with other non-compliance issues such as failure to comply with the 
requirement for local content.  And the conflict of interest between in 
particular Mr Sharma and Mr Essa who enjoyed a business relationship.  
Particularly their interest in VRLS Properties and VR Laser.  VR Laser 
was a vendor at the time for Transnet and Mr Sharma failed to disclose 
this conflict of int – direct conflict of interest to the board at the time.  
Mr Essa was contacted by China South Rail Hong Kong to provide 
advisory services to Transnet through his company Tequesta previous ly 
referred to by Mr Pretorius for the procurement of 359 locomotives for 
10 
which it enjoyed a success fee.  Overleaf at 27 we deal with how the 
commission should – should deal with the document – with this report.  
We submit that Chair you admit it. It is q uite comprehensive.  We point 
out however it bullet points 1 and 2 that the commission is currently 
undertaking an analysis of various email records and minutes and audio 
recordings of the BADC and the board meetings and its performing 
relevant cash flow analysis.  As regards the analysis of the email 
records and minutes the results thereof should come – should be 
presented through the various witnesses that will appear before you.  
The performance – the cash flow analysis is a subject for when 
20 
Transnet returns the next time to appear before you it is not for this 
session Chair.  If I may then proceed to page 28.  That is the report 
again by MNS appointment of advisors for 1064 locomotives tender.  It 
is dated March 2019.  And the man – MNS mandate in this r egard is 
reflected at page 29 which was to conduct investigations into 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 40 of 87 
 
irregularities relating to the appointment of these transaction advisors 
in respect of the acquisition of 1064 locomotives and the financial 
transactions concluded pursuant to such appo intments.  We list the key 
findings from page 30 of that report.  It is page 30 of our presentation 
through to page 39.  This is a very important report and at times 
complex as Mr Pretorius indicated.  Firstly the appointment of the 
transaction advisors were fraught with irregularities in that Transnet 
elected to use the method of confinement instead a public tender.  The 
reasons advanced were in part – did not substantiate a choice of 
confinement as a method of acquisition because that acquisition did not 
10 
meet the requirements of a confinement which is inter alia urgency.  
The issue with the appointment of advisors is that firstly a proposal 
was submitted by McKinsey Consortium.  At the time that McKinsey 
submitted its proposal Regiments was not part of tha t consortium.  
However at the time that the LOI was being signed with Transnet 
Regiments had – was reflected now as a part of a consortium in this 
tender.  The problem with this was that Transnet – because Regiments 
did not form part of the consortium did not have the opportunity to 
verify and investigate the affairs of Regiments in the decision to make 
this award to the McKinsey Consortium.  Oh at page 31 a further 
20 
change to the consortium was effected which was inconsistent with the 
policies of Transnet in this regard.  Trillian was appointed to replace JP 
Morgan and in the process of obtaining the R1 billion club loan.  This 
was done purely on the recommendation of the CEO without going back 
to tender to replace JP Morgan which for reasons had had to leav e the 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 41 of 87 
 
consortium.  If we go over 32 insofar as the consortium itself is 
concerned the RFP required that all tenderers submit audited financial 
statements.  Failure to submit would result in disqualification of the 
bid.  In the McKinsey consortium instance it failed to submit – 
McKinsey failed to submits its financial statements and should thus 
have been disqualified but that requirement was overlooked in this 
instance for no reasons advanced and McKinsey became part of the 
consortium that was awarded the co ntract.  At page 33 we deal with the 
other part of the McKinsey consortium which is Regiments.  As I have 
indicated Regiments was not originally part of the consortium but now 
10 
had become concluded – had become included on the eve of the 
signature of the LOI.  The view expressed by MNS at 13 is that this 
constituted a misrepresentation and states that Mr Singh signed an 
agreement on – in January 2014 between Transnet and Regiments 
setting out the updated scope of transaction advisory work that 
Regiments was assigned to render as a result of Nedbank no longer 
forming part of the McKinsey consortium.  There was never such a 
scope.  It is an issue that was raised by Mr Singh to justify the 
inclusion of Regiments and this consortium.  The result of this 
agreement signed by Mr Singh resulted in Regiments being entitled to a 
20 
20 percent performance fee which was payable – which was to be 
payable by Transnet.  That according to MNS was unlawful because 
having on all documentation provided and the award made Regiments 
was a sub-contractor to McKinsey.  There was no contractual nexus 
between Regiments and Transnet and it could not under the 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 42 of 87 
 
circumstances have been entitled to any fee payable by Transnet but 
that agreement bound Transnet to pay that fee and the fee was in deed 
paid.  There are other issues arising which is to the extent that 
Regiments would have been entitled to a fee - a performance fee.  The 
contract provided that such would kept at nine million but as will 
become – as we shall see it was in fact paid in excess of 100 million.  
At page 35 we continue to deal with Regiments.  There will be evidence 
that at this juncture before the signature of the LOI there was an email 
on which Mr Singh made certain comments – handwritten comments and 
this including the fact that Regiments is not a direct contractor to 
10 
Transnet.  Notwithstanding his comments Mr  Singh prepared a 
memorandum motivating to the then CEO Mr  Molefe that Regiments be 
remunerated by Transnet on a risk sharing model or a success fee.  
Why Mr Singh did this is a matter that will be debated with the witness 
to the extent that they are able to clarify or maybe Mr  Singh himself 
would be in a better position to assist.  This misrepresentation led to 
Regiments being paid and a fee of 79 230 000 that it was not entitled to 
which MNS concludes is an amount – that amount constitutes fruitless 
and wasteful expenditure.  The report then deals further on with the 
appointment of J P Morgan and this appointment MNS held was 
20 
irregular on the basis that it did not com ply with the policies of 
Transnet.  At 36 we then deal with the other partner in the consortium – 
Trillian.  As I indicated earlier Trillian subsequently replaced J P 
Morgan in the consortium.  The issue is whether or not a proper 
procurement process was followed in the appointment of Trillian to 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 43 of 87 
 
replace J P Morgan in the consortium and the conclusion is that such 
an appointment was non-compliant with the Constitution and the policy 
of Transnet – policies of Transnet – and is thus irregular.  From page 
37 we try to simplify the various payments made to members of the 
consortium which are deemed to be – by MNS – are deemed to be 
irregular and unlawful.  I indicated earlier that to the extent it may be 
argued that Regiments would have been entitled to a fee.  Such was in 
terms of the contract kept a nine million and their report – in their 
report MNS explains the difference – how the difference between nine 
and R15 million occurs which in their view at the very most is what 
10 
Regiments would have been entitled to  receive.  At 37 we indicate that 
in actual fact Regiments received not only more than nine million but 
more than 15 million and that it was paid 194  240 000 including VAT.  
This payment led to Regiments being unjustifiably enriched to the value 
of at least 79 230 000 and as a consequence Transnet being 
impoverished thereby.  At page 38 we deal with payments to Trillian and 
this is a payment of 93  480 million which was made by Transnet to 
Trillian in circumstances where it is contended that Trillian did not  do 
any work that justified payment to it for that amount or any as the work 
it claimed for had already been executed by Regiments.  So in Trillian’s 
20 
case it is not a question of overpayment.  It is a pure fraudulent 
exercise to benefit to the tune of 93 m illion at the expense of Transnet 
in circumstances where it did not provide services.  If the Chair would 
turn to page 90 – page 39 we deal with the amounts that – MNS deals 
with the amounts it believes for reasons advanced in the report are 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 44 of 87 
 
recoverable by Transnet from the various beneficiaries.  In this regard 
it contends that Transnet must recover an amount of 79  230 000 from 
Regiments.  It must recover an amount of 189  000 from Regiments – 
189 million, sorry – from Regiments once again as Regiments when  it 
received this amount had adequately been remunerated to the extent of 
R15 million and MNS Report suggests that Transnet seeks to recover 
the payment of 93 480 000 paid to Trillian.  At page 40 then Chair we 
deal with how – we propose the Chair should d eal with these reports 
and as with the previous report we point that an analysis of email 
records, minutes and board meetings recording is currently being 
10 
undertaken and that the relevant cash flow analysis is being conducted.  
As regards the result of the  analysis of the emails and minutes that 
witnesses will testify to soon enough and the cash flow analysis will be 
at a later stage.  All these documents – this report which is substantial 
Chair is in Volumes 4, five, six, seven, eight, nine and 10 and it i s 
listed as such in the index.  That then deals with the acquisition of 
1 064 locomotives together with the transaction advisors appointed in 
respect – in regard thereto.  I now turn to page 41 Chair and that deals 
with an acquisition of a further 95 locom otives which is a different 
transaction.  This is a fairly small report comparatively speaking and 
20 
MNS found in this transaction various irregularities regarding the 
procurement and the award of the 95 locomotives.  The Commission – 
the investigators conclude there is no further work to be done on this 
transaction and that the report should be accepted as final by you 
Chair.  This is then followed by the next process – acquisition process 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 45 of 87 
 
which is the acquisition of the 100 locomotives starting at your page  
44.  As with the 95 MNS concluded that this procurement process was 
fraught with irregularities and equally so was the award and at page 46 
we extracted the key issues that MNS highlighted in regard to this 
transaction.  The first is that the use of the c onfinement methodology 
once again was not in compliance with the policy as it did not meet the 
requirement of urgency standardisation and highly specialised goods as 
prescribed by the confinement.  In the process of acquiring these 
locomotives there was a decision not to acquire them – if you could just 
bear with me Chair.  In the process of executing this acquisition which 
10 
was originally budgeted at 3.8 billion a memorandum was prepared by 
the then CEO Mr Molefe recommending – as recommended by Mr  Singh 
and Mr Gama that led to an increase of that budget from 3.8 to 4.4 
billion a total of 965 million which increase MNS - based on its 
investigations - concluded the inflation was unjustifiable and that the 
factors relied upon for such an increase were not reas onable in the 
circumstances and could not justify such an increase.  As a result of 
this increase Transnet paid per locomotive 3.47 million and at times 6.2 
million which was unjustifiably increased.  It concludes by holding that 
Messieurs Molefe, Gama, Singh and Jiyane failed in their fiduciary 
20 
duties in the acquisition of these locomotives and at 47 Chair we 
indicate that the report is final and in our view no further work is 
necessary as regards that report and the Chair may admit it as it is.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Does that mean that the legal team submits that the 
findings made in that report are all justified insofar as they may relate 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 46 of 87 
 
to the matters that were investigated?  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Whether the findings are justified?  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  The only conclusion we can make at this 
juncture Chair is that the conclusions drawn by MNS are supported by 
evidence and I do not know if that is what the Chair is requiring of now.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Excuse me.  Well the forecast should be whether the 
findings made are justified having regard to the material on which they 
are based. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that if this Commission were to adopt them it 
would not be subject to any – any criticism. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Chair that – that is our preliminary view but I 
say … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  That with your permission Chair with a rider …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  That to the extent as we work with MNS 
through these reports and the annexures …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Should we identify gaps …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  We shall revert Chair and indicate whether or 
not there should be any qualifications in accepting that report.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja and that should apply to all reports.  
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 47 of 87 
 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  To all – yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The idea should be for us to be able to say this report 
contains the following findings that can justifiably be adopted by the 
Commission but these others maybe need further work - further 
investigation and maybe others are just not justified.  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And – and in the – in the case of the latter …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  We attempt to indicate where the gaps have 
10 
been identified and what further work is required …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  In respect of each report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And yes I confirm Chair that insofar as 95 and 
100 concerned the preliminary view is that they are conclusive and ma y 
at this juncture be admitted unless we revert Chair having identified 
gaps that perhaps we – we have not seen as yet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair.  If – if I – we then go to 
20 
page 48.  The Chair would have heard from Mr  Pretorius about 
relocation 
of 
manufacturers 
to 
Durban. 
 
MNS 
conducted 
an 
investigation into this relocation and the report relocation of OEMs is 
the outcome of that investigation.  At 49 we highlight MNS mandate in 
this regard which was to conduct an investigatio n into possible 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 48 of 87 
 
irregularities in respect of the relocation of China North Rail and 
Bombadier Transport from Koedoespoort to Durban.  The Chair will 
recall that Mr Pretorius indicated that the relocation concerns the cost 
that had to be borne by Transnet in this regard.  It is necessary to 
determine whether such relocation was necessary and whether 
Transnet should appropriately be burying that cost.  This report at 50 
Chair we mark as a preliminary report.  The reasons for that is that 
Nedbank and McKinsey have been invited to comment on that – the 
report – the preliminary report as it stands and their comments are 
awaited.  I would like to point out that the delay is not significant 
10 
because if the Chair has regard to page 48 this report was only 
published in March 2019.  So we expect in the fullness of time both 
Nedbank and McKinsey to comment and for MNS to then conclude the 
report and we shall resubmit it if necessary.  If they do not make 
comments then MNS will tender this as a final report Chair.  I then  
move on to another set of reports from page 51 which we refer to as the 
Fundudzi Report for convenience.  They are actually two separate 
reports.  The first relates to the acquisition of 9  500 and 1 064 
locomotives and the second relates to the appointmen t of McKinsey, 
Trillian and Regiments.  Before we deal with this report in detail this is 
20 
one of the reports where there is an overlap as the Chair can see from 
the heading of the reports between MNS, Fundudzi and Werksmans 
insofar as the acquisition of th e locomotives are concerned.  The 
reason for this overlap is that …  
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you said 9 500 locomotives? 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 49 of 87 
 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  9 500 and 1 064. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it not 95? 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You said 9 500. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Oh, I should - 95, 100 and 1 064.  Sorry, I 
read it as if it is one number.  My apologies Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And as the Chair recalls the acquisition of the 
95 locomotives, the 100 and 1  064 have already been dealt with by 
MNS and the 1 064 were subject of the Werksmans’ Report and these 
10 
are the overlaps that we previously referred to.  The reason for the 
overlap as Fundudzi was engaged by National Treasury to investigate 
the same transactions whereas MNS and Werksmans ha d been – and 
Werksmans had been engaged by Transnet.  The issue really that 
arises is whether there are any conflicts between the MNS Report and 
the Fundudzi Reports.  In our assessment there are no significant 
contradictions.  Any that may be found could be explained by who had 
better access to what information.  So we propose that notwithstanding 
the fact that they cover the same issues that they be allowed – they be 
admitted side by side.  The second of the Fundudzi Reports relates to 
20 
McKinsey, Trillian and Regiments and these entities we have spoken 
about when considering the advisors for the acquisition of the 1  064.  
For Fundudzi purposes however their investigation included the 
activities or investigation into the activities of McKinsey, Trillian and 
Regiments in both Transnet and Eskom.  It is thus a wider report than 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 50 of 87 
 
the MNS findings as regards these three entities and the Fundudzi first 
report is captured at pages 52 and 53 and at 54 we deal with 
Fundudzi’s main findings as regards the locomotives a cquisitioned.  In 
this regard Fundudzi – Fundudzi identifies in particular certain aspects 
that are not dealt with in as much depth in the MNS Report in particular 
I would like to refer the Chair to bullet two which states that:  
“Mr Molefe and Mr Singh failed to conduct a cross 
benefit analysis …” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do we have the same numbering?  I see you keep on 
saying bullet what – what … 
10 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Number two – numbering two Chair.  I have …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, we have the same paper. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Slip of the tongue.  I apologise. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  I apologise, yes.  I will call it point two.  Yes 
Chair. 
“That Mr Molefe and Mr Singh failed to conduct a 
cross benefit analysis when a decision to change 
the locomotives from 19E …” 
Needs to be locomotives. 
20 
“…to 21E CSR were undertaken.  Transnet would 
have saved …” 
At three: 
“…1.2 billion if it had procured 100 locomotives 
from Mitsui at 3.188 billion rather than procuring 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 51 of 87 
 
from CSR at 4.4 billion.”  
The Chair will recall that wh en dealing with this aspect in the MNS 
Report it – I pointed out that MNS found that Mr  Molefe based on a 
recommendation by Mr  Singh and Mr Gama made a proposal to the 
board to approve the adjustment of the budget price from 3.8 billion to 
4.4 billion.  This Fundudzi Report gives further detail as to why such an 
increase was unnecessary and based on Fundudzi the argument was 
the same locomotives could have been acquired from Mitsui at about 
1.2 billion less.  There will be a witness who will speak at length  Chair 
on the 19E locomotives and the 21E locomotives.  It is not necessary at 
10 
this juncture to go into detail.  One of the important aspects as well is 
at point five which reflects that Transnet fail – Transnet Board failed to 
notify the shareholder as it was in law bound to of acquisitions and 
disposals above 2 billion before it concluded the contract with CSR and 
this is a requirement of the shareholder contract and in contravention 
thereof the Transnet Board concluded this contract with CSR without 
informing the shareholder.  At page 55 Chair we briefly deal with how 
we suggest this report be – be dealt with by the Commission and we 
indicate it is a final report again with just a qualifier and points one and 
two which is that the analysis of emails, reco rds and minutes of the 
20 
Board and the BADC is currently being conducted by the Commission. 
Equally so – so are the relevant cash flow analysis and that will be 
dealt with in due course.  From page 56 – before I go to 56 Chair if I 
may just point – for the record point out that the Fundudzi Report on 
the acquisition of 95, 100 and 1  064 locomotives are in your Volume 14 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 52 of 87 
 
and at Volume 15 it contains two documents.  The first of which is the 
second Fundudzi Report which is the appointment of McKinsey, 
Regiments and Trillian.  At page 57 we set out the mandate.  Most 
importantly Chair at page 58 – page 58 – I was hoping my – it is 
catching up with me – my slide presenter.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Page 58 indicates that the Fundudzi Repor t 
insofar as those three entities are concerned is much, much broader 
than the MNS investigation.  Expands a longer period which is a period 
from 2012 to 2016 and deals with at least eight separate transactions 
10 
all of which have been investigated by Fundud zi and recommend – and 
findings made and recommendations made in respect thereto.  So and 
so they overlap with MNS would be about the advisory services for the 
1 064 locomotives and the SWAT – SWAT and SWAT two.  The rest MNS 
did not investigate at all.  So insofar as the Chair would like to hear 
more about those transactions one would have – to have regard to the 
Fundudzi Report and once again there will be witnesses who will table 
these reports formally and deal with their detail.  At 59 – page 59 Chair 
Fundudzi deals with various irregular payments made to McKinsey, 
Regiments and Trillian and these included payments at (indistinct) of 
20 
what is referred to as out of pocket expenses.  In circumstances where 
the three entities did not submit any supporting do cumentation to 
substantiate entitlement to the amounts reflected in the invoice.  The 
three - McKinsey, Regiments and Trillian – were paid 1.5 billion during 
the period 2012 to 2016 in respect of the contracts awarded to them 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 53 of 87 
 
through confinement.  Yet agai n Chair it is a question of the process 
that was employed by Transnet to get these entities on board – this 
process of confinement which was not only irregular but was unlawful 
as the circumstances of acquisition did not meet the requirement for 
confinement.  Most importantly Chair - at nine - Fundudzi found that 
Mr Ramosebudi misrepresented that Trillian assisted Transnet to 
negotiate with Nedbank, Bank of China, Absa and LIPFIN in the 
memorandum dated 17 September 2015.  This is in respect of the club 
loan that is dealt with in the MNS Report and Fundudzi concluded that 
this misrepresentation – it is this misrepresentation that resulted in 
10 
Transnet making an irregular payment of 93  480 000 to Trillian Asset 
Management.  The Chair will recall that 
– and Mr Pretorius’ 
presentation - I think Mr Ramosebudi at the time was a Senior 
Executive within Transnet I think within the Treasury Department and 
such a finding is of course concerning.  At 60 then Chair once again we 
– we deal with our recommendation – recommendations and we suggest 
that the document – the report maybe placed before you with the 
proviso of course that we shall revert with the findings regarding the 
current analysis been undertaken of audio recordings and minutes and 
the cash flow analysis.  Th e second document in your Volume 15 is 
20 
what appears from your page 61 Chair.  It is a report that was 
commissioned by Mr Tokyo Sexwale then the Chairperson of Trillian 
Capital Partners into allegations with regard to the Trillian Group of 
Companies and related matters.  This report was prepared – the 
investigation 
was 
conducted 
and 
report 
prepared 
by 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 54 of 87 
 
Advocate Budlender SC.  The mandate of Advocate  Budlender appears 
at 62 and in the main he was required to investigate the allegation that 
Trillian in – invoiced some SOEs for work which was not done and was 
paid or invoiced without contracts.  He was secondly to determine the 
role or impact if any of members of the Gupta family and persons 
associated with them on the activities of Trillian.  The opening caveat 
by Mr – by Advocate Budlender is key Chair to understand the detail or 
in some instances the lack of detail of his report and it states – I read 
for the record: 
“The management of Trillian have obstructed this 
10 
investigation.  The obvious question is why th ey 
have done so.  The only conclusion I can reach is 
that the questions which I raised and my request for 
documents and information led them to conclude 
that if they complied with the undertaking they had 
given information would be revealed which would be 
embarrassing to them.  I can think of no other 
reason.  I expect that Trillian will say that some of 
the factual information in this report is incorrect or 
incomplete.  If that is so it is because Trillian 
20 
refused to cooperate with the inquiry.  This 
investigation is still incomplete and …”  
He said he could have spent more time except that at the time he had – 
it had become clear to him that the inquiry would not reach a 
satisfactory conclusion.  It is with that qualifier then Chair this report 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 55 of 87 
 
must be dealt with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think we have referred earlier on; there was a 
reference to an incomplete report, if a report is incomplete how much 
value is there including it here?  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:   We have found that it has got two values, 
firstly in some – it’s an investigation that’s been undertaken.  Absence 
or lack of access to documents – certain documentation which is listed 
made it impossible for advocate Budlender to draw a conclusion.  He 
has, however, given detail of the documents required to substa ntiate 
his preliminary findings and we as the Commission are able to access 
10 
those documents from Transnet.  So for an incomplete investigation and 
I think I deal with this particular – yes report at page 68 and suggest 
how it must be dealt with and we say that at this stage these are 
allegations which would need to be substantiated and confirmed by the 
Commission but there are allegations that are useful to the work of the 
Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Ja but shouldn’t you just note the documentation to 
which he refers and then the Commission does its own investigation 
because he’s not drawing not any final conclusions, so what’s the use 
of including the report for purposes of this Commission.  
20 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     Chair we had...(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:     You can’t say much about findings that are not 
conclusive – that are not final conclusions. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     Chair if I may give you an example at page 
65 onto 68 Mr Budlender deals with a payment of an invoice of 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 56 of 87 
 
10million rand he, however, fin ds a claim and he needs for us to check 
whether that was paid for same services for again 10million rand.  The 
question he poses is whether or not this constitutes two payments for 
the same service provided and because of that important exercise that 
he has conducted we thought it appropriate to bring it to your attention, 
but we stayed as we do so that the report as we find it to constitute 
useful background information and intelligence but is subject to the 
limitations that he could not draw any definitiv e findings. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Ja I’m not sure that it’s very useful to include it 
here, it may be that all that should be done is to note certain things 
10 
that he has said and then the investigators of the Commission could 
then investigate those, not to inclu de the whole report.  So you may 
have to reflect on the question whether it really serves much purpose to 
include it here. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:   We will do so and Chair it may very well be – 
because we also characterise it as useful background and intellige nce 
we would uplift it and we will make the appropriate amendments to the 
index and to your file Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:     So it might be useful for the investigators to follow 
up certain things as opposed to including it here.  
20 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     That is already underway Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And we shall revert, therefore, Chair as 
regards the issues arising here from and the results of the 
investigations.    
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 57 of 87 
 
CHAIRPERSON:     Ja. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     But in the meantime it shall be uplifted and 
it will not form part of the Transnet document.  I would then, Chair, turn 
to the next report which is at page 69 and this is to be found in your 
volume 16.  This is a report by UBAC Qhubeka...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:     If that is Zulu it would be pronounced as Qhubeka if 
it is Zulu, I don’t know if it is Zulu but it does look Zulu.  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     Chair neither do I know if it Zulu but I will 
go with what the Chair ’s suggestion, Qhubeka.  
CHAIRPERSON:     Okay. 
10 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And I did spell it it’s Q-h-u-b-e-k-a for 
purposes of the transcribers and this is the report of investigation into 
the Transnet National Ports Authority, investigation into the Neotel 
transaction.  At page 70 we provide a summary of the issues pe rtaining 
to this transaction, this was, in large part, a transaction for the 
acquisition of CCTV and related equipment for the Ports Authority.  The 
issues, that in the main, arise from this report is that Transnet paid an 
excessive price for what was delivered at – contracted at R150 000.00 
per unit provided and it has since been established that the equipment 
provided ranges in price from  between 4  500 and 9 000 dollars.  On 
20 
the second point it deals with the quality of video recorders provided 
and concludes that these were a cheaper product than that contracted 
for.  There is a question of the guarantee provided by Neotel, Neotel 
appears to have provided a three year guarantee but the original 
supplier of the equipment to Neotel, I don’t know if it is Ni ce or Niece, 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 58 of 87 
 
I’ll settle for Niece, the documents indicated that it could only provide a 
guarantee for two years.  The question then is, how does Neotel 
provide a three year guarantee in those circumstances.  The last key 
issue is at point 4 which is that Neotel itself as a supplier of these – 
this equipment is not a registered security services provider in terms of 
the Private Security Industry Regulation Authority Act 56 of 2001.  The 
investigators of this transaction concluded that they are, in law, 
required to be registered as security services providers before they can 
be engaged to provide these services.   
 
The witnesses will testify in this regard and it’s beyond doubt 
10 
that Neotel did not satisfy the requirements of the Act in this regard. At 
72 we then, Chair, deal with our recommendation and we say although 
it is a final report by Qhubeka and UBEC further procedures must still 
be performed or undertaken and one of those is to check – is to 
conduct an assessment whether the technical specifications w ere 
appropriately addressed by Neotel in delivery on this contract and to 
perform a physical inspection of all the equipment, the recorders on 
site to dispute the version that has been put forward by Niece in 
relation to the video recorders.  So this is on e of those reports that are 
inconclusive Chair.  The suggestions and recommendations made here 
20 
for extra procedures to be conducted relate, in large part, to Transnet.  
These are not issues for the Commission to undertake.  So we suggest 
that the report be preliminarily accepted and Transnet, in the fullness 
of time to report back to the Chair on what these – whether they have 
implemented 
these 
recommendations 
and 
what 
their 
further 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 59 of 87 
 
investigations have found.   
 
I turn then, Chair to page 73 and page 73 dea ls with – is a 
report by Ligwa and this was an investigation into allegations of 
irregularities relating to the network transition programme and asset 
buy-back.  There are two  - there are two transactions – there are two 
issues that the report looks into Chair, it is on the one hand, the 
network transition programme and a separate issue is the asset buy -
back by Transnet from Neotel.  Now insofar as the network transition 
programme is concerned Ligwa made these following conclusions and 
these are reflected at page 75, my apologies Chair these are not 
10 
conclusions this is the mandate and Ligwa’s mandate at 2, was to 
determine which services were included as part of the transition of 
services budgeted for at 225 and amongst...(intervention).  
CHAIRPERSON:     The mandate is at 74 and not 75...(intervention).  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     It’s at 74 and ...(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:     Ja okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     Overleaf the heading is not correct to say 
that it is key findings.  The key findings are overleaf at 76, the issues 
listed at 75...(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:     So – yes. 
20 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     If Chair if I may say 74 I said there are two 
issues that Ligwa was to investigate.  As regards to the network 
transition programme the specific issues under th at programme, it was 
to investigate listed in 75. 
CHAIRPERSON:     So the heading “key findings” should be crossed 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 60 of 87 
 
out? 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:    It should be crossed out Chair because this 
was a specific mandate in respect of the network transition programme.  
CHAIRPERSON:     Okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  My apologies there Chair.      
CHAIRPERSON:     Maybe what you can do it provide a corrected page 
75 in due course. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     Will do Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Ja. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     The key issues and the network transition 
10 
programme besides a concern that a transition agreement did not exist 
in the first place between Transnet and Neotel is that the 225million 
contracted for, for the network transition programme did not detail the 
actual services that were to be provided for payment of that amount 
and at point 5, a further issue that Ligwa looked at was following the 
payment of 225 a further claim by Neotel of payment – for payment of 
500million in respect of the same services.  These were the key issues 
that Ligwa had to investigate.   It’s findings start at page 76 and the 
key ones I’ll refer to, and this time Chair, I’ll be correct under 2, is 
bullet point – second bullet point and Ligwa...(intervention).  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:     Yes you are correct this time. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     Thank you Chair.  Ligwa notes in its report 
that Neotel had submitted a proposal for the services and it had quoted 
an amount of 132million which amount was split between three different 
services.  If the Chair then has regard  to bullet point 4, the last on the 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 61 of 87 
 
page, notwithstanding that Neotel had bidded for the works and costed 
them at 132million, Neotel and Transnet actually concluded a contract 
for 225million.  That contract did not allocate or did not provide any 
breakdown of services and did not allocate any costs to any particular 
service tower. Chair will recall at bullet point 2, the 132million 
is...(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:     I’m sorry with regard to bullet point 4.  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:     I thought you made a statement that made me have 
a look here. I thought you were saying that although X amount was – 
10 
the bid amount was X amount, another amount was awarded but they 
seem to be the same figures...(intervention).  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     No the bid amount is in bullet point 2, the 
last sentence of bullet point 2, Neotel’s proposal amounted to 
132million. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     And was split between three different 
services. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     Bullet point 4 says the total fee amounted 
20 
to 255million excluding VAT and that 255million was not broken down 
and neither was it allocated between the various service towers – the 
three service towers. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Is a suggestion that the bid amount was 132 million. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     Yes Chair. 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 62 of 87 
 
CHAIRPERSON:     But ultimately the amount awarded was 225million.  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     The contracted amount was 225million.  
CHAIRPERSON:     I think the way it’s formulated doesn’t make that 
clear but when you were dealing with it you did make it clear except 
that I could see that the amounts looked the same on bullet point 4 and 
therefore what you were saying didn’t make sense.  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:     So you might have to...(intervention). 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     We’ll re-visit page...(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:     You might have to re-formulate here to say – to 
10 
make the although in your statement make sense.  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     Indeed Chair but the Chair appreciates the 
difficulty with this and the difficulty with this transaction is that the 
increase in cost is not explained, there’s no documentation to explain 
it, all that is available is a contract for 225million and this point is 
made at page...(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:     So maybe therefore, this page also, you might 
replace it with one that has an amendment of what we have just talked 
about. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     I have made a note of it and in fact Chair, if 
20 
I may refer you to page 77, we will dovetail it with – what’s contained in 
77 which states, first bullet point, Ligwa have not received any 
explanation as to the difference between the proposed amount being 
132million and the amount included in the MSA being 225million.  
CHAIRPERSON:     Ja. 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 63 of 87 
 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Second bullet point at 77, it is evident that 
the 225million was paid by Transnet to Neotel without Transnet knowing 
what services were included in this payment.  The point I’m making is 
to take those two pages, re-word and – so that it is clear what the 
issues are arising from this Ligwa report.    
CHAIRPERSON:     Ja because I think what you were saying, which is 
not clear here, was, you were contrasting the amount that was in the 
bid documents and the amount that was actually awarded and 
highlighting the difference. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:   Indeed Chair, that’s what I intended to do 
10 
Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:     Okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     We shall attend to it Chair and we’ll attend 
to your file as well.  At page 78 Ligwa – we have extracted – the main 
issues from the Ligwa report in regard to this transaction – and now it 
confines itself to the 225million rand.  At bullet point 2 we reflect what 
the report found that the 225million was intended as a once -off fee and 
was payable within 7 days of the effective date,  the effective date being 
contained in the contract. So in effect, the contract provided for an 
advanced payment of 225million excluding VAT and this would be a full 
20 
payment of the contract amount prior to any services being rendered.  
In the last bullet point, the point is made that Neotel issued invoice 
number 70074 for an amount of 225million VAT exclusive on 9 
December 2014 and that – the date of that invoice precedes the date of 
signature of the MSA by five days.  
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 64 of 87 
 
 
Overleaf at page 79 bullet point 2 on that invoice of 9 
December 2014 on 17 December 2014 at 79 bullet point 2 Mr Singh 
approved payment of this invoice and that invoice at bullet point 3 at 
page 79 was paid in full, 225million excluding VAT on the 23 r d of 
October 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Your headings, “key findings” include in some of 
those pages, are they correct?  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:     The reason why I’m asking that is because of in a 
number of pages where you have that heading, immediately under it 
10 
you have, like in – at page 77 under 2, determine which services were 
included, which seems to relate to the mandate.  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     No Chair at page 75 we’ve corrected and 
we’ve removed the topping – topic, the heading “key findings include” 
because at page 75 
CHAIRPERSON:    At page 75?  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     Only at 75 because that lists the mandate in 
respect of the network transition programme.  
CHAIRPERSON:     Okay, no we did that...(intervention).  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     Further on the rest then deals with key 
20 
findings. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Ja. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     And if the Chair will have regard, for 
instance, to 76 – 76 starts with number 2, determine which services 
were included and what the page does is to – each time...(intervention). 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 65 of 87 
 
CHAIRPERSON:     I think I know what you are trying to do but I don’t 
think – I think you did it in a way that’s causing confusion, I think you 
should be – you should have said something like, in relation to the 
determination blah, blah, blah, blah, shouldn’t you have done that?  In 
relation to the determination of which services were included or 
something like that then you say these were the findings made.  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     The specific mandates were used as 
headings, I understand Chair...(intervention).  
CHAIRPERSON:     What you are doing, you are repeating the relevant 
part of the mandate and then you are setting out the findings but I think 
10 
that will make it clear, say, in relation to that part of the mandate, 
these were the findings. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:    And the findings are the bullet points thank 
you Chair...(intervention).      
CHAIRPERSON:     Yes so then maybe all the relevant pages you could 
do that ja. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     The same would apply to 77, 78 and 79.  
CHAIRPERSON:     Ja you can just go through that. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     We will make those changes so that it is 
clear that each page deals with a different exercise – a separate 
20 
exercise and what conclusions are drawn there from.  
CHAIRPERSON:     Ja or if you don’t put it like that another way of 
doing it would be to say immediately after 2 for example in 
76...(intervention). 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:   Yes Chair.   
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 66 of 87 
 
CHAIRPERSON:     Mandate: and then you put determine but then you 
put findings immediately below that so that It’s clear these are the 
findings that relate to this mandate – this part of the mandate. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     We’ll consider doing that Chair and we will 
...(Intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:     Whichever you prefer. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     We shall attend to your file accordingly.  
CHAIRPERSON:     Ja. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     In dealing with the payment of 225 from 
page 76, I don’t know if the Chair followed me because I did not 
10 
highlight all the points, I more or less jumped the key points.  
CHAIRPERSON:     No, no that’s fine you might not n eed to highlight 
all of them. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     Need I go through the issue?  
CHAIRPERSON:     You can only highlight what you think is important.  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     At 78, Ligwa’s findings – I’ll start with bullet 
point 2 and the issue there is th at the MSA concluded between Transnet 
and Neotel provided for payment of 225million excluding VAT to Neotel 
and at bullet point 4 the point is made that, that payment was due in 
full prior to any services being delivered by Neotel.  The last bullet 
20 
point at 78 points out that on 9 December 2014 Neotel did issue an 
invoice of 225million against Transnet for what it called mobilisation 
fees.  The date of this invoice is important because it is exactly five 
days before Transnet and Neotel signed the MSA agreem ent.  Overleaf 
at 79 I then have regard to bullet point 2 which states that, that invoice 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 67 of 87 
 
for advanced payment dated 9 t h of December was approved by Mr Singh 
on 17 December 2014 and this was, still again, two days before the 
contract was concluded and at b ullet point 3 the issue there is that the 
invoice was honoured in full on 23 December 2014 following approval 
by Mr Singh. 
 
Notwithstanding at page 80, Chair, that the full amount of 200 
– notwithstanding that the full amount of 225million was paid for a 
contract that was to be completed in 12 months as indicated at the 
second bullet point at page 80 as at the 8 t h of September 2015, and the 
Chair remembers that the award comes from December 2014, only 38% 
10 
of that contract had been executed and at that point  it had – was 
supposed to be at 43% if it was to meet its completion date.  The issue 
that arises from that is – and I will just remind the Chair that this is 
September 2018 the report, is it needs to be established whether or not 
that transaction was comp leted in full.  Chair it has been brought to my 
attention that it is 1 o’clock I have got very little left to go through, if 
we were to break for lunch Chair I probably would take, maximum half 
an hour after lunch.  I’ll propose that perhaps I deal with th e remainder 
of the report now and finish it. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Are you not going to have a witness ready to take 
20 
the witness stand when we are done with this?  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     Chair if I may just...(intervention).  
CHAIRPERSON:     It looks like there will be enough time. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     Look behind me and – the next witness for 
Transnet is the Chair of Transnet and it’s a question of his availability 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 68 of 87 
 
today.  He’s scheduled to appear before you, Chair tomorrow.  
CHAIRPERSON:     Is he not here – he is here, he is here and he has 
raised his hand so we can continue?  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     I’m advised that all 33 notices of persons 
implicated by Mr Molefe provide the date of the 7 t h of May so all those 
implicated know to come tomorrow and not today, i t might be something 
the Chair might consider.  May I suggest differently Chair, we may 
break for lunch and maybe we confer and see what...(intervention).  
CHAIRPERSON:     Ja let’s break for lunch and then when we come 
back I’ll hear what you have to say.  
10 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:     Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:     We’ll take the lunch adjournment and resume at 
two, we’re adjourned. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS  
INQUIRY RESUMES  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Ms Sello. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Chair we – when we broke for lunch we were 
at page 18 and had dealt with the issue that notwithstanding full 
20 
payment by the 8 t h September 2015 which was… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let us deal first with the other issue about 
whether we will stop when you finish  or whether we will have a witness.  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Indeed Chair I am happy to.  Mr Pretorius will 
deal with that one. 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 69 of 87 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Chair there are two issues.  The 
first in relation to the next witness is the  notification given to 
implicated parties and although perhaps not decisive it is very 
important that we abide by those notices insofar as possible and the 
second that Mr Molefe has arranged this afternoon to consult with his 
attorneys and requires that op portunity to be able to do so and will be 
ready at ten o’clock tomorrow morning.  
CHAIRPERSON:  I take it is on the assumption that the legal team also 
did not think that he would be required to testify before tomorrow.  
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Yes, no in fact if one looks at 
the presentation being given to you Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  It is a 170 pages. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Of Slides. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And there is just given our 
failure to predict accurately in the past.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And consistently with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  I certainly and legal team did not 
think that we would even be finished that presentation today.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No, no that is fine. 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 70 of 87 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Although Ms Sello has made 
every effort to condense it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And has done so successfully – 
too successfully it turns out. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well no that is fine.  I was concerned about two 
things.  One was us using the time we have optimally but I was 
concerned that he may have been ready to start and he had been 
sitting in the – in the hall from morning.  So – but if – if there are those 
two issues you have mentioned then that is fine.  We will finalise what 
10 
Ms Sello has to deal with. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then adjourn until tomorrow.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What we may have to look at is whether we cannot 
start earlier tomorrow than ten o’clock.  Do you know what your position 
is on that? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Well there are certain issues…  
CHAIRPERSON:  Is the legal team. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  That I am leading the evidence. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You might need time. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Chair I would like to discuss with 
Mr Molefe before…  
CHAIRPERSON:  Tomorrow morning. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  He gives evidence in fairness to  
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 71 of 87 
 
him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  That I would like to put that are 
not contained in the statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And in fairness .. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So he… 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  He should consider so we will be 
busy from early tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You would 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  So I would prefer to start at ten 
o’clock and finish the evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At ten o’clock. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And finish the evidence 
tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine then.  So one he will not testify 
this afternoon.  Two we will continue until we finish and then we will 
adjourn until ten o’clock tomorrow.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.  Ms Sello. 
20 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair.  Chair I was indicating 
where we were when we broke for lunch and we had just dealt with the 
– the lack of delivery on this network transition programme at page 18 
that for a twelve month contract that is  scheduled to end in December 
2015 by 8 t h September 2015 only 38% of that contract had been 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 72 of 87 
 
delivered.  Overleaf then Chair we deal with the second issue arising 
from the network transition programme.  The Chair will recall that the 
first issue is the payment of the R225 million up front before any 
services are rendered.  The second is a current claim faced by Trans  
CHAIRPERSON:  And before the contract was concluded?  (Chair not 
speaking into mic). 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes Chair before the contract was conc luded 
indeed.  The second issue regarding that same programme is a claim 
currently faced by Transnet of R500 million by Neotel.  And that claim 
is said to be simply be in respect of the transition of services.  That is 
10 
dealt with at page 81 and it is uncle ar firstly how this – the amount of 
R500 million is arrived at?  What services are contemplated for which 
R500 million is charged and what is the basis for requiring that 
payment from Transnet in circumstances where 225 contracted for 
amount has been paid in full.  If it were to be payable it would…  
CHAIRPERSON:  The 500 million – the 500 million relates to the same 
transaction for which 225 had been paid?  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Had already been paid yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So it just kept on going up?  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  The amount just kept on going up?  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  I guess Transnet is the gift that always – that 
keeps on giving.  Yes Chair it started at – as I said with this report the 
issue really is the bid was for 132 Tran snet decides to contract for 225.  
By – towards the end of September of 2015 the contract was barely 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 73 of 87 
 
halfway delivered and now Transnet is faced with a further claim of 500 
million.  This is outside the contract.  It is not clear currently what 
entitled Neotel to that charge and the way the charge is described it 
would appear to be for the same services that Transnet has paid 225 
million.  Now Transnet is resisting that claim of 500 million currently.  
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And this matter – it has not been paid so this 
matter is up in the air.  But the concerning aspect is that Transtel – no 
that Neotel could increase the cost of that contract readily by 429% and 
without giving any substantiation for that increase.  So Chair that would 
10 
be the first part of [indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But also is the position not that if you get a tender 
that is limited to a certain amount you do not just go on and submit a 
claim for a higher amount you would have to approach the company and 
say well this amount that you have set aside is not enough, here are 
the reasons we suggest that the price be increased and then you hear 
whether there is agreement on that.  You do not just keep on working 
and go beyond the amount. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Indeed Chair and the question is, is it a case 
of to go – the question really is whether Transnet is in a position to 
20 
determine whether the contract is being delivered on fully.  And 
Transnet should have – should be able to make that determination 
because it has paid 225 milli on.  But as we indicated earlier the 
difficulty with the MSA concluded by Transnet does not detail precisely 
what services are included into – in the 225.   
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 74 of 87 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But strictly speaking is the position not that the 
company that is claiming the amoun t is the one which must show that 
1. There was a contract for the work that it did and  
2. That it did the work and that the work is  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Exceeded the contracted formality.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Is equal to that amount. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Indeed Chair.  And that is the issue now that 
Transnet is facing but as I indicated Transnet is resisting this claim.  
10 
The second leg of the Legor Report starts at page 82 and this is what is 
commonly referred to as the asset buy back.  Briefly back in 2007 
Transnet sold certain assets to Transtel – to Neotel and subsequently 
and in particular on 19 December 2014 that is the second bullet point 
at page 82.  The MNS included a portion in the contract in terms of 
which Transnet would buy back the same assets from Neotel.  The 
contract is silent on the rationale for such a buy back on the valuation 
of the assets to be bought back but it is that obligation is in the 
contract and it rests on Transnet to buy those assets.  Th e assets have 
been valued at 200 million but the process of valuation has not set out 
20 
in any documentation that can be understood.  This matter is dealt with 
at page 83 as an outstanding issue and we – the commission 
recommends in this regard on the second  bullet point at 83… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The legal team?  You mean the legal team?  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  The investigators. 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 75 of 87 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh the investigators. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  They conclude that there is nothing further to 
investigate on this matter but there is certain action that Transnet is 
recommended must take. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which investigators are we talking about now?  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  They are – we are talking about the Ligor 
investigators. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. Okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  The report.  And it suggests that Transnet 
considered taking action against Mr Brian Molefe and in this particular 
10 
respect that I referred to which is the buy -back that is in bullet 2 for 
signing the operational agreement between Neotel and Transtel – and 
Transnet on 10 April 2015 which was subsequent to the payment of 200 
million excluding VAT made by Transnet to Neotel on 23 December 
2014.  The sum total of what is set out there is that the 200 million that 
found its way into the MSA was paid on the 23 December 2014.  A – an 
operational agreement was concluded five months later – four months 
later on 10 April 2015 by Mr Molefe on behalf of Transnet and Neotel 
and this is after the 200 million itself had been paid to Neotel.  The – 
from page 84 for what it makes other recom mendations and in this – at 
20 
page 84 it recommends that Transnet consider take action against Mr 
Karl Socikwa for signing the MSA between Transnet and Neotel in his 
capacity as acting GCE in terms of which the 225 million was paid and 
the subsequent 200 million for the asset buy-back was paid to Neotel 
by Transnet.  So that is 425 million.  At page 85 it is recommendations 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 76 of 87 
 
as against Mr Singh and once again Legor recommends that Transnet 
should consider taking action against Mr Singh for other transgressions  
but in particular on the topic we are on second bullet point is the 
approval of the payment of the 225 million that he approved before the 
signing of the MSA which had been submitted to him as CFO by Mr Karl 
Socikwa.  And lastly Chair at 86 it is further steps that are 
recommended be taken against Mr Singh and these include the fact that 
on payment of the 200 million Transnet was working off a list that 
reflected wrong assets to – that were being purchased.  The value of 
the assets being reacquired by Transnet was unknown and yet 200 
10 
million was agreed upon.  This 200 million was agreed upon on the 4 
December 2014 at a meeting without any valuation having being 
undertaken and the invoice paid in December 2014.  The correct list of 
assets actually that would  have formed part of the buy-back was only 
finalised on the 28 September 2015 almost nine months after the 
payment of the 200 million.   
CHAIRPERSON:  So payment was made by whoever made payment on 
behalf of Transnet without knowing the actual list?  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of items that they were buying or would get?  
20 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes Chair because the original list that the – 
was presented was an – reflected incorrect assets. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:    So yes the Chair be correct that then they 
do not know the correct assets that were being acquired for 200 million 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 77 of 87 
 
– were being bought back for 200 million.  
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And in circumstances where – and the Chair 
should recall that these ar e assets that were taken over by Neotel in 
2007.  
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  This is seven years later. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And there was no valuation process 
undertaken. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Neotel had bought them for how much?  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  I would – we would have to go back there.  
That detail does not appear. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes but it appears in the – in the report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because it would – it would be important to compare 
the two prices. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes.  To my recollection Chair and I speak 
under correction it was like the price paid in 2014 did not take appear 
to take into consideration any …  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Depreciation. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Depreciation of the asset.  It seems to  be 
insensitive to elements such as depreciation subject to confirmation 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.   
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 78 of 87 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that Chair – that would then conclude the 
forensic reports under Section B.  The last section is what we call 
judgements and cases and that is – continues on Volume 17 Chair and 
starts at 8 – page 88 my apologies Chair.  Page 88 is Project Daffodil 
my apologies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  That is the second preliminary report to the 
board of Neotel.  This report was commissioned  by Neotel itself and the 
investigation was done by Werksmans and it relates in the main to an – 
a payment by Neotel to Homix of R41 million and odd and that is at 
10 
page 89.  And the enquiry was to determine the justification for Neotel 
appointing Homix and the – to negotiate a – to finalise negotiation on 
the – in the contract between Transnet and Neotel for which Homix 
received 41 million.  At page 90 we point out that this is a draft report.  
It does not make any recommendation or conclusions and this mus t be 
investigated 
further 
and 
is 
being 
investigated 
further 
by 
the 
commission.  So this is definitely a draft report.  It is a 2015 report it is 
unlikely that any further work will be undertaken on this investigation to 
bring the report to a level of it be ing final.   
CHAIRPERSON:  So what is its – what is the value of including it?  
20 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  The value of it is – the investigators of the 
commission can finalise the report and see whether or not they can 
draw any conclusions from the investigations  conducted by Werkmans 
here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Should it not be outside of here and they can do that 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 79 of 87 
 
and then when they have finalised then you can see what comes in 
here? 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes we included it Chair because it 
highlighted a number of issues a nd ours was to identify the gap and the 
gap is the finalisation. But if the Chair would rather …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja because the other reports you have put in here are 
reports where there were investigations and certain findings were made 
based on certain evidence. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And – and this is a draft.  A draft report should it not 
10 
just be handed over to the commission’s investigators to look at it and 
see of what – how much use it will be to them.  It may be that it will be 
of much use but the product of what they will do after making use of it 
then might be what might end up here is it not?  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Indeed Chair except..l. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because it has got no findings it is a just a draft 
report.  Somebody’s draft. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  The issue of Homix being appointed to 
negotiate between Transnet – to conclude the negotiations between 
Transnet and Neotel is also covered in other reports.  So the 
20 
information contained in the Werksmans Reports is relevant and one 
would say has been confirmed by other reports although that 
information – the conclusion then drawn on that appointment of Homix 
is not directly as a result of investigations there but a mandate from the 
Werksmans Report as it is. 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 80 of 87 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I still say what is the value of us putting it in here?  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  We… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The others are findings, those findings if they are 
justified by the material that on which they are based they may be 
useful they may be helpful and implicated persons may have to tell me 
what is wrong with those findings.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if it is a draft report. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  We are happy to withdraw it Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
10 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And we shall revert…  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja maybe reflect on it…  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  With the view of the investigators…  
CHAIRPERSON:  And let … 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Once the investigations are complete.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe reflect on it and then let me know tomorrow.  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Will do so Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  The last report then in the forensic section 
starts at page 91.  It is a Transnet commission report.  It is an 
20 
investigation conducted by Deloitte’s into the National Ports Authority 
security upgrade project.  At page 92 this deals – we set out the 
mandate of Deloitte’s and what it was to investigate.  The first being 
the process leading to the award.  Most importantly is at item 5, 6 and 
7 it is review of payments made on this contract, verification of the 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 81 of 87 
 
work performed at 6 and 7 the necessity to perform a physical 
verification of the installation at all of the six ports to identify if it is 
necessary to make any changes thereto.  At page 9 – from page 93 we 
list the key findings made by Deloitte’s.  At 29 at pa ge 93 states: 
“Deloitte’s could not verify maintenance claimed paid 
for 
by 
the 
various 
ports 
to 
the 
supporting 
maintenance reports and documentation.  Deloitte 
were only informed that these payments were made 
on instruction from head office.”  
So the payment – the payments were made but the basis thereof is not 
10 
determinable.  At 30 Deloitte’s in its report pointed out – pointed to the 
fact that the entity appointed ESS that is an Engineered System 
Solutions PTY Limited did not deliver on some of the critical  services 
provided for in the maintenance agreement.  At 31 we highlight 
Deloitte’s finding that various port personnel informed Deloitte during 
the course of his investigation that the excessive equipment purchased 
was used as spares.  So instead of buyin g the quantity required of the 
equipment actually ex – more equipment was purchased and that 
equipment was put up as spares.  Deloitte’s suggest is that is the case 
the validity of the extension of the warranty’s agreement claimed for by 
20 
ESS and the amount paid for such warranties of 48 million plus is 
questionable in these circumstances because the spares used were 
already from equipment acquired.  At 94 one of the key findings by 
Deloitte’s is that Transnet should consider taking corrective action 
regarding the 20 million payment. 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 82 of 87 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Actually it is a recommendation ne.  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  It is a recommendation  
CHAIRPERSON:  As opposed to a finding. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  As a recommendation that is correct Chair.  
There are two payments for which  it is suggested that Transnet must 
take corrective action.  It is a payment of R20 million which deemed to 
be unauthorised expenditure and an irregular expenditure of R127  000 
plus.  This report is final Chair and we recommend that it be accepted.  
Chair that then brings me …  
CHAIRPERSON:  You must consider deleting that heading on page 94 
10 
which says “Outstanding Issues” because it looks like you do not have 
outstanding issues here. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or do I misunderstand?  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Well it is not outstanding issues for the 
commission.  It really is recommendations to Transnet because all the 
material is available in the report to take the corrective measures.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think all that you need is – because in the end what 
20 
recommendations Transnet accepts or does not accept might really be 
their issue.  Probably you should just have recommendation because 
that is all that is on that page. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  I will do so Chair.  Thank you Chair.  That 
then Chair brings us to the last part of the presentation and these are 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 83 of 87 
 
the Section C under the heading “Court Matters”.  We start at page 96.  
This is an application brought by Mr Litha Nyhonyha and Mr Pillay 
amongst others being the two directors of Regiments against Mr Eric 
Wood to declare him a delinquent director.  The proceedings were 
instituted on the 8 November 2016.  It does not appear that the matter 
has been disposed of so there is no judgment in the matter.  The 
relevance of these papers as that Mr Nyhonyha, Mr Pillay and Mr Wood 
have made important allegations under oath in court…  
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry Mr Sello. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes Sir. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think it would – it would make life easier if in regard 
to judgments and court applications what one sees immediately is 
names of the parties as we are all used to Sello versus Pretorius case 
number so and so, what court then the rest can come because then – 
then we – rather than the way it shows here.  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  We – we have the front page of the papers is 
too small we will put it on a bigger page.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I am looking at page 96. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  96. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You have got a report name and then you have got 
20 
Notice of Motion case number declarin g 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you talking about the relief when I am looking for 
the names of the parties.  So in other words I am saying tell me the 
names of the parties about this court application and the case number 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 84 of 87 
 
and in which court before you tell me anything else. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Indeed Chair at 96 it indicates the first two 
applicants.  There is a range of applicants listed there.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja it is always that side.  That is not how we – you 
know that is not how court judgmen ts and court papers are like.  The 
first thing you look at – you have the heading even if you do not have 
the heading here in what court, in what matter.  At least the names of 
the parties you say Sello versus Pretorius case number so and so, 
South Gauteng divisional high court then that is complete.  Then you 
tell us what was it about. 
10 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  We will read you page 96 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That will make life easier.  Okay.  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO: I am – I was trying to understand the 
instruction.  We will do – we will redo page 96 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  It is supposed to reflect the two directors of 
Regiments – supposed to reflect that Mr Woods was the respondent and 
that it is in the Gauteng – Johannesburg court. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And the case number. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON: Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  The attempt made here on this page does not 
– can always be improved upon and we shall Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  From 97 we tried to extract from those 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 85 of 87 
 
proceedings the important issues that are relevant to the work of this 
commission as made in the various affidavits of the applicants and the 
respondents Mr Nyhonyha, Mr Pillay and Mr Wood.  All of whom are 
relevant to the allegations made against Re giments in respect of 
Transnet.  In particular at page 98 Chair if the Chair were to look at 
bullet point 5 under 1.  We have previously referred to this invoice the 
R93 million invoice by Trillian which was paid for the club loan and in 
the morning when we were discussing this club loan we indicated that 
some investigations have found that that invoice ought not to have 
been paid at all because Trillian had done absolutely no work for 
10 
Transnet in that regard.  So that transaction is dealt with in detail by  all 
the parties in those affidavits and that is really the relevance of – of 
these proceedings.  It deals with other aspects of the transaction.  The 
SWAT 2, the SWAT 1, all these are matters that will be ventilated in due 
course by – by the witnesses and we make the point at page 102 Chair 
under the heading “Other Commentary” and we state that the matters 
raised in these – in the affidavits are relevant to the multiple work 
streams of this Commission and we would like the Chair to take notice 
thereof.  As soon a judgment – if a judgment is handed down in the 
matter we shall the record.  The following document starts at page 103 
20 
Chair and I – I believe that it shows better on the screen.  It is bigger.  
We can produce a bigger version in the papers.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay but also what is under the report name is 
better than what we had before …  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Indeed. 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 86 of 87 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the other one. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes Chair.  This is actually a judgment.  It is a 
matter brought by the Transnet Second Defined Benefit Fund v 
Regiments Fund Managers .  At 104 we – we highlight that Transnet 
Fund had concluded an agreement with Regiments Fund in terms of 
which Regiments was to administer the funds on behalf of Transnet.  In 
disputes between them certain issues arose that gave Transnet a 
concern that the assets currently controlled by Regiments could – 
would be dissipated or there was a likelihood they would be and that 
Transnet would not be able to recover anything should it be successful 
10 
in its own main action.  So the Transnet fund brought an interdict and 
the judgment – and was successful in that regard.  So the judgment is – 
is restricted only to the anticipation interdict.  The main action is yet to 
be determined and the third one is at page 105 and t his is a judgment 
again in a matter between Transnet v T-Systems.  The Chair will recall 
that Mr Pretorius this morning made reference to T-Systems and in one 
of the reports I have referred to the T-Systems Contract is also dealt 
with.  Now Transnet brough t this matter before court – just for record 
purposes to show that the matter was upheld and the award of the 
contract to T-Systems by Transnet was set aside and the party that was 
20 
by law entitled to the award of that contract Gijima has since been 
appointed in its stead.  There is no further action to be taken in regard 
to – to this judgment.  Just for noting purposes because T-Systems 
features significantly in the evidence of witnesses to come Chair and 
that Chair brings me to the conclusion of the gap an alysis.  Unless 
06 MAY 2019 – DAY 89 
 
Page 87 of 87 
 
there are questions from the Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  So what comes – the last bit on that bundle is not for 
today? 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  No what I – we have gone through today Chair 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Oh, this …  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  An attempt to summarise the bulk. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh it is a summary of this?  Ja. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
10 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And the Chair will recall that I gave him a 
bundle of the – the - yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you did – yes you did.  I forgot.  Okay.  Thank 
you very much Ms Sello. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We – we will then adjourn for the day and will start at 
normal time tomorrow namely 10 o’ clock.  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
20 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 7 MAY 2019  
 
 
