 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
07 MAY 2019 
 
 
 
DAY 90 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 2 of 130 
 
PROCEEDINGS ON 7 MAY 2019  
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Pretorius, good morning everybody.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Good morning Mr Molefe.  
  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Are you ready Mr Pretorius?  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes we are ready may the 
witness be sworn? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names on record 
10 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:   My name is Popo Simon Molefe. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections to taking the prescribed 
oath? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on your 
conscience? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence that you will give will be 
the truth; the whole truth and nothing  but the truth; if so please raise 
your right hand and say, so help me God.  
20 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  So help me God. 
REGISTRAR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Chair perhaps this should have 
been done before Mr Molefe was sworn but there are a number of 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 3 of 130 
 
representatives of various parties here may they place themselves on 
record? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes let them do so.  Thank you.  
ADV KENNEDY TSATSAWANE:  May it please you Mr Chairperson I 
appear on behalf of Mr Brian Molefe.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV KENNEDY TSATSAWANE:  And my name is Kennedy Tsatsawane 
from the Johannesburg Bar. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much. 
ADV THATO SEROTO:  Morning Deputy Chief Justice Zondo.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning. 
ADV THATO SEROTO:  I appear on behalf of the C hinese entities being 
CRRC E-Loco Supply and other related entities.  My name is T hato 
Seroto. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much. 
ADV ANDREW STRACHAN :  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning. 
ADV ANDREW STRACHAN:  Andrew Strachan from Norton Rose 
Fulbright South Africa we appear for Bombardier Transportation South 
Africa. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very muc h. 
ADV MNCEDISI NDLOVU:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning. 
ADV MNCEDISI NDLOVU: My name is Mncedisi Ndlovu I represent 
Transnet. 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 4 of 130 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Transnet. 
ADV MNCEDISI NDLOVU:  And MNS attorneys. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  It looks like that is all?  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  Chair you 
have before you two lever arch files.  They are the files which contain 
the statement and annexures to the statement of Mr Molefe.  It is 
Exhibit BB1A and BB1B.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you for the two lever arch file will 
respectively be marked Exhibit BB1A and BB1B.  Thank you.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Molefe at page 33 of Exhibit 
10 
BB1A is a signature, whose signature is that?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  It is mine Sir. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And the document at pages 1 to 
33 is that your affidavit before the Chair?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  1 to 33 yes Sir. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Subject to a few corrections 
which will be drawn to the Chair ’s attention are you satisfie d that the 
contents of this document are true and correct?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I do Sir. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And we will very shortly draw 
20 
your attention to a typographical error Chair that – although it is a 
small error is significant. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Molefe what position do you 
occupy at present in relation to Transnet?  
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 5 of 130 
 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I am the Chairman of the Board of 
Directors of Transnet. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And when were you appointed? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I was appointed on the 23 May 
subsequent to the cabinet approval and so appointed by Minister Pravin 
Gordhan. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Was that 2018> 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  2018 correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And you provide the statement 
and your evidence to the Chair in your capacity as such I understand?  
10 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  That is correct Sir. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Just very broadly what topics or 
what category of topics will your statement cover?  You deal with that 
in paragraph 2 of your statement?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  The – essentially the statement would 
cover the what – what the board discovered when it came into office 
subsequent to its appointment and we do so to the extent that we have 
been able to – to discover these things.  I also informed the 
commission of the remedial steps that the board had taken to – since 
its appointment to correct the wrongs that it found in the company.  
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In the draft before – or it is not a 
draft – in the signed statement before the Chair in paragraph 3 it read s: 
“I hasten to state that I have personal knowledge of 
the happenings prior to my appointment to the 
board.” 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 6 of 130 
 
Is that correct? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  It is not correct.  What is correct is that I 
have no personal knowledge and this is what was in the initial draft and 
I think something fell through the cracks as we were doing the final 
draft. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  It appears so. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:    Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  The Rule 3.3 Notices that were 
issued Chair mentioned the version that you see before you that in fact 
the witness did have personal knowledge and that is why although a 
10 
small correction it is an important correction that needs t o be made 
which will be placed before you in a supplementary affidavit.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  What is the status of Mr Morwe?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  At the time of the writing of this statement 
Mr Morwe was Chairperson the  acting group CEO of Transnet.  He had 
been appointed for a period of six months and that period expired after 
midnight on the 30 April.  So at – and the board had decided that it 
would not extend his contract.  Accordingly he is no longer the acting 
group CEO and that would require that the necessary correction be 
20 
made on that statement. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Do you have any comment in 
relation to Mr Morwe’s current status and how that came about?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  The board of Transnet when it heard that 
it would be required to present before the commission on behalf of 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 7 of 130 
 
Transnet.  It took a view that the perspective that informs its 
presentation would be that it would give full disclosure to the 
commission of all matters that it was aware or it knew of.  That it took a 
view that there was nothing to defend because its purpose is to assist 
the commission to find the truth and to make the necessary 
recommendations to the President.  We – we – we also took the view 
that in making this full disclosure therefore we would endeavour to be 
as honest as possible.  May I say that despite the fact that the term of 
contract of Mr Morwe had come to an end matters had come to our 
attention that suggested that there were matters that he would have 
10 
been aware of which we were not aware of which were not fully 
disclosed and even if we would have considered in the unlikely event of 
us considering extending his appointment we would still have taken the 
view that unless he embraced the perspective of the board of f ull 
disclosure and – and of telling the truth and the perspective that there 
is nothing to defend we would not have been able to present him to the 
commission as a representative of Transnet.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  So… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe Mr Pretorius before you proceed it looks like 
there may be no need to make a correction in regard to him Mr Molefe 
20 
because I see your affidavit was signed while he was acting group CEO 
so in regard to that part maybe there will not be a need to correct 
anything it is – it may be enough that you have said that he is now no 
longer acting group CEO.  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  As the Chair pleases.  
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 8 of 130 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  However. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Later on 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  When we deal with the matters that we 
thought he would deal with  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  They would indicate that the new acting 
group CEO  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Would deal with those matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  So it is a matter Chair for the 
present not necessarily of correcting the statement  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  But merely updating it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes no that is fine ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And explaining what has 
happened since this statement is signed.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes no that is fine. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And that will happen on several 
occasions during the course of the evidence.  
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Molefe when you were 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 9 of 130 
 
appointed and you took office as the Chair of the Transnet board you 
clearly did so with an intent and purpose and in paragraph 4 you give a 
background to how you would approach your tasks  at Transnet and 
what personal attributes of yourself would qualify you to do so and 
would direct you in your tasks.  Would you tell the Chair about that 
please? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Briefly Chair – Chairperson I – when I was 
asked to consider the appointment I could not but accept and believing 
that this is being done in recognition of the commitment to good 
governance the ethical leadership, responsible use of public funds and 
10 
the courage to confront the wrongs that happened in state companies 
and in the country.  And I think for approximately five decades of my 
life Chairperson I was involved in the struggle for freedom, the struggle 
against oppression, exploitation of our people and in favour of the 
restoration of the dignity of all South Africans and their human rights to 
ensure that all of them enjoyed equality before the law.  And in doing 
so I continued to be inspired by the values and the principles of the 
freedom charter which served as a corner stone of my belief.  And that 
freedom charter its significance lies in the fact that it is a democratic 
document that was written or crafted by South Africans of all 
20 
nationalities and all races and one can truly say it contains cardinal 
democratic principles which provided a vision for a new South Africa as  
we see today and must still continue to build.  And when I looked at 
some of – I reflected on some of its provisions and in relation to 
Transnet as an entity that I have been asked to check I could not but 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 10 of 130 
 
remember a provision that talks about the wealth of the country being 
shared amongst all those – all the people of South Africa.  And looking 
at what was happening in the country where small sections of people, 
small clicks or groups were – were appropriating public funds, 
appropriating the wealth for th emselves I had to say that but the 
freedom charter does not say this should be the case.  The freedom 
charter says let the wealth be shared amongst all the people clearly not 
amongst the thieves, amongst crooks by the people of South Africa 
therefore it had to be a wealth that benefit and better the lives of the 
ordinary people.  Now in the context of Transnet Chairperson which is a 
10 
vehicle owned by the Development of State with the developmental 
agenda.  It is expected that it has to be managed in a manner  that the 
resources that it controls are used prudently and for the development of 
the country and in particular the disadvantaged committees.  The 
challenge that the country is facing now is that of huge unemployment 
amongst the young people, the youth of  our country.  Their inequities 
that exist in respect of women so we have got to deal with the 
challenges of gender equity both in terms of their upward mobility 
within the company Transnet but also in terms of their own economic 
empowerment and anticipation.  Included of course would be other 
20 
marginalised groups like the disabled people and the veterans who 
spent their lives serving this country in the military.  Both in statutory 
and non-statutory where non-statutory being those military organs that 
existed before the advent of democracy in 1994.  And not they have 
been – they have [indistinct] into a single national defence force and 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 11 of 130 
 
they continue to become veterans and therefore an entity like Transnet 
advancing their agenda of this development of state would have had 
therefore to take into – has to take into account their interest as well.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes you will deal later in your 
evidence… 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  So – so what am I saying therefore 
Chairperson?  I – when I was told come help us at Transnet I did not 
consider it to be only an honour but it was a rare opportunity for me to 
join those who are working selflessly to turn around this very important 
vehicle that should drive a sting relation and growth of the economy of 
10 
South Africa.  And serve various other businesses, industries in our 
country. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Mr Molefe you will 
give evidence in due course I understand in respect of both the extent 
to which against the context that you have drawn Transnet was able to 
fulfil its mandate in recent years and the extent to which steps have 
been taken to ensure the fulfilment of the mandate that you have 
described. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One second Mr Pretorius.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In paragraph 5 you describe at a 
high level the role of Transnet in the South African economy.  Would 
you deal with that please?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Chairperson the – Transnet is a very  
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 12 of 130 
 
complex organisation and its [indistinct] the easily the entire economic 
spectrum of South Africa.  It is a very important – it provides a very 
important logistics and freights system for the country.  A system 
necessary for the movement of goods and serv ices.  It is a custodian of 
the rail – rail network and pipelines.  It has also the Transnet 
engineering 
which 
is 
a 
very 
important 
component 
that 
does 
maintenance and also does manufacturing of locomotives.  At this stage 
mainly light locomotives for shunting mainly in the mines.  It does 
haulage of goods across the country, vital routs which would include 
major, major export products such as iron ore, manganese, coal and so 
10 
forth.  This is just at a high level.  But it also play a very critical role in 
the Southern African region because it connects countries like 
Botswana, Zimbabwe, Zambia, it assists with the port of Maputo.  They 
move their goods through South Africa to our port terminals.  Transnet 
also as I said controls the port and port terminals in South Africa.  It 
also has a property division.  It has got a huge property base that it 
controls.  I think therefore I did say that it is critical to the 
advancement of the goals of the developmental state to this extent 
clearly it contributes critically to the development of infrastructure, 
industrial capabilities and it ensures that there is regional integration 
20 
and ensures any energy security through the transportation of multi -
products such as diesel, jet fuel, petrol from Durban to various parts 
right – I think it goes right up to here into [indistinct] and Alberton and 
from there it moves to other parts of the country.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Transnet is also the custodian of 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 13 of 130 
 
our ports? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  It is the custodian of our ports yes Sir. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In paragraph 6 you talk of the 
announcement by the President on 15 February 2018, would you deal 
with that please? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Chairperson the – when we came into 
office as a new board some of the first th ings we had to – to consider 
was what is the context in which this new board is being appointed?  
And it was the context that was amongst others characterised by this 
important development that on 15 February 2018 President Cyril 
10 
Ramaphosa was sworn in as the President of the Republic of South 
Africa.  And as was articulated in his speech and indeed as was 
perceived by many South Africans his appointment represented the 
ushering in of a new dawn for South Africa.  It created high 
expectations amongst our people.  But what was this new dawn as was 
seen by him and ourselves?  We saw a new dawn – the new dawn as 
the beginning of the recognition and acknowledgment of the wrongs of 
the past.  We had spent many years denying that things were going 
wrong.  His coming into office began to provide a new pyridine that 
says indeed things are not what they should be.  Things have gone 
20 
wrong.  There has been a systematic weakening and or destructions of 
vital organs of the state, state owned entities, the erosion of talen t and 
skills in all these institutions.  They had set in untold levels of 
corruption which had begun to define the South African society  – 
corruption had become endemic.  So the new dawn therefore posed the 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 14 of 130 
 
challenge of cleaning up of reversing this phenom enon of corruption.  It 
also called for the beginning of a process of reconstruction of these 
institutions.  Perhaps something similar to what we have begun doing 
when President Nelson Mandela took over in 1994.  There we were 
reforming or radically changi ng the institutions whose ethos were based 
on – in apartheid and began to bring in ethos that reflected a broader 
society in South Africa that belongs to all of us.  So this is the – 
therefore the context that we saw and therefore for us it meant the 
beginning of this very arduous thorough going task of rebuilding.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Molefe the statements of 
10 
intent in the paragraphs that you have just summarised for the Chair 
are matters that provide a context for the work of the commission 
obviously the task of the commission remains to assess the causes and 
effects of all the allegations of state capture, fraud and corruption and 
we dealing now particularly with Transnet and we have been dealing 
and we will deal with other state owned entiti es but a question that has 
been asked of prior witnesses and will no doubt be asked of witnesses 
who are still to come is what necessitated a new dawn?  In other words 
how did it come about that reconstruction or reform was necessary at 
all?  How did it happen that the circumstances in Transnet for example 
20 
were such as to require the actions taken by you?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Chairperson the – I have spoken about the 
erosion of skills and I have spoken about the weakening of the 
institution.  In the context of Transnet on or about 2011 the new CEO 
was appointed to Transnet.  A man who was well educated and in many 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 15 of 130 
 
ways was respected, was trained by the government under some of the 
Ministers who are highly respected like Trevor Manuel and President 
Mbeki, Brian Molefe was appointed.  He became the CEO, but before he 
became the CEO the strange thing was that a publication owned by – 
company owned – by a family called the Guptas had already published 
that he was going to be the CEO of the company.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  My apologies for interesting 
Mr Molefe.  Would you pull the microphone closer to you so that you 
can be heard? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Ja.  The - The New Age which is a 
10 
publication owned by the Guptas had already pronounced that 
Mr Molefe was going to be the CEO of Transnet and in our view 
therefore when – once they came in there we began to see a process of 
a collection of individuals with the common purpose that advanced the 
interests of those who were pursuing quick accumulation of weal th for 
themselves through certain companies and their linkages to important 
big businesses some of which later were awarded contracts by Transnet 
and later on we will show how monies would flow to these companies 
and that began to weaken governance within the company because in 
order for money to flow to friends who want quick accumulation systems 
20 
must be weakened within the company.  Governance must be flouted.  
The rules of procurement such as the Procurement Procedure Manual 
of Transnet, Public Finance M anagement, Section 217 of the 
Constitution had to be ignored but also it was necessary as I said to 
weaken the skills base of the company but on top there you would have 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 16 of 130 
 
people who have we say a veneer of skills and professionalism but 
what is lacking from them is the ethical leadership and the moral values 
necessary to under kill the qualifications that they have and to ensure 
that the manner in which they were to advance their interest of 
Transnet as a company. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Molefe in – unless the Chair 
wants to ask any questions concerning that – we can move onto a new 
topic. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, we may.  I hope that either in the annexures or if 
no in the annexures arrangements or attempts would be made to find 
10 
The New Age article that announced Mr Molefe’s appointment. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Other than that if - then – then you may continue. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Perhaps just one question 
arising from your evidence now Mr  Molefe - how was it that this 
operation or the circumstances as you have described were no detected 
and acted upon?  Can you assist the Commission in that regard?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  It is very difficult for me to – to say in 
detail but to say that it – it was a sophisticated operation.  It starts off 
with people who are known to have served the country, the Government 
20 
who have the qualifications who have been proclaimed as great 
managers and corporate leaders but these people once they are there 
therefore they take contro l of the mechanisms that provide a counter 
veil against rampant corporation or irregularities in the business.  Now 
if you look at the – the delegations of authority within Transnet – when 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 17 of 130 
 
we came in there we found that the way in which it was applied was 
such that an individual could sign off a contract for huge amounts of 
money from 500 million to a billion without any reference to the Board 
save to go to the Board only when they decide that it has happened and 
that opened up a space for lots of contracts  signed in this manner and 
contracts that favoured certain selected individuals but the second way 
in which it was done it was through a system of confinement.  Now a 
system of confinement – and I know that the Commission will hear 
evidence from experts in  that regard – is a system that has to be done 
very – applied very restrictively and Treasury Regulations and Transnet 
10 
Procurement Procedure 91 would require that you use only if there is 
extreme urgency and the urgency must mean that if you do not act 
there would be dire consequences for the business or for the lives of 
the people.  Secondly, it is used where you have had probably 
equipment from a particular supplier and you – you have part of that 
equipment in operation and you need therefore to standardi se by way of 
bringing further equipment manufactured and designed along the lines 
of what you have and I think the – the other one is – relates to very 
scarce restricted skills necessary for the business to do its work.  In 
short Chairperson confinement would be used in that regard but 
20 
because the door was open for confinement those in authority applied it 
even in circumstances that did not require that it be applied and in 
many instances - and I have become aware of that even after I came 
onto the Board - management would simply delay when they know that 
a contract is going to expire they do nothing about it.  They do not 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 18 of 130 
 
issue the RFP on time and at a very late hour they come and say we – 
we need to confine this.  If we do not confine it there will be coll apse of 
business.  We will not be able to do our work.  So it is continuing even 
now and I will respond later on how we are seeking to change that 
environment and to do things differently.  
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so the last part that you said effectively means  
that management would create a situation of urgency or emergency 
themselves by not doing what they are supposed to do in time and then 
when the contract is about to expire they say now it is urgent and if – if 
we do not confine it this will happen and the y use that to say this is a 
10 
ground to justify confinement?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  In paragraph 7 
Mr Molefe you deal with the appointment of the new Board which 
coincided with your own appointment.  Would you please tell the Chair 
of the contents of paragraph 7 of your statement?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Can I make a comment outside that?  I …  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Of course. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I must be a very difficult witness for you 
20 
… 
(Laughing) 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Because I run away but I am sure you will 
talk to me during the break. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No, I think he just wants you to tell me the gist of 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 19 of 130 
 
paragraph 7. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Chairperson …  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  May I just add if you leave here 
today dissatisfied that you have not been able to tell your whole story it 
would be a sad day indeed.  So you must feel free to tell the Ch air what 
you believe is important about your role.  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Thank you very much.  Thank you very 
much.  Chair – Chairperson we – we were – Minister Pravin Gordhan 
10 
was appointed by President Cyril Ramaphosa and on 23 May 2018 he 
appointed the Chair of the Board and other 11 members of the Board.  
Their names are set out there.  If I am required to mention the names I 
can do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is really up to you. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE: 
 
Ja. 
 
It 
was 
Mpho Letlape, 
Louis Van Zeuner, 
Ursula Fikelepi, 
Dimakatso Matshoga, 
Ramasela Ganda, 
Edward Kieswetter 
- 
who 
is 
currently 
the 
Commissioner for Revenue Services - and Aluwani Ramabulana, 
Flolisani Mufamadi – Dr Mufamadi, Vivian McMenamin.  Now Vivian has 
20 
since resigned so has Professor  Kieswetter as of yesterday because he 
has had to go and start his new job on the 1 s t.  The others are 
Advocate Motaung and Gratitude Ramphaka.  At the time of the 
appointment 
of 
this 
new 
Board 
the 
Acting 
Group 
CFO 
Mr Mohammed Mohamedy who by virtue of being the Acting Gr oup CEO 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 20 of 130 
 
would be a member of the Board and also actual a future member of the 
Board but he – he therefore had to be appointed by the Minister.  He 
had been appointed earlier on 15  May before we go appointed and he 
replaced Mr Garry Pita as the Acting Chief Financial Officer of 
Transnet. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Are there any …? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  And then of course on 1  November with 
the 
consent 
of 
the 
Minister 
the 
Board 
had 
then 
appointed 
Mr Tau Morwe.  The consideration in appointed Mr  Morwe was that as a 
new Board coming into this very complex and big organisations – 
10 
organisation knowing that it has got all these problems that had been 
reported in the media we felt that to bring in a new person from outside 
who did not understand the organisation when we still do not know who 
is who in this company it would have probably been a – a big mistake 
because if the existing management did no collaborate – cooperate with 
the new person it would have been very difficult for the period of the 
appointment 
of 
the individual for 
that 
individual 
to 
lead 
the 
organisation.  So Mr  Morwe from the point or view of seniority and 17 
years of knowledge of Transnet became for us an appropriate candidate 
to do this job. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Molefe you go on to speak in 
paragraph 8 of the role that the Board as a collective must play with in 
Transnet and perhaps you can also when dealing with that topic also 
deal with the necessary qualifications - if any - that Board members 
must possess in order to occupy their position and carry out their 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 21 of 130 
 
responsibilities. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Thank you very much Chairperson.  The – 
the President in his State of the Nation Address announced that we 
were going to change the way in which the Boards were being 
appointed and he said that it must be people who have got business 
background, understanding commerce, good corporate governance the 
necessary skills – technical skills that would inform the Board - 
financial management skills and so on.  Those are some of the 
considerations that the President referred to and therefore the Board 
that was appointed is a multidisciplinary Board of people who are 
10 
hardworking but also ethical and have the courage to confront the 
issues facing Transnet as an entity.  They are also selfless.  T hey 
spent long hours working and they do not get paid for those many hours 
that they work and amongst them are young people who should really 
be spending that time to earn a living but they have devoted that time 
to serve Transnet because they recognise th at Transnet is a very 
important company for the country and for the economy.  So I am 
making that statement.  So we were therefore – Chairperson – as a 
Board that has the skills understood our responsibility as directing and 
overseeing the affairs of Trans net.  In a normal business you talk about 
20 
creating shareholder value but in the new situation that has unfolded 
over time where the question of sustainability becomes critical as well 
the Board must also work in a manner that creates a balance – finds a 
balance between the interest of the shareholder and the interest of the 
stakeholder.  The stakeholders being the customers of the business in 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 22 of 130 
 
communities in places where Transnet operates the organised labour all 
of those things and also dealing with issues of – of the environment.  
So it is the responsibility of the Board to do that but this responsibility 
of the Transnet Board also include it serving as the deemed Board of 
Transnet National Ports Authority which is a component of Transnet but 
that is prescribed in the National Ports Authorities Act.  So – so – and 
of course it has to do also with the managing – the subsidiary of 
Transnet called Transnet International Holdings which was created in 
2017 with the express mandate of exploring trade and developme nt – 
economic development opportunities on the continent to see how the 
10 
skills we have in managing ports, in building rail infrastructure and 
operating freight rail businesses could be deployed to assist our – our 
neighbours on the continent.  So Transnet International is doing that 
kind of work.  They are already doing work in Ghana.  They are busy in 
Kenya.  We have been working on – in Zimbabwe to assist them to 
turnaround their own economy starting with the movement of – of the 
mining boots and ore beca use they can generate revenue – export 
revenue out of that.  So – so – and of course we are working with 
Botswana also whose economy is growing and we are connecting their 
rail from Botswana to Lephalale right to Richard’s Bay in KwaZulu -
20 
Natal.  So broadly  Chairperson therefore the role of the Board is one of 
providing strategic direction but also oversight on operation to ensure 
that there is accountability of management to ensure that those things 
that are articulated in the memorandum of incorporation an d the 
shareholder compact are aligned with the actions of management and 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 23 of 130 
 
the work of the Board and the Board can account in respect of the 
requirement of those critical documents but also that it would then 
show that the – the corporate plan of the busines s that issues out of 
the strategy that is developed between the Board and management 
gives 
rise 
to 
key 
performance 
indicators 
within 
specific 
key 
performance areas for each one of the managers of the company to 
ensure that each one does their work and that the overall mandate of 
the company collectively can be achieved.  I – I do hasten to say also 
that it is the responsibility of the Board also to – apart from accounting 
to the Minister – to account to Parliament but also to ensure that there 
10 
is compliance with the legislative framework of the Companies Act, the 
provision – relevant provisions of the Constitution, the – the (indistinct) 
Report and so on.  All of those provide a gamut of instruments that the 
Board needs to acquaint itself with as it pursues its mandate of making 
Transnet work.  In sum therefore Chairperson the Board remains 
accountable for leading the organisation ethically and effectively.  It 
reports to the shareholder representative being the Minister.  We were 
not always going to be perfect in pursuing these things but what 
matters is that there is a determination and an effort that is being made 
to do so. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Molefe you do not deal with it 
directly but I know it is a matter of concern to the Chair of the 
Commission and that is the oversight that is exercised by Parliament 
over State Owned Entities and in this case Transnet.  How is that 
oversight exercised and do you have any comment on the efficacy of 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 24 of 130 
 
that oversight? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Transnet Chairperson resorts under a 
Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises.  From time to time the 
Transnet Board is required to report to that Committee.  It has to 
submit the Annual Report once the audit has been completed and the 
report has been submitted to the Minis ter but it also reports on the 
program implementation of its program of work and strategy.  In recent 
times we have had to report on what we are doing about corruption.  
When we – the first time I went to Parliament Chairperson Mr  Gama 
was still the Group CEO of Transnet.  The Portfolio Committee refused 
10 
to listen to us.  They said that they were not going to listen to us if 
Mr Gama was there because they said they told him never to come to 
Parliament anymore and they took a view that they would only talk t o a 
Transnet Board once Transnet had solved the issues of those 
individuals implicated in rampant corruption within the company.  So 
indeed we could not come but we undertook that once we have dealt 
with the issues we would go back.  Indeed we went back.  Now part of 
the difficulty and that is what we discovered when we went to 
Parliament was that in the period preceding our appointment there was 
lack of transparency from the Board of Transnet.  Quite often and I 
20 
remember – I think it was the date of 6  December 2017 - when 
Parliament wanted to meet the Board because the Board knew the 
difficult questions that they were going to be asked.  They did not go to 
Parliament.  They stayed away.  So they were not opening up and the 
refusal to open up was influenced by the fact that there was this denial 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 25 of 130 
 
in Transnet of accepting that there was a capture – the capture of the 
business.  That the business was no longer focused on his mandate 
adequately and they sought to explain things differently.  I mean when 
we wrote the first integrated report we came in the audit had already 
been done and management wanted me to put as the Chairman of the 
Board things that say allegation of corruption were levelled against us.  
I said no, no.  We are going to write it as corruption t hat we have 
become aware of and that is how we are going to write it because we 
do not want to say things that we want to – to back – retreat on.  We 
want to say things that we believe we can continue to maintain going 
10 
forward.  So we went to Parliament.  We opened up to Parliament.  We 
told them some of the things that we are saying hereto this Commission 
and 
Parliament 
embraced 
our 
report 
and 
they 
made 
some 
complimentary statement which said we wish this Board was there three 
years ago when we met in Transnet.  We believe that we would have 
been far by now in our work.  We had a similar experience Chairperson 
with the – another Portfolio Committee for Trade and Industry which 
Portfolio Committee wanted to understand how transport – Transnet 
complied with the provision of Policy on Local Content and Supplier 
Development.  We did say that yesterday when the introduction was 
20 
made one of the presenters made a distinction to say there are certain 
components that have to be sourced inside the country and in respe ct 
of the locomotives which Transnet had procured.  If you – you were 
procuring diesel – electric locomotives the local content required there 
would have been 60 percent and in respect of respect of diesel 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 26 of 130 
 
locomotives it would have been 55 percent and DTI has set out 
designated 
certain 
products 
which 
must 
be 
used 
including 
manufacturing them here locally as part of that procurement process 
and Transnet had not reported fully on those matters.  We had to do it 
and I remember when we got to Cape Town we had a sked management 
to prepare our presentation.  We had to cancel it in Cape Town and say 
okay keep your document.  I am going to make five points which I am 
going to use to address Parliament and it is five points which 
acknowledge out weaknesses, which refl ect transparency, which say 
what we are busy doing to fix the wrongs of the past.  We still have to 
10 
go back to Parliament in January to now report to them on where we 
are 
today 
in 
enforcing 
Local 
Content 
and 
effecting 
Supplier 
Development. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, I am grateful that Mr Pretorius asked you this 
question and he is right that it is something that I am really interested 
in, also in terms of how Parliament played its oversight role in regard 
to Government Departments and SOE’s and so on and so on, in r egard 
to periods where there are allegations of all kinds of wrongdoing that 
one  hears happening over a certain period of time, because it will be 
important to see to what extent Parliament may have always adopted 
20 
the kind of attitude that you found when you started as the Board with 
the Portfolio Committee concerned, is that the attitude that different 
Portfolio Committees had always adopted or was it different and if it 
was different over the years why was it different, or are we dealing with 
a situation where they were trying their best but there were certain, 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 27 of 130 
 
there’s just certain difficulties and if there were certain difficulties were 
no mechanisms to assist them to do their job properly because I believe 
that at some stage the Commission must look at if A, B, C, D happened 
that was wrong, who had the opportunity and the obligation to stop 
these things from happening, what did they do, what did they not do, 
and why did they not do what they were supposed to do?  
 
Is it connected in any way with State Cap ture or is it 
incompetence or is it other things, so it will be important for us to look 
at all of those things and maybe somebody like you, because I believe 
Transnet is not the first State Owned Entity in which you get involved, 
10 
it may be that maybe not this time, maybe some other time you might 
come and share more experience because it’s important that I get a full 
picture of different portfolio committees in Parliament and how 
Parliament has played its role, so I thought I would mention that, ja.  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:   Chairperson the question you raise it’s 
tempting me to go outside the realm of what I am here for, but I am 
going to say one or two or three things briefly about that.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     I served as a Chairman of the 
Armaments Corporation of South Africa, ARMSCOR, for two terms and I 
20 
served also, that was from 2004 to 2010 and I served also as the, I 
normally say Chairman of Petroleum and Gas Corporation of South 
Africa, that is PRASA [?] for the period 2004 and 2010 and I’m saying 
Chairman because I define myself in line with the Companies Act, once 
we change it I will call myself what is in the Act.  
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 28 of 130 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  PetroSA. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:   PetroSA, ja thank you PetroSA, I also 
served as the Chairman of Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa, 
PRASA, which made big headlines in the period following the report of 
the Public Protector called Derailed.  During that period Chairperson I 
had occasion to interact with Portfolio Committees, vario us Portfolio 
Committees.  They were very robust, and I did not discern anything that 
suggested that they were not regarding ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  ... properly. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:   Their oversight role as important, towards 
10 
in when I was at PRASA and we began as a Board to confront the 
issues raised in the Public Protector report we went into that extensive 
investigations we found that in Parliament there appeared to be people 
in the Portfolio Committee who were being lobbied by those who were  
defrauding PRASA, because all that they were interested in was trying 
to stop us from continuing our investigation and insisting that we 
should move the investigations from where we were conducting them 
and to give them to Law Enforcement Agencies which h ad manifested, 
witnessed and reluctance to deal with issues and Chairperson would 
recall that I have had to compel Law Enforcement Agencies, in 
20 
particular the  Hawks, to go to Court and explain to the Judge and the 
people of South Africa why they were relu ctant to discharge their 
constitutional mandate, so from that time we began to see that 
elements of State Capture were incipient in these, and in that particular 
committee, and of course we saw it beginning now to spread, but I must 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 29 of 130 
 
say that since I joined  Transnet I have designed a definite mind shift 
and seriousness in dealing with the issues.  
 
SCOPA for example came to visit us, they seemed to have 
been pretty aware of the state of fear of lower down employees, of the 
management on top, and I recall in one meeting they said they are 
going to talk to the employees of Transnet, they don’t want any 
manager to be there, and they did that exactly that, and employees 
disclosed to them how they were being thoroughly intimidated, that they 
were not allowed to raise the voice when they see something wrong.  
 
So Parliament is doing its work, but if you’re at SCOPA you’re 
10 
very robust and I think that going forward if this mood that prevails in 
the country is allowed to grow and spread we would see a different 
South Africa and at Parliament that place the kind of roll that was 
envisaged when we conceived in 1993, I say when we conceived it 
because at that time I was also a politician, so I would like to stop 
there Chairperson because some of these things that I mention ed I 
might well have to come back here, as you correctly pointed out.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I think you probably have a lot of experience, you 
have mentioned various SOE’s in which you have been involved, so you 
probably could be quite helpful because to the e xtent that it may be 
20 
true that for a certain period different portfolio committees seem to be 
performing their oversight role the way they should, but from a certain 
period there seems to be a difference it might be important to get 
people who really have experience in regard to those periods so I think 
that must be looked at and from your own point of view you can reflect 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 30 of 130 
 
and if really you believe you can help the Commission understand 
though what was happening then you could really come back and share 
your observations. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:   Thank you Chairperson, I will certainly go 
and reflect on that and just to say that I am willing to assist because 
the problems of this country are problems for all of us, the solution 
would be one that would benefit all of us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, definitely, thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :    Mr Molefe in paragraph 9 you 
deal at a general level with issues directly relating to the concept of 
10 
State Capture and its manifestation as you testified to in Transnet,  
many of the points made in paragraph 9 you have already dealt with, 
perhaps you can just look at paragraph 9 and say to the Chair or tell 
the Chair which – what points you wish to emphasize from that section 
of your evidence, and I do have one or two ques tions arising out of 
paragraph 9, if I may. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  That is where I think I am a difficult 
witness, because you ask me something and I go and traverse other 
paragraphs, but Chairperson I think the two points that need to be 
made is that we think that there was a clear pattern of how the capture 
20 
was implemented, the starting point is to make sure that you capture 
the decision maker, the person in the top position.  Identify all other 
strategic positions, which positions would play a critical r ole in the 
allocation of budgetary resources of the company, so you would capture 
the Group CEO, the Group CFO, the Treasurer of the Company, Shift 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 31 of 130 
 
Procurement Officer and the key people in operating divisions and this 
is the pattern that we have seen and because these people as I said 
earlier on are people who manifest this professionalism and they can 
show they have qualifications, there has not been of looking deeper 
into their ethical values, their ethics and moral values to see if they are 
the kind of ethical leaders that the company should have, and it is 
something that we are going to be dealing with when we interview 
people for all the strategic positions that we would be appointed to 
later in Transnet, in the next four months.   
 
So that is one point I want to make but also I need to say that 
10 
there are always little cliques of people who agree, who are – who 
share common 
understanding 
of 
how they 
want 
to implement 
procurement processes to benefit their friends outside, and half the 
time this collective that works together is a collective that is also 
known to the people outside, and who are defrauding the company, so 
they collude amongst themselves, they weaken the governance system 
and they identify high value tenders because that’s where big monies 
are and quite often once those tenders have been issued they would 
constantly review and extend the scope of the business, of the 
contract, and when they extend the scope of the contract they would 
20 
also then increase capital allocation for that contract, s o that’s really a 
few points that I would like to say but to indicate that these things that 
I am talking about are things that we have experienced in Transnet.   
 
I think later on when we deal further with the evidence there 
will be examples that show wha t people have done to have money 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 32 of 130 
 
flowing for work that was not done and out of that money would flow to 
other entities that are not connected with any service to Transnet.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Mr Malefe perhaps this is a 
convenient time for a bre ak.  Chair with your leave could we take the 
short adjournment? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, we will take a short adjournment, tea 
adjournment, and we will resume at half past eleven.  We adjourn.  
INQUIRY ADJOURNS  
INQUIRY RESUMES  
CHAIRPERSON:  You may proceed Mr Pretorius. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Mr Molefe we were dealing with 
the statement at paragraph 9 where you make some general 
observations about the phenomenon of state capture as you understand 
it and as you have testified it is prevalence in Transnet wh en you 
arrived there.  Before we leave paragraph 9 may I ask you speak in 
paragraph 9.4 of weakening of governance systems and you say in 
paragraph 9.5 that that indeed occurred in Transnet.  Do you have an 
example you mentioned earlier to me in consultati on the example of Mr 
Richard Vallihu in the context of the weakening of governance systems 
within Transnet. 
20 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Chairperson the – there are various ways 
in which this weakening occurs.  I did say that at one level you erode 
the skills simply because – let me start off by saying you – those who 
are committed to the agenda advancing the capture of state owned 
companies which translate broadly into state capture would seek to turn 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 33 of 130 
 
– would bring in first their own cronies.  They surround them selves with 
cronies.  Where they are not able to – and then they seek to turn those 
who are there but were not their cronies they seek to turn them into 
cronies.  And when there is a resistance from those upon which an 
attempt is made to turn them into cronies they then remove them from 
the positions that they are holding and make them redundant.  And 
when that moment comes they appoint to those positions quite often 
strategic positions people who have no knowledge, qualifications or 
skills to manage those positions.  Because for those who advances 
state capture what is important to them is collusion with them.  Is 
10 
[indistinct] with them.  Is not – is not the skills that the company needs.  
So they do that.  And I made the example that you can make is this.  
That Transnet had an engineer this time I think he is probably 21 years 
or 22 years in the company, Richard Vallihu.  He was running an 
engineering division, operating division of Transnet.  It is engineering 
operation division.  The man is senior is an e ngineer.  He gets 
removed.  He is substituted for by a teacher.  H’m?  And in Transnet 
you would have had a thing called Group Leadership Team.  
Chairperson in your normal knowledge and probably even common 
sense knowledge your executive team would be comp rise the leaders of 
20 
key operating divisions or units in the business.  Because when they 
meet there they talk about how they implement their strategy, what 
needs to be refined in that strategy?  That GLT was just a group of 
friends.  They were not linked to operating divisions of the business.  
But once they were sitting there amongst themselves they determined 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 34 of 130 
 
where – how to influence the awarding of tenders and they do that 
outside the governance structures of the company.  They also put 
themselves in a position where they attempt to determine – they 
determine what the procurement needs of the business are.  So the 
effect of that was that they are really more like a screening house than 
a structure that facilitates effective management and operations of th e 
business.  And it also meant that the heads of operating divisions of 
the company did not have easy access to the top structure or even to 
the group CEO.  They have to report to the chief of operations.  What 
happens about what they report one never know s?  Probably they would 
10 
just get a report that says no we do not agree with the proposal that 
you are making, we are not doing it.  So that is how the structure was 
operating.  But what made it even worse Chairperson was that it was 
also a structure that d etermined what information come to the board of 
directors.  The board of directors was persistently and consistently – 
let me say consistently frustrated.  Documents which were brought to 
the board were unprofessional, not properly prepared and they would 
come at the last minute to the board and the board would be required to 
make decisions about matters that they have not adequately been able 
to apply their minds to.  So that is one – that is one of things.  So you 
20 
– they then remove people from positions who are good – they put their 
own people.  They have the structure which behaves in a manner that 
overrides the governance structures that the governance assisting of 
the company it created.  Let me give you an example.  Transnet has got 
the internal audit unit.  The chief of internal audit ideally should be 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 35 of 130 
 
reporting directly to the audit committee.  And if information is given to 
management is for information to get them to correct the wrongs that 
have been picked up by internal audit.  But our experience  in the 
organisation was that the internal audit unit had to dilute or okay had to 
be selective as well on which report would come to the board and to the 
audit committee.  I had said Chairperson that I am a very difficult 
witness for my evidence leader but my experience in the investigations 
we have been doing with MNS was that we could not even get all the 
internal audit reports from our own internal audit unit because we 
needed to know what reports are there, what findings, what 
10 
recommendation, have they  been implemented, to what extent, what – 
what sanctions were issued, were the sanctions commensurate with the 
gravity of the offence?  Many of the reports and the information that 
MNS got came from other sources. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And not from within?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Not from within so it is this culture of 
secrecy, this culture of withholding information.  Yesterday in the 
presentation of evidence we were told that Werksmans could not 
access certain information they wanted.  Yes it is true I spoke to 
Werksmans the man who was leading the investigation team and I 
20 
asked him what does it mean for the report then that you have 
prepared.  He said no our fundamental – our findings are fundamental 
nothing will change by – it will not be changed by the fact that there 
might be some information we did not get.  So that is what he said.  But 
that is the difficulty you have.  MNS if you take the example of Ubeck – 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 36 of 130 
 
Qhubeka that we spoke about …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh ja …  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Ezolo yesterday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  MNS had to go to KwaZulu Natal to go and 
get it there.  They have had to talk to a number of audit firms to say 
man please give us we understand the – you did this investigation for 
Transnet where is the report?  So that is the difficulty we had in trying 
to get to the root of corruption knowing the truth so that we can fix the 
organisation.  So clearly you have people there resisting and that is 
10 
what we mean when we say there is a fired back because they do not 
only do that then they will disseminate information calculated to tarnish 
the image of those who are cooperating.  So that is how I think they 
then weaken the systems and achieve their objectives.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well before you proceed let me just ask this.  I would 
have thought that if somebody is employed by Transnet as for argument 
sake head of the audit unit and therefore as the person who should be 
in possession or should have custody of certain reports relating to 
Transnet that have something to do with auditing an d so on that if there 
are reports that are supposed with – to be with him and he is 
20 
approached or she is approached and if they are there that person is 
obliged to make them available to whoever Transnet has said maybe 
give him those reports.  And if they are not there maybe you might 
understand with one but also you might check well somebody else must 
have it, it cannot be that if it is – you do not have it nobody has it.  But 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 37 of 130 
 
if you begin to have a number of reports which are supposed to be 
there within the possession of that person or official and – and he or 
she is refusing or keeps on coming up with excuses certain 
consequences should follow and I would imagine that those are being 
taken.  But I do not know whether the basis in which attempts are made 
that you do not get the reports are such that it is difficult to take 
disciplinary action. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Chairperson in an ideal situation and 
things being equal you would expect that a person entrusted with 
certain responsibility – responsibilities and who is accountable to and 
10 
loyal to the company would understand that they have the obligation to 
give information to the company when it is required.  But the situation 
is not normal.  We have begun acting on a number of these individuals 
and I am sure we will continue to do so until we get right to the last 
person in the chain.  So that we are dealing with.  
CHAIRPERSON:  No thank you.  Because it is obvious that such a 
person is not in possession of a report such as that in his or her 
personal capacity is not his or hers it is Transnet’s and the only reason 
why he or she has control is because she or he is in that position where 
Transnet has put them you know.  But I think you have given indication 
20 
that something is being done.  Thank you.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Molefe in paragraph 9.4 you 
also mention the practice of recruiting what you referred to as 
reputable consultancies.  Would you explain that please to the Chair?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Chair the reputable companies in order to 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 38 of 130 
 
– are consultancies are appointed or recruited as part of the agenda of 
the – these individuals.  Let us take an example.  McKinsey is a 
globally recognised company.  You would not fault it their knowledge is 
just until recently it has been impeccable.  But if y ou look at the 
investigations into Transnet and even what we have seen in the reports 
about Eskom they got embroiled in instances where they got monies for 
work that they did not do.  The former acting group CEO of Transnet 
considered that an employee of M cKinsey wrote his research for his 
dissertation that he was doing for his master’s degree and McKinsey is 
a service provider of Transnet.  I do not understand why it was 
10 
necessary.  He made that admission and McKinsey told me that they 
have investigated it he made the admission and they disciplined the 
person.  So reputable companies are brought in but then they got – 
they get harnessed to an agenda – a strategy, a programme that 
advances an agenda that does not serve Transnet or that facilitates the 
syphoning of funds from Transnet.   
CHAIRPERSON:  So from what you have said at least in terms of your 
understanding it seems that people who were pursuing the agenda of 
state capture, the agenda of capturing SOE’s but at least certainly with 
Transnet in your ex perience sometimes they would try and make use of 
20 
individuals who enjoy because of the past to enjoy good reputation as 
managers who are well educated, who have done well up to a certain 
point and then – but once they have got them they use them or they ge t 
them to do wrong things and then – but you say sometimes they would 
use people who might not have the requisite qualifications and 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 39 of 130 
 
experience like you said you made the example of an engineer of 21 
years’ experience in Transnet being replaced by a teache r in relation to 
a unit that deals with engineering as I understood the position.  And 
you are now saying sometimes consultancies would also be brought in 
who have a good reputation, [indistinct] internationally but then they 
are used to do wrong things. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  It is correct Sir.  I think in the evidence 
that probably would be given by – in the evidence that would be given 
by the acting group chief financial officer some of these things would 
be elaborated further and the – I know I have got a bit of it in my 
10 
statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  When you deal with the question of capital 
raising dealings which historically were done by the treasury of 
Transnet which was whose expertise was world acclaimed.  But then 
someone in a strong top position whose chief financial officer collude 
with the – a consultancy to marginalise treasury of the company to 
make them redundant and they take over.  They do what treasury would 
have done and get billions out of that you know millions an d millions 
out of that as a fee and they would say capital raising fee.  I mean if 
20 
you think of how capital raising was done in respect of the locomotives 
in particular for I think it was China South Rail we had a similar 
experience and then people walk aw ay with millions of money.  So they 
have now weakened treasury because I am sure that I am almost 
certain that one of the individuals who was there in the treasury would 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 40 of 130 
 
be called by the commission who when she saw this and I have had 
occasion to talk to her said she told them that what was happening in 
the company was so grossly wrong and she said to them I came here 
with my integrity.  I tell you now I am going to leave this company with 
my integrity.  I am not going to allow the happenings in this busine ss to 
compromise my integrity and my professionalism.  So – but these are 
the things that are happening.  Many of them were happy to sell to sell 
their reputation, their integrity on the altar of making quick money and 
not thinking about the future of the country.  Even their own future 
because it is something quick you get and we catch you, you lose 
10 
everything that you had had which you would have kept if you had been 
an honest citizen of the country.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Molefe in the remainder of 
paragraph 9 you refer to and you quote the report of the Public 
Protector which gave rise to the appointment of this commission.  You 
also deal with a certain report of the Public Affairs Research Institute 
and you deal with the - what has become known what have become 
known as the Gupta Leaks.  Is there anything you wish to add to those 
observations by way of background to what is to follow?  
20 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  It is the first difficult question I have to 
answer.  The [indistinct] the report of the Public Protector invest – 
which she done investigation to – into alleged improper and unethical 
conduct by President and state functionaries relating to the alleged – 
oh it is called the Capture of State of Capture.  I think that is the name 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 41 of 130 
 
of the report.  Details clearly some of the things that I have said how 
the – those seeking to capture the state set out to do so and mainly at 
the heart of which was he Gupta family.  And in Transnet Chairperson 
you will see that in many of instances where monies were lost they 
were channelled to companies linked with this particular family. But the 
commission would also have received evidence from people who had 
been heads of government departments who have shown how when they 
did not acquiesce in the manipulation of tenders or defrauding of the 
state they found themselves out.  You know people like James Maseko 
and others.  And the same applies to the government itself.  So how 
10 
some of people and the evidence was led here – how some of the 
people who had been suspended, disciplined and were out of the 
business were later brought in when Ministers alleged – a Minister 
allegedly captured by this family was appointed to the position and 
suddenly that person came back into the position.  So we  saw that and 
of course the other report Chairperson which we referred to here is one 
in May 2017 by the Public Affairs Research Institute PARI which 
published what was considered to be a ground breaking study on state 
capture called the The Betrayal of th e Promise.  And it shows how 
South Africa was stolen.  Maybe a bit of an exaggeration but it is quite 
20 
clear when now the facts come out that indeed the country was on the 
edge of the cliff so was Transnet itself as a company.  With its very 
critical role that it plays to the economy.  And then of course you have 
all those thousands of emails, correspondence between the Gupta 
families and various officials in state entities and government 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 42 of 130 
 
departments which were leaked.  And which have been established to 
be a fact now by many investigations that subsequently ensued.  And I 
– I am advised by my lawyers that most of these things that I am talking 
about, these reports and the correspondence and so on are in the 
possession of the commission.  Chair I would like t o leave it there but I 
am happy to maybe try better  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  If there is a need for me to elaborate 
more. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No that is fine.  What you can do afterwards if 
10 
there are issues that you feel you might wish to  share with the 
commission you can be in touch with the legal team and arrangements 
can be made because you know you might have a certain perspective 
on some of the issues that are covered by one or other report.  So we 
would like to make sure that if you have got something that you believe 
is important it is not left out unless it is really been captures already, 
been taken care of. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja thank you. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I hope my attorneys are taking notes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes they should take notes otherwise you might be 
reluctant to pay them.  Thank you.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Molefe in 
paragraph 10 you describe in general terms what the new board found 
upon its appointment at Transnet and for example in paragraph 10.3 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 43 of 130 
 
you use fairly strong language in relation to your discoveries on your 
appointment.  You talk of for example total paralysis and you talk of a 
horror show.  If you could assist the Commission please to un derstand 
the facts and circumstances that you discovered on your arrival at 
Transnet in your position as Board Chair.  Those facts and 
circumstances which led you to draw the conclusions you have drawn in 
your statement. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Thank – Chairperson the – many of these 
things contained – there is a combination of things.  There are those 
that we – we – are contained in the reports of the investigations, MNS 
10 
and – and Werksmans and then others of course are those that we 
became aware of through  whistle blowers.  If I am allowed Chairperson 
I am not going to go through what I have written in my statement there.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, you may do that. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  The evidence leader is happy with that.  I 
just want to say that we refer to paralysis – total paralysis.  The 
examples to support that would be – let me take this one.  In – 
sometimes I think 2000 and …  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Molefe - one second.  Can I find out 
whether anybody feels that it is hot inside here?  I had earlier o n said 
20 
they should put down the air conditioner.  Well it does no look like 
anybody is particularly feeling any heat.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  No one is saying so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  The relevant people will monitor and where 
necessary they will sw itch it on but not too much. 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 44 of 130 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you.  Thank you Mr  Molefe. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  By way of emphasis Chairperson let me 
repeat part of this statement.  We say that it is not an exaggeration t o 
state that the Board was astonished by the wide spread corruption and 
wilful disregard of the rules.  These rules pertain to policy on 
procurement process that must be followed by various procurement - 
supply chain management structures.  Each one of whi ch had a defined 
role - they were disregarded and some of these examples you see in 
the manner in which the Neotel confinement and procurement was – 
10 
was done.  So we – we go further to say that that kind of a situation the 
prevalence of this rampant disreg ard for systems and rules and 
mechanisms put in place suggest that there is a state of paralysis that 
has set in and we argue that the way in which monies would be 
siphoned off and nothing being done to stop it.  For those of us who 
were accustomed to work ing in the interest of the businesses and the 
country it represented what I called a horror show.  It looked more like 
a – a movie or a theatre where those who are in key positions and 
made decisions were the protagonists the main actors.  So that is what 
it does.  I give an – let me give one example.  I – as we were busying 
20 
doing our job we were made aware that we needed to do a road show.  
Visit the National Port Authority and Transnet Ports Terminal.  So we 
went to Durban.  Having received the report for  – of the whistle blowers 
and having seen some correspondence – correspondence from 
complainants who had entered into a lease arrangement with Transnet I 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 45 of 130 
 
have asked that management should take the Board of Directors to the 
old Durban Port.  Now the old Dur ban Port when it was discontinued on 
the back of the opening of the new Durban International Port it was 
purchased from Acsa by Transnet for R1.9 billion ostensibly to create a 
dig out port in Durban as an extension of the facility to assist the port 
to deal with the congestion that was building up in Durban.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Are you talking of the land that 
compromised the old airport at Durban?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Yes.  The land that compromised the old 
airport was bought by Transnet. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Had it belonged to somebody else before?  It must 
have, yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  It belonged to Acsa the Airports Company 
of South Africa …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Because they are the ones who were paid 
the money … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  For that land. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  And the Airports Company of South Africa 
is a company that is renowned for efficient management of various 
airports here in South Africa and outside South Afric a.  I think they go 
as far as India in doing that job.  Indeed the – later after they dug a 
port the land was bought on which construction was to commence in 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 46 of 130 
 
2020.  There was a downturn in the economy and Transnet itself had 
begun to experience – had experienced over a period of time a decline 
in volumes for export.  So there was a postponement of construction of 
that land but what was strange is that when we got to that airport we 
found that there were a number of businesses that had moved into 
occupy what was Transnet land.  There were logistics companies and 
there was once company that was – that had a huge – a 100 by 100 
square 
metre 
warehouse 
where 
they 
were 
cutting 
tiles 
and 
manufacturing some kind of product and storing cement.  There was no 
lease arrangement between them and Transnet.  They were there.  
10 
Transnet was no getting money into its account.  There were others 
who were running.  It ran management businesses.  They were running 
restaurants that they had opened there and management of Transnet.   
The Chief Operations Officer including the Acting –the then Chief 
Executive Mr Gama pretended that they did not know that there is 
illegal occupation of the land.  After much engagement Mr  Gama said to 
me ja they have occupied the land but you know there  are laws in our 
country which say that we may not remove squatters unless we can 
provide to them an alternative accommodation.  Clearly that provision 
of the law would not have applied to rogue businesses who behave like 
20 
mafia and came to occupy the land that belonged to a company that is 
owned by the taxpayers of South Africa but that is what happened.  So 
for years they were there.  We ask ourselves a question they must have 
been paying money.  Who were they paying money to?  They must have 
been assured that you can occupy this land, you can build a factory 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 47 of 130 
 
here and warehouse.  Nothing is going to happen to you because the 
assessment we – we made was that that factory was built for close onto 
R50 million.  Nobody spends R50 million if there is uncertainty  – if 
there is a risk.  So they were assured by management.  Now I am 
mentioning these things to show the problems we have had – this 
paralysis that we are talking about - this horror show we are referring 
to.  At the same time in the same place Transnet h ad signed a lease 
agreement with a company called Seaworld.  Seaworld was going to 
operate that place over 10 years – begin to run domestic flight 
business like Lanseria linking up with Lanseria.  After 10 years they 
10 
would give it back to Transnet.  They c ould not operate because other 
more 
powerful 
people 
had 
occupied 
that 
place 
and 
Transnet 
Management did not deal with them.  Of course they have now taken 
them to court.  There are several litigations to get them out of the land.  
They also occupied that land without permission of the City of 
EThekwini.  So now this is the horror show we are talking about.  This 
is paralysis that we are talking about.  Money can come into the 
company.  Nothing can be done because people who are there and are 
friends of people in top positions can stay there and nobody can do 
anything about it. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  You say in paragraph 10.4 
Mr Molefe that the ability of the Board to tackle these issues were not 
immediately possible and was negatively affected by a n umber of 
factors and you list those factors in paragraphs 10.4.1 to 10.4.3.  You 
have already mentioned some of them but perhaps you want to 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 48 of 130 
 
summarise your evidence in that regard.  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Chairperson I – I referred to that structure 
that I call the screen house.  The structure that selected what may 
come to the Board.  So they kept the secret.  This Durban dig out port 
story is one of the secrets that they kept away from the Board.  There 
are many others which we will deal with later.  Well the biggest one 
which almost collapsed Transnet we talk about it and which only came 
about as a result of the qualified audit report but we will come and deal 
with it later on.  So – so we had that problem.  We could not get 
information.  No employee could  simply talk to Directors because that 
10 
is like a regimental arrangement in the company.  It is like a command 
system in the army.  If the Commander has no commanded you – 
instructed you to do something nobody does anything and if the 
Commander chooses not to instruct you to do the right thing so you 
have got to stay with the wrong thing which is what was happening and 
made it very difficult for the Board.  If people spoke to Directors they 
would be called aside and told you got no right to be talking to the  
Directors.  We - the top management – are the only ones who talk to 
the Directors.  So you got – if visitors come to the business – to 
Transnet employees must be scared to talk to them and that is why 
20 
SCOPA when it came there it says we do not want your m anagement 
because we know that the employees will no talk if you are there.  We 
want to talk to them alone which is what I have also done when I go to 
port terminals.  We tell management to go and allow the employees to 
tell us about their problems and wha t they think we should be doing 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 49 of 130 
 
which we are not doing.  So that is the culture we are doing because it 
is important that we encourage a culture of openness, a culture of 
transparency, a culture of participation without any fear in the affairs of 
the business. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  You mention names in paragraph 
10.5.  Would you deal with those please?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Well Chairperson in the reports that we – 
we got and when we look at the history of the transactions that – that 
happened there we identify three key protagonists – three actors.  We 
call them the architects and the implementers of the capture of the 
10 
State 
and 
these 
were 
Mr  Brian Molefe, 
Mr Anoj Singh 
and 
Mr Siyabonga Gama.  The records and exhibits will show that they 
signed for some of these big and irregular contracts including 
deviations or confinement.  The – even changing the procurement – 
evaluation criteria for –for some of these – these tenders in orders to 
facilitate entry of those companies which were their darlings wh ich later 
on we saw that they siphoned money out of Transnet and then of course 
you had a man who was chairing the Board Acquisitions and Disposals 
Committee – Mr Iqbal Sharma – who was a business associate of 
Salim Essa a darling of the Guptas and the guy  who – who had all 
20 
solutions for the Guptas and who was running their businesses.  Salim 
– Mr Iqbal Sharma was working for Transnet and the – there was an 
associate.  I think that business was called VR Laser which – which we 
know also involved with – with Denel and it associated with other 
companies that then procured business with Transnet.  Purely this is 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 50 of 130 
 
the abrogation of Corporate Governance Rules and a gross violation of 
fiduciary duties of Directors and senior management of the business 
and all of these people including Mr  Sharma were people who were 
appointed by Minister  Gigaba when he took over as Minister of Public 
Enterprises.  It is a – it is a matter of public record that he was a big 
buddy of the Guptas.  He has been called several times to Sax onwold.  
I think I was unlikely.  They probably did not know my name.  They 
never asked me to go there and you know the opportunity ended before 
they could call me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  You have also dealt Mr Molefe to 
some extent with the matters raised by you in paragraphs 10.6 and 
10.7.  Are there anything in those paragraphs that you feel you should 
add to what you have already said?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Not much of substance Chairperson save 
to say that we make a point that the manner in which these individuals 
operated they treated Transnet as their piggybank.  You know the little 
bank that kids play with.  They put in money - they take it out.  
Transnet was that kind of a thing that they – they could put in money 
take it out at will but I think they were taking more out than they would 
20 
have put in anything and – and in this regard – this context they would 
have been diverting funds to various entities through these nefarious 
methods of inflating the prices and changing th e scope of contracts.  
So that you justify increase of the costs and they were also using these 
advisory services somewhere.  In the exhibits the Honourable Chair will 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 51 of 130 
 
– will see that Trillian would be paid money for the work that they had 
not done for Transnet.  I think we will probably see it later.  It is 
probably in the region of R93 million which – which was paid to them.  
This was all part of this sophisticated game that was being played by 
those in – in power. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Paragraphs 10.8 to 10.10 
Mr Molefe similar observations apply. You have dealt with issues raised 
in those paragraphs and in paragraph 10.9 by way of summary you talk 
of three basic pillars of the corruption and model of State Capture as 
you refer to it.  That was prevalent in Transnet when you arrived.  Do 
10 
you wish to add or mention those three pillars by way of summary - 
paragraph 10.9? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  All of them, okay.  We did refer to them 
that we – we did say that the – a particular model of capture and 
corruption was constructed based on basic pillars.  I did say that that – 
those pillars would be you are either with us or without us – against us.  
So employees who did not support the agenda were dismissed.  They 
were transferred elsewhere or they were r endered redundant.  In this 
connection I must say we found many hardworking, loyal and 
experienced employees pushing paper and not knowing what they are 
20 
doing.  They are still there many of them and we are in the process of 
doing this.  We also know that those who could not stomach this kind of 
behaviour resigned.  Not because they wanted to go but because they 
felt that they had no future but this organisation needs the skills that 
they had and we are in the process of bringing them back provided that 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 52 of 130 
 
in doing so we will not find ourselves to be acting in conflict with any 
law of our country because we think the – the company needs them and 
we do say that oh look they introduced new methods – procurement 
methods or they flouted decision making in respect of  our procurement 
processes.  They used systems that facilitated State Capture.  You 
asked me how.  I think probably Neotel again would provide an 
extractive example where normally the process of determining the 
business needs, the quality and the scope or the quality of product 
required and the scope of work would originate from the owner of 
business.  When we look at what had happened at certain points with 
10 
regard to Neotel the memorandum comes from the top.  It does not 
come from the owner of business and  it ends up being endorsed by the 
CEO of the Operating Division and Management and they get settled 
with a mess of dysfunctional equipment which was obsolete which later 
on of course the company would have been required to buy back.  It is 
one example that that we have seen and we have said also Chair that 
reprisals were enforced.  There were concoctions - fabrications of 
charges and people subjected to disciplinary hearings found guilty and 
fired.  Some of them are subjected to this disciplinary hearings o n 
matters that they know they had – they are not guilty of but in the end 
20 
because they have considered that they are unwanted in the business 
they go away.  So this – this has been the – the method that has been 
used by those in power and the culture that had developed was that you 
do not ask your superior questions.  You do not debate with your 
superior.  You just listen and carry out orders.  That had been the 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 53 of 130 
 
culture and it is a culture we are seeking to reverse.  It is very difficult 
because it had become not only a culture but a practice within the 
organisation and I have got to turn that around if we have to unchain 
the creativity, innovation and talent of the many employees who 
understand this business, love it and are committed to working.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well part of what you are – you are telling me in 
terms of people who maybe – may have been seen to resist attempts to 
get them to be involved in wrongdoing that they were – disciplinary 
charges were brought against them and you were suspended and/or 
dismissed or things were made difficult for them with the result that 
10 
some would leave – you know.  It seems consistent with what I have 
been told by other witnesses in relation to - for example - the Law 
Enforcement Agencies.  Of course I will still hear m ore evidence and 
see whether there is any – there are any witnesses who dispute that 
analysis but what you are saying seems to be consistent with what they 
told me or some of the witnesses in the Law Enforcement Agency told 
me what is happening in that sector as well. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  It is indeed consistent Chairperson.  
Without getting into the details I have had the opportunity to work with 
Law Enforcement Agencies when I was Chairman of PRASA.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  We started off very well.  We had 
professional police officers who were doing a good job.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  And we gave them files and files of 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 54 of 130 
 
evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  They agreed …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  To work with our forensic investigators 
because they had lack of capacity in that area.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Then of course when the President 
changed the Head of the Hawks and brought in a gentleman 
Berning Ntlemeza… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  He got in there and he removed …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  All these good people …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  And we started seeing – getting the story 
of files which were disappearing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  The work we had given not been done.  As 
I am sitting here now …  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Talking in this Commission …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  There are volumes of evidence …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 55 of 130 
 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Sitting there …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  With the Hawks …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Which – which they are yet …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  To go to the National Director of 
Prosecution … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  To deal with. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  It is precisely for that reason …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  That I had to haul them before the court …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  And say do your job …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  And it was a simple thing.  Do your job.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE: 
 
You 
discharge 
your 
constitutional 
20 
mandate.  I am not asking you to do something that’s not part of your 
responsibility and your duties.   
 
So there is a correlation between what we have painted here 
and what happened to these Law Enforcement Agencies.  I needed 
...(intervention)  
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 56 of 130 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But what’s quite important in relation to the last bit 
that you have said about the Law Enforcement Agencies is, you are not 
basing that on what you may be reading in the newspapers or hearing 
in the media you are basing it on your experience as Chairperson of 
PRASA at a certain time when – from a certain time the Hawks see med 
to have good people who were keen on their job doing it properly but 
from a certain time your experience showed that things began to be 
different, that’s personal experience you – in matters in which you were 
involved in, that capacity. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     Certainly Chairperson, I said with the 
10 
most – some of the senior people, I’ve never said with Mr Ntlemeza 
because he was not there and when he came in they stopped doing the 
job but I sat in meetings with his deputy who is still there now.  I 
needed to have added one point, Chairperson, which – when I spoke 
about reprisals and disciplinary hearings.  
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:   To say that justice in Transnet was 
applied selectively where the person implicated in reports was 
somebody who knew a lot about the wrongs of some of the people in 
senior positions.  That person would be charged but deliberately, not 
20 
enough evidence would be adduced before the disciplinary hearing.  
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     We had one example where there was a 
devastating report for example on the matter of the NMPP, National 
Multi Product Pipelines and that report, during the disciplinary hearing, 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 57 of 130 
 
was not used.  The result was that the person was not found guilty.  So 
it is deliberate because they had the report but they didn’t want to use 
it.  Transnet lawyers or lawyers instructed by Transnet were either not 
made privy to that report or they did not ask for that report but 
Transnet, knowing the gravity of the transgression, the offence , they 
should have used it, but they didn’t but on smaller persons, individuals 
they descend heavily on, they punish them, they fire them from work.  
CHAIRPERSON:    Well it might not be exactly the same thing that 
some of the witnesses and the Law Enforcem ent Sector told me, but 
they did say that in regard to persons, officials who seemed to be 
10 
fighting corruption there seemed to be quite determination to get them 
arrested, charge them criminally even when, either there was no case 
or if there was something  they’d done wrong was really a minor thing 
but when it was certain other people then even if there was clear 
evidence nothing would be done against them in terms of arrest or 
being suspended or charged or transferred or when it was done it was 
done in such a way that they would not be found guilty or something 
like – I hope I’m not misrepresenting what they told me but there was 
something like that but I just mention to say that there is also that 
came from a different sector thank you.  
20 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     It is so Chairperson that’s my 
observation from where we are sitting what we have seen but I’ve also 
seen it by working closely with Law Enforcement Agencies.  
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     The – there was a point I wanted to 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 58 of 130 
 
make, maybe I can make it once advocate Pretorius concludes that 
paragraph 10 but if you allow me, Chairperson, I can just rattle on and 
say that...(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes Mr Pretorius is that fine in terms of your own 
planning? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETOR IUS SC:  Well I was coming to paragraph 
10.12 and had a few questions in relation to the manner in which the 
Board responded to what it found and began its own series of 
investigations. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:    I was going to do something – say 
10 
something before that paragraph 10. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Okay say so. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     And that is 10.11 basically where we say 
that one of our primary tasks was to investigate the extent of abuse of 
procurement processes at Transnet and to make sure that we clea n up 
the mess as much as possible.  I think to this extent there are a number 
of these big matters we are dealing with, one of them is that the Durban 
Dig-out Port I referred to earlier, the other one is that one of the cranes 
which has been dealt with.  We received further whistle blowing reports 
in respect of the multi product pipeline that I’ve spoken about, we still 
20 
have to look at how to use that information.  I’m advised that we have 
approximately 400 000 documents which came as a result of the whistl e 
blower and MNS Attorneys went to collect it in Durban and the whistle 
blower says, you stand a chance of recovering 12billion rand that 
Transnet has lost but I don’t know if people would have been sitting in 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 59 of 130 
 
the 12billion rand but it is worth demonstrati ng to the South African 
public that we’re acting decisively so we will deal with that.   
 
You might ask, Chairperson, but what mechanism have you 
created to make sure that matters that you have not referred to in your 
evidence here are followed up are not allowed to disappear.  We are 
working on that, we have recently been – received approval from 
National Treasury in the use of Transversal contract to use forensic 
investigators who are on their panel and the intention is to make sure 
that we move rapidly, we don’t go through tedious processes of trying 
to find investigators through a public tender.  Of course, even as we do 
10 
that we will still have to go through Transnet procurement to achieve 
that but we are looking at – these cases that I’m referring to wo uld go 
to them. 
 
Yesterday advocate Pretorius said Transnet is no longer at the 
Carlton Centre, Transnet has moved now to Waterfall Corner and he 
said, well this might be the subject of investigation, I don’t know who 
whispered to him.  It is indeed the su bject of investigation, I should 
have seen the preliminary report of it yesterday or today it has not 
been brought but is the subject of investigation.  Some of the strange 
things that have happened and the questions that I’ve asked 
20 
management was, how could it be so coincidental that Waterfall Corner, 
the building you want is occupied by Group Five, Group Five has a five 
year contract – lease, Group Five has used two years of that lease and 
suddenly Transnet comes in and takes a lease of three years in the  
same building.  Is this not a bail out of some kind because in my 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 60 of 130 
 
personal experience if you had a lease the Landlord would have said to 
you, you can’t leave my property now unless you find me a tenant who 
will take the remainder of your contract.   
 
So it is that red flag that we’ll pursue from where I’m sitting 
I’ve been privy to some of the emails that suggested that, in fact, even 
before the RFP went out there had been discussions between 
management of Transnet and management of Group Five, management 
of a company called Attack which is a listed property company of – why 
do I forget the holding company, I’ll remember it but there had been 
those discussions and we also look at how the RFP was designed.  
10 
Transnet needed a lot of parking space if it was to  move everybody 
from the Carlton Centre to the Waterfall Corner, it would also have 
needed additional space to accommodate Executives coming from the 
operating divisions when they come to the meetings of Exco but 
Transnet did not do that.  It designed the parking requirement to suit 
what exists already there in that building, the result being that when 
there is Exco, members of management, top Executive team, they don’t 
have place to park.  So it’s one of those things that will be investigated 
there are many more similar ones and we will be using this – the panel 
of National Treasury to follow up on these things.  There are other 
20 
things which Funduzi, in his report, became privy to but they were 
falling outside their mandate but they reflect the violation of  
procurement and other things happening within Transnet they would 
have to be packaged as well and included in the next phase of our 
investigations. 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 61 of 130 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :    You deal in paragraph 10.12, 
Mr Molefe with the beginnings of the review p rocess embarked upon by 
the new Board and a number of high -value tenders were identified in 
that process.  We’re going to deal with some of them in your evidence 
in due course but as you yourself has stated the question arises, what 
about the possibility o f malfeasance outside of those high -value 
tenders and you’ve told the Chair about some of the activities of the 
Board in that respect.  May I refer you to a statement you made – 
public statement you made, it’s not part of the bundle Chair but it will 
be handed up.  In January 2019 it’s in the Business Report and its 
10 
under the headline, Transnet Reviews Thousands of Contracts and 
Clean Up, and towards the end of the article you are quoted as saying 
that Transnet would spend a significant amount of time going  through a 
pile of contracts which you, Mr Molefe, estimated to be in the 
thousands that the company had entered into during the past few years 
and you are quoted as saying, “the reality is that once that exercise is 
completed, the 8.1billion rand reported  in irregular expenditure last 
year, that number could be significantly higher”, did you make that 
statement? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     That is correct Chairperson, I did.  
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :    Do you have anything to add, 
how is it that...(intervention) 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     I did not suck the number thousand from 
my finger, I had a discussion with our Treasury and the Acting Chief 
Financial Officer and said, what would it take for us to get to the 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 62 of 130 
 
bottom of this corruption.  It is quite cle ar that when we came in the 
focus was on the 1064 locomotives, on Neotel, on T Systems as well as 
95 and 100 locomotives procurement but the reality is that there are 
many others falling outside that which, if indeed we want to clean up, 
we’d have to deal with.  So the statement is correct sir and we are 
committed to doing so and one of the things that – items that we’re 
already dealing with on which there’s a preliminary report is one 
relating to what is called Ambrose Park, is the land of Transnet where 
Transnet was attempting to create an opportunity for emerging oil and 
gas businesses to establish there but unfortunately whilst economic 
10 
transformation, inclusiveness and empowerment are necessary, some 
opportunist circumvented the processes, so we are loo king at that and 
it’s a complex thing, Chairperson, because the companies that signed 
these lease agreements were Transnet, themselves did not want to 
defraud Transnet unless they might have been giving kickbacks to 
somebody.  It’s that somebody inside Tra nsnet chose not to follow the 
process. 
 
The result was that once those companies had signed the 
lease agreements they spent millions.  I spoke to one company that 
says we have already put 100million into this thing.  So Transnet, in 
20 
resolving these matters  it is going to have to find a balance between 
dealing robustly with compliance with the procurement system but also 
deal with the impact that our failures as Transnet has had on innocent 
businesses.  Perhaps that is probably the point at which lawyers wou ld 
call about just and equitable arrangement.  
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 63 of 130 
 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes, yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Mr Molefe in embarking upon the 
project or projects that the Board has chosen to, have you found a 
change in relation to the readiness of whistle blowers  to come forward? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:    Yes Chairperson, increasingly South 
Africans in and outside Transnet, employees of Transnet are coming 
forward disclosing information which hither to we would not have been 
able to access and we think that it (ind istinct) for the process of 
changing the culture, rebuilding the institution and restoring public 
confidence in State owned companies.  
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :    Mr Molefe at paragraph 10.12.1 
and following you deal, at a high level, and in summary w ith some of 
the 
larger 
contracts 
which 
have 
been 
reviewed 
through 
your 
investigations or through the investigations that you’ve mandated your 
legal representatives and others to undertake.  Shall we start first with 
the issue of the 95 locomotives at parag raph 10.12.2 if you could tell 
the Chair, in summary, what investigations have revealed?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     The key investigation in this regard – 
investigations where MNS and Funduzi, especially Funduzi and the 
investigations reveal that, again, as  is prevalent Transnet at the time – 
20 
as was prevalent in Transnet at the time procurement processes were 
flouted, prices were increased.  If you look at these two they start off 
with Transnet saying we need to confine because we’re going to 
prepare our locomotives aging there’s a number of them which would be 
phased out, they will go out of service so we need to move rapidly.  
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 64 of 130 
 
Now there were companies that provided service at this stage, I recall 
one of them was Mitsui, I think it’s called Mitsui.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :    That’s Mitsui. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     M-i-t-s-u-i. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :    Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     It had previously provided locomotives 
of the type that Transnet required and management advised that in 
order to ensure that the costs are not high that we implement – we 
manufacture these locomotives quickly and therefore can deploy them 
in services quickly as possible.  The confinement should be in Mitsui, 
10 
they have the design, they have the production line so they ’re not going 
to spend time still trying to figure out how to design that locomotives 
and that is where, probably, the question of standardisation would have 
arisen in that regard and which is provided for in confinement and in 
the deviations of National Treasury regulations, if I recall well should 
be regulation 16 or so but China South Rail entered, things changed.  
 
What was, initially intended to be a confinement to Mitsui was 
now changed, it was made a confinement now to China South Rail 
which did not have the design that Transnet required at that time and 
therefore Transnet ends up with a locomotive design that they did not 
20 
require and again, the business owner, which would have been TFR 
would have said this is a kind of locomotive we want it gets up th ere to 
the big bosses at Corporate, they decide no, no you’re not going to get 
what you want, you will get what we say is good for you.  You’re not 
going to get what you want which would be cheaper for Transnet you’re 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 65 of 130 
 
going to get what we say is good for y ou and which will lead to 
escalation in terms of price but you must pay that price, I just want to 
make that point.  I know that the details will be dealt with by other 
witnesses who were more into operation and we’re dealing with issues 
of governance and procurement there are experts in that regard.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:    We know from investigations 
that there were three contracts in relation to – well many more than 
three contracts but three categories of contract in relation to the 
procurement of locomotives, that’s the procurement of the 95 
locomotives then the procurement of 100 locomotives and then the 
10 
procurement of the 1064 locomotives, those issues have been raised 
yesterday and will be the subject of further evidence.  You summarise 
separately in relation to the 95 the 100 and the 1064 the findings.  
You’ve dealt with the 95 I think and in paragraph 10.12.4 you 
summarise the findings in respect of the 100 locomotives.  Would you 
just summarise those for the Chair please, that’s in paragrap h 
10.12.4.1 and following?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     Chairperson we – I identified the 
irregularities in respect of the acquisition of a hundred locomotives and 
I did say that, already, what was initially intended to be a confinement 
20 
to Mitsui now shifted to become a confinement of the hundred 
locomotives to China South Rail and this was not in compliance with 
the requirement of urgency, standardisation and highly specialised 
goods as prescribed by the policy and of course the Treasury 
regulation.  So it’s one of those things so we – it’s irregular, that’s 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 66 of 130 
 
Funduzi has found that and so did MNS investigators...(intervention).  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :    Was there any escalation of 
cost that raised concern?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     The – I’m coming to that, the 
investigations – the report showed that the China South Rail proposal 
did not meet the objectives of confinement as set out in the 
memorandum of 21 January 2014 which had been approved by the 
Transnet Board of Directors and then of course that on t he – in 
response to the question by advocate Pretorius SC it is indeed true that 
the acquisition cost escalated from 3.8billion to 4.4billion and this 
10 
memorandum was submitted by Mr Brian Molefe, Mr Singh and Mr 
Ganda justifying the increases.  So I’m advised, from the investigations 
that Transnet overpaid at least 3.47million per locomotive and at most 
paid 6.2million per locomotive. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :    Overpaid? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     Sorry overpaid yes overpaid by that 
amount sorry and the conclusion was that Messrs. Molefe – Brian 
Molefe, B S Ganda, Singh and Giani had failed in discharging their 
fiduciary duties in the acquisition of hundred locomotives for China 
South Rail, the fiduciary duties being one that requires care and 
20 
diligence.  So – and these are the things that show that, wilfully, people 
could just ignore the rules. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :    Chair its two minutes to one 
we’re about to move to a new topic.  Would it be convenient now to 
take the long adjournment?  
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 67 of 130 
 
CHAIRPERSON:     Okay we’ll take the lunch adjournment and we’ll 
resume at two o’clock, we adjourn.  
INQUIRY ADJOURNS  
INQUIRY RESUMES  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay you may proceed Mr Pretorius thank you.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Thank you Chair.  Mr Molefe 
before the long adjournment we were dealing with the various 
locomotive transactions and you were about to refer to the findings of 
the investigations mandated by the board of Transnet into the purchase 
of the 1064 locomotives which is at paragraph 10.12.5 of your 
10 
statement.  If you would summarise please for the Chair what the 
investigators found in respect of that transaction.  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Chairperson in summary the findings of 
the investment – I mean the investigators sorry the investigators was 
that the request for proposal, the RFP’s did not comply with the 
Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Act.  The investigators 
found that Transnet did not follow National Treasury instruction note 
which provided for 90 10 preferential point system.  Being 90 I  think on 
the side of pricing and then 10% on side of empowerment.  Which is a 
provision 
provided 
for 
in 
the 
Preferential 
Procurement 
Police 
20 
Framework Act.  They also found that Transnet unlawfully deviated from 
the evaluation process when evaluating techn ical compliance.  That 
Transnet did not track production and content threshold as the price 
changed during post tender negotiations with regard affecting three 
bidders in this connection.  I earlier on referred to the requirements of 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 68 of 130 
 
local content and variously looking at matters requirements in respect 
of electrical locomotives which was 60% and the diesel locomotives 
being 55%.  I – in reading the scores in respect of all of them in fact 
none of them complied, none of the bidders.  So they were allowed to  
go through but it also suggests that you know the environment was 
such that bidders could come and simply ignore policy and procurement 
strategy of the company that is procuring their services.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  In relation to the local con tent it 
is quite a complex issue I understand because as you say in paragraph 
10.12.5.3 prices changed in post tender negotiations which resulted in 
10 
a change to the local content calculations, am I correct?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Yes Sir. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Sorry I interrupted you.   
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  No I do not – I do not intend to add 
anything unless…  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Alright. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I am required to do so. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  In 10.12.5.5 you mention a 
circumstance involving China South Rail and Mr Salim Essa and a 
payment made there that tainted the procurement process.  You there 
20 
referring to a payment to a company called Tequesta.  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  It is so Sir the – now Chairperson the 
procurement Public Procurement in South Africa is provided for or is 
governed by Section 217 of the Constitution of the Republic of South 
Africa.  And it is also the Public Finance Management Act and Transnet 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 69 of 130 
 
has developed also a robust policy in what is cal led procurement 
procedure manual which clearly define how this process should be 
undertaken.  Of course at the heart of it apart from your local content 
and so on is the fact that the process has got to be fair.  It has got to 
be just.  It has got to be cost effective amongst others.  Those clearly 
were ignored and these provisions were ignored and one sees in the 
findings of the reports unimaginable arrogance where China South Rail 
bid to supply if I remember well it is 359 locomotives to South Africa I 
think those ones were electric if I remember well.  And then they also 
allow for a back to back service agreement to be entered into between 
10 
Tequesta which is a company of Salim Essa an associate of the Gupta’s 
with a company called China South Rail Hong Kon g.  And the basis of 
that agreement says we are responsible for you getting the contract in 
South Africa.  Which means they are saying there was no fair 
competition. We went in there, we told our friends inside Transnet in 
the board acquisition and disposals committee that you must get this 
contract and you got it.  Now because you got it you got to pay us a 
success fee and you will pay us through another vehicle that you have 
created and will be in Hong Kong, registered in Hong Kong China South 
Rail Hong Kong.  And for each invoice that Transnet pay you going to 
20 
pay us 21%.  If my recollection is good but I suppose the experts will 
deal with the exact detail, I think S at the time when I last checked this 
matter Tequesta had already been paid over R3 billio n on the basis of 
this so called success fee.  Now…  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Who was the chairman of the 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 70 of 130 
 
board acquisition and disposals committee at the time?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  No the chairman of the board acquisition 
and disposals committee at the time was a man called Iqbal Sharma 
who was a business associate of Salim Essa who owned maybe if not 
100% but majority – huge majority stake in Tequesta.  And the money 
therefore arising out of the contract awarded by Mr Iqbal Sharma on Mr 
Iqbal Sharma’s recommendations to the board found its way, part of 
that found its way to the company of his business associate Mr Salim 
Essa.  We said earlier on they were business associates in VR Laser 
ja. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  May we move on then? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry … 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Just – I had wanted to go back to 10.1.2 – 
10.12.5.4  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh I was also wondering whether that you left that out 
deliberately? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  No I had left it – I had intended to leave it 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  But now I see money there. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well that is what… 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  That is what I see. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is what I saw too. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I thought South Africans want to hear 
about that. 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 71 of 130 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I thought when I saw that figure I said how could 
you leave it out.  Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  So, so, so.  That – the finding there – the 
MNS it is contrary to Transnet negotiation strategy.  The post standard 
negotiation team permitted the bidders to prize for split in batches thus 
causing Transnet to incur additional R2.7 billion in the total estimated 
costs.  So every time there is failure to observe the rules, the 
processes and regulation Transnet loses money, pays more a nd in this 
instance it is paying an extra R2 billion.  I would imagine that as they 
keep paying more some of this money then finds its way to the pockets 
10 
of these individuals. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  The purpose of post tender 
negotiations would be to establish what is known as the best and final 
offer, am I correct? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  That is correct Sir. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And what is the purpose 
normally for the party issuing the tender?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Chairperson the purpose normally of the 
party issuing the tender is to use that process to reduce the costs in a 
way they use that to negotiate the prices down.  And it is normally done 
20 
with post tender.  It is done with those who have already been advised 
that they have been the preferred bidders and they are being awarded 
the tender.  Something that has been strange with this process we have 
found that when negotiations take place on the best and final offer the 
prices just go up.  We – I am yet to call to mind any negotiatio ns where 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 72 of 130 
 
the – the price went down.  So that is the difficulty we have with the 
way in which the BAFO negotiations was handled.  BAFO meaning the 
best and final offer.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I guess that these kinds of things would not be 
picked up most of the time where those within the company who were 
supposed to exercise oversight are either not able to because they are 
incompetent or not able to because they do not know the subject or 
because they too are party to the scheme.  Because otherwise when 
there are so many things going wrong if there are people who are paid 
to do oversight they must pick these things up.   
10 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Chairperson that is true things being 
normal.  But we now know that the phenomenon of state capture has 
ushered in anomalies that boggles the minds of normal thinking human 
beings.  They should be doing that but they are not doing it.  The 
Transnet procurement procedure manual requires that people in supply 
chain need to be trained regularly. Of course your management wo uld 
say that it is – it should not end only with employees that directors too 
need to be subjected to this training so that they understand the 
processes and when they ask questions interrogate those who are 
making submissions requesting approval they shou ld be able to ask the 
20 
right questions and they should also be able to detect where processes 
have been violated.  The finance and capital investment committee of 
the board which has been mandated to exercise oversight on 
procurement and to recommend to the board when they are satisfied 
that the procurement mechanisms and policies have been applied in a 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 73 of 130 
 
manner that is satisfactory.  They would then come to the board and 
recommend that they are satisfied that it has been done.  But we have 
also said probably we need to do more than that.  The way to do it is to 
stop the situation where one person is the person delegated to sign 
approval can do so without the collective view of the committee.  So we 
have introduced the committee system to ensure that the commit tees 
would then serve as a counter vale against the weaknesses or the 
disregard of rules and policies.  But we went further to say probably we 
need a new way also where you could – you could say to each 
individual you need to sign off in a particular list where you – you 
10 
confirm that you agree with everything, you have done your best to 
make sure that policy is complied with.  And therefore if you write that 
and it comes to the board as a result of that recommendation the board 
approves and later it is foun d that you mislead the board that should 
lead to summary dismissal of the individual.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course …  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  But of course it is a matter that 
procurement and governance section of the company must further 
elaborate that policy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course the fact that people who are supposed to 
20 
do oversight might not have done it might be directly the result of the 
effectiveness of the strategy that you talked about before lunch of 
going to the people who have strategy – who occupy strategy positions 
in the entity and making sure that those people are on their side.  In 
that event now whatever training the person has whatever expertise 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 74 of 130 
 
that person has will not work because he or she is deliberately not 
wanting to expose what they are supposed to expose so because they 
are already part of the scheme. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  It is so Chairperson but the question is – 
that must be asked, would anybody have the incentive not to want to 
apply policy, the rules and procedures when that person  has got no 
material benefit out of that process?  I would be surprised if anybody 
would simply commit to doing these sorts of things on behalf of a 
company bidding for a contract in their company and a company that 
they have nothing to do with except the professional relationship of 
10 
requiring them to provide a service.  It is pretty clear I mean the 
reasonable assumption is that there is material benefit for those who 
bend the rules to ensure that companies that do not comply and get the 
contracts.  I must hasten to say by the way that some of the companies 
that may not have complied might not necessarily have offered any 
material benefits to these individuals but the individual in order that 
they do not get confronted with the questions to say why is it th at you 
are excluding these other companies?  They make everybody to pass 
even those who do not pay the incentives to them which is what we see 
in the 1064 process of the OEM’s.  I think and it is a matter we have to 
20 
deal with.  China South Rail features pr ominently in this matter and 
that is where investigations see trails or traces of movement of monies.  
We have tried to talk with them.  They have played games.  They are – 
they have been so far the most uncooperative, delaying not responding 
to our requests which are aimed at finding an agreement which together 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 75 of 130 
 
would enable us to have these contracts cancelled and together 
approaching the court on what is the most appropriate or equitable and 
a just remedy for this. We have found it difficult.  Of course t he lawyers 
and probably Chairperson you being a judge and a very – the highest 
court in the land you might also say look what is unlawful is unlawful.  
The law has been broken is unlawful you cannot make it lawful.  And we 
agree but we are saying that when  you deal with a company like 
Transnet whose critical role we have indicated earlier on when we were 
talking, when we have a problem like this you cannot deal with that 
problem in a manner similar to how we have dealt with a problem of 
10 
non-compliance in the case of PRASA.  In the case of this OEM’s the 
locomotives are per the designs approved by Transnet and some of 
them have already been delivered, tested, accepted and they have 
already been deployed in service.  In the case – in the case of Transnet 
I mean PRASA the locomotives were not fit for purpose.  They were tall, 
they were not meeting the safety regulations, requirements of safety 
regulator of South Africa.  They were not even complying with the rail 
network requirement of Transnet itself.  So there  you could say it 
serves no purpose for us to keep a product that we cannot use or a 
product which when we use there are certain places where we cannot 
20 
use which is what we did not ask for.  Ja.  Here it is a very critical 
matter management when they went into procurement they went through 
detailed assessment and presentation that showed the life of the 
existing locomotives.  The number of them who were becoming obsolete 
and therefore would go out of service and seeing the urgency of getting 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 76 of 130 
 
the new ones to replenish their stock.  So then you have the business 
imperative – business imperative that would need to be taken into 
account even as you proceed towards cancelling the contract.  You may 
want to say then the – you got to invoke the principle of equitab le and 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just and [indistinct]. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Just remedy that would arise.  But there 
may well be some of these OEM’s and entities that have been involved 
in so much corruption that we would simply not be able to apply that – 
that remedy to them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I am sorry I am pretending that I am a 
lawyer. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I am not a lawyer just that I talk I spend a 
lot of time talking to MNS. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  On page 16 or at least at 
paragraph 10.12.6 Mr Molefe you deal with the relocation issue.  It has 
been mentioned in presentations yesterday.  What was at issue in 
relation to relocation?  
20 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  The Chairperson as I understand it and 
listening 
to 
management 
of 
Transnet 
and 
having 
seen 
some 
correspondence that they exchanged with the Minister Brown, Lynne 
Brown the – the intention in talking about the relocation was to say this 
procurement programme is so big  and it involves so much money it 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 77 of 130 
 
needs to be used also as an opportunity for industrial development or 
capacitation and development of local businesses in other parts of the 
country and they chose KwaZulu Natal for that purpose.  But I think to 
call it a relocation was a misnomer and I agree with the Advocate 
Pretorius SC I think he is the one who summarise it so eloquently 
yesterday, because the findings of a company appointed by Transnet to 
look into this question of relocation.  I think it was called Lo liwe - 
arrived at the conclusion that in fact there was no relocation because 
relocation presupposes that you have got an established establishment 
elsewhere and you have to move that establishment if not in its entirety 
10 
but a – the big – a significant proportion thereof to a different place but 
in this instance what appears to be pretty clear from the beginning is 
that it was really just an establishment in KwaZulu -Natal of – of 
manufacturing in an assembly plant rather than a relocation.  At the 
beginning as Chairperson would see in the document the initial so 
called relocation prices that are given by the OEMs range between four 
and nine million and then suddenly a company called Bex …  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Is that B-E X? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Bex - B-E-X - is brought in we do not 
know how but by the BADC to advise them on how to cost the 
20 
relocation.  The result of that was that Bex then say for you – for one – 
call them by name – for you Bombadier Transport relocation would cost 
618 457 125 and for China North Rail it will cost 647  181494.  So it 
jumped from four to nine million to this figure.  So what do you do then 
on this question of relocation you just dig into the – the vault.  You dig 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 78 of 130 
 
into the vault of Transnet and pull out R1.3 billion or  so for that 
purpose and – and this question of relocation again was no part of the 
RFP initially.  It is a matter that was brought in – in the post award 
negotiations. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, through variation. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  It is a variation yes of – in a sense also 
tampering with the relevant aspect of – of the RFP as well. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  The costs I understand 
from what you say in your statement and from the investigators were 
unjustifiably inflated according t o Transnet investigators. 
10 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  That is so. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  The advisor in that respect was 
– B-E-X – Bex as you refer to them?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Yes sir. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  They apparently received a large 
payment for their advice in relation to costings.  Do you recall the 
amount of that payment?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I – where I am sitting I am not able to 
remember the exact figure but it is a figure that is in excess of 30 
million. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  3-0? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Does R67 million ring a bell?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Oh, yes.  67 million, yes sir.  67 million.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Chair - may I place on 
record that we have received substantial submissions in regard to 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 79 of 130 
 
issues raised in relation to Bombadier Transport from the legal 
representatives of Bombadier Transport - Norton Rose Fulbright?  
Those have been placed before the legal team and have been made 
available to the investigators.  Of course we believed it would be  
inappropriate to debate the rights and wrongs of those outside of the 
Commission.  They need to be debated in public before the 
Commission.  They will be placed before the Commission in due course 
preferably by Bombadier itself and they will be brought to  the attention 
of witnesses who deal with these issues as and when they need to deal 
with them when we are dealing with applications for cross -examination. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  That is fine. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  If – whilst advocate is …  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Still looking at his papers if I may 
Chairperson …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Interject on this matter it is for Transnet a 
very serious matter …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  And it is so for the Government of the 
20 
Republic of South Africa and the people of South Africa – the SIU 
proclaimed by the President in April  2018 has also found that these 
contracts – 1 064 contracts – are irregular.  MNS has found that they 
are irregular so did Werksmans.  Now there is a big challenge that the 
Board of Transnet now faces as an accounting authority.  Parliament is 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 80 of 130 
 
going to say so will SCOPA say to us you became aware that these 
contracts are irregular.  You say that they are unlawful as well but you  
continue to perform.  You continued to use the taxpayers’ money to 
finance contracts that you say are unlawful.  Now I am raising this 
question because the need for us understanding the complexities of 
this contract and the business imperatives that I ref er to – to go into an 
arrangement where we can arrive at a conclusion together with the 
parties to this – these contracts.  The urgency thereof cannot be 
overemphasised and that is why I must say I do not know what 
Bombadier Transport is saying in its subm issions but the reality is that 
10 
all of us have got to move rapidly and close this major problem for the 
country that is being phased by Transnet and the country.  Ordinarily if 
there was proper enforcement of performance taking into account 
milestones, the delays and so on.  They should have been imposed on 
many of them several penalties.  Those were not done.  Of course 
probably some of them will say ja you compelled us to use Transnet 
Engineering.  Transnet Engineering was not ready to deliver the 
volumes and in time that we wanted them to deliver.  They would not 
have been able to assemble and manufacture bogies as quickly as we 
would have wanted them to do so but that does not mean we can delay 
20 
this process to eternity Chairperson.  We have a responsibil ity as the 
Board to Parliament and to the Government to resolve this matter and 
we have sent messages to the parties that we want to talk we want to 
rapidly resolve these matters.  MNS together with their Acting Group 
Chief Executive Officer and the Acting  Chief Financial Officer supported 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 81 of 130 
 
by teams from TFR and TE have been working on these things and it is 
important - I must place on record - that they be resolved.  We may well 
in the next few weeks find it difficult to sustain continued payment – 
performance when we know that in doing so we are also breaking the 
law on our side. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you have said it is a complex matter and I – I 
will not give advice.  I am sure you have enough advisors.  
(Laughing) 
CHAIRPERSON:  All - all I can say is that So uth Africans will expect 
that if it is a matter where the Board must tread carefully they must do 
10 
so but they would also expect that things should not take too long to be 
finalised and they will also expect that the Board should not be scared 
of taking difficult decisions if it has to take difficult decisions and that 
the Board should – should apply its mind and where it should draw a 
line it should do so but those would be different expectations of people 
in South Africa.  So ultimately the Board would nee d to apply is mind 
properly to different routes and avenues but I am sure that they will not 
expect that things should go on without resolution indefinitely.  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Thank you Chairperson.  Let me agree 
with the Chairperson on – on that matter and the Board has been very 
20 
cautious and it sought to act responsibly on these matters.  There are 
two aspects to this matter.  The first one the legality of the contract.  
They probably will treat every contractor the same.  Then there would 
be the question of justice…  
CHAIRPERSON:  Equity justice (intervenes). 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 82 of 130 
 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Just and equitable remedy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  In that regard there will be a varied 
approach.  There are complexities that I have not spoken about her e 
but Bombadier Transport understands some of those complexities which 
extend beyond themselves and ourselves …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Which – which would have to deal with – 
which relates to how … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  The funding for this procurement was – 
was handled …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  And what kind of agreements were – the 
terms of that funding was done but – but we cannot keep it going on for 
every as the Honourable Chair said.  We would hav e to move.  The 
Board has to be decisive but the Board has to be rational and 
responsible. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  Thank you 
20 
Mr Molefe.  In paragraph 10.12.7 you summarise the results of 
Transnet’s investigations in relation to the relocation issue which in 
turn I understand relates to the procurement of the 1  064 locomotives.  
Is there anything you wish to add from that list in paragraph 10.12.7?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Chairperson unless there are further 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 83 of 130 
 
questions I think the paragraph is straightforward.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: Hm. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  It is there as a matter of record 
and then in relation to the findings of the investigation conducted by 
Loliwe those are summarised in paragraph 10.12.9.  Once again you 
may wish to summarise those findings.  If you need to read the report 
(intervenes). 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I - I just want to restate that Transnet 
appointed a railway logistics expert company – Loliwe Rail Solutions 
10 
(Pty) Ltd.  Loliwe- called Loliwe – to conduct an assessment of inter 
alia the reasonableness of the relocation costs accepted by Transnet.  
The findings of Loliwe were that there was no relocation of either BT or 
CNR.  Variation orders wer e inflated intentionally by the OEMs and 
inadequately violated by Transnet …  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Evaluated. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Sorry – inadequately evaluated by 
Transnet prior to concluding the approval and amendment of the 
contracts.  That there is no justification for either the direct or indirect 
costs presented by BT – sorry – Bombadier Transport and China North 
20 
Rail.  That it was improper for Transnet to have agreed to lump sums 
for the relocation.  These are the lump sums that I referre d to earlier 
Chairperson going into over 600 million.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In each case. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  In each case. 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 84 of 130 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In fact over R1.2 billion. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Ja, overall it is R1.2 billion.  In eac h case 
it went over 600 million.  Now the – the approval of the direct and 
indirect costs was done without the representation or valid and 
substantiated documentation and now the process followed in the 
approval of the relocation costs was not in accordanc e with the 
standard 
contract 
management 
protocol 
and 
then 
the 
– 
the 
investigations report goes further to conclude that Mr  Gama has 
approval of relocation costs without appraising himself of the 
circumstances the amount – may have caused Transnet to incur 
10 
fruitless and wasteful expenditure and our recommendation – our 
investigators recommend that Bombadier Transport and China North 
Rail be directed to provide a statement and debatement of the funds 
paid in relocation to – paid to them ostensibly for relocation. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  So in a sense show us your records - your 
documents.  Give us those documents.  We will give you ours and show 
you our report to say that this – this is irregular but we do not want 
Chairperson to spend time splitting hairs.  This is a matter that is very 
serious and urgent.  We now all know about the irregularities.  
20 
Somebody might try to dispute it and play legal technicalities but I think 
the big picture require us to move beyond the game of lawyers trying to 
demonstrate that they know the law better than others.  We must look 
at the big picture – the impact on the country, the impact on those 
companies themselves and the impact of institutions that financed this 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 85 of 130 
 
program. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right and you have already told 
the Chair that the engagement with Bombadier Transport and China 
North Rail is continuing. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  It is – it is so Chairperson.  I must say 
and probably will provide an incentive to those OEMs th at are lagging 
behind – which are still lagging behind.  The negotiations with General 
Electric have gone extremely well.  Most of the issues our negotiators 
and their negotiators are able – were able to reach some measure of 
consensus and we think that an d – and they accept where they have 
10 
failed to meet the requirements that they have failed.  So we have to 
deal with what then - we would not be able to sign off until we have 
dealt with the question of the legality of all of those contracts which 
must then be followed by a process of determining just and equitable 
remedy. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Before we move on Mr  Molefe 
one correction necessary that has been drawn to my attention – B-E-X 
– Bex was I understand the advisor to China North Rail and n ot to the 
BADC of Transnet.  My apologies. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  That is correct.  They were – they were 
20 
advising China North Rail but once they had given the figures about 
China North Rail somehow in a way that I am unable to explain here - 
maybe it is something if I need to do further research on I may have to 
but I do not think there is a need – the figure around 600 million was 
then applied to Bombadier as well.  Not the exact figure as to the 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 86 of 130 
 
Honourable Chair will see. 
CHAIRPERSON:  More or less? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Ja, in respect of Bombadier Transport it is 
618 million and the other one was 647 million for – for China Rail. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, thank you. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  China North Rail. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In paragraph 10.12.12 Mr Molefe 
you deal with the engagement of T-Systems and what occurred there. 
Would you tell the Chair about that please?  
10 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  If I am allowed to gallop on this one 
Chairperson – I simply want to say that …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  At a point and that was in – in 2017, 
22 February – Transnet awarded to T-Systems a data services tender 
after tenders – after determining that they continued to need this 
service.  It was not the first time.  They had been there before.  So it 
was in a sense a further award but it followed the RFP that was issued 
– a competitive process.  The competitive process pointed to the Gijima 
company being the one that really performed better and I think T-
20 
Systems came out second but the B oard Acquisitions and Disposals 
Committee reviewed the recommendation that came from management 
and disagreed with management.  Ostensibly after the assessment of 
risk and these risks are said to have been identified by a company 
called 
(indistinct) 
Consultants 
and 
of 
course 
post 
(indistinct) 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 87 of 130 
 
assessment the constituted objective criteria.  This matter became the 
subject of debate and later subject of disagreements between Transnet 
and National Treasury.  National Treasury having reviewed how the 
procurement process was handled – concluded that Gijima should have 
been awarded that contract.  By that time of course the BADC – Board 
Acquisitions and Disposals Committee – of Transnet had already issued 
the letter of intent to T-Systems.  That would have required  them then 
to rescind their decision and withdraw the letter that they had written to 
T-Systems.  T-Systems decided no they were now going to agree.  They 
were offered the tender – they want it.  So it became the subject of 
10 
litigation for a while.  Litigation now between Transnet and T-Systems.  
Of course Transnet was then joined later by Gijima as an interested 
party in the matter.  It is now common cause that a judgment was 
handed down which – which annulled the LOI accepted the application 
of Transnet which was for a declaratory order approving the withdrawal 
of that letter and – and which then opened the way for the contract to 
be given to Gijima.  I must say that the Board of Transnet that I am 
Chairman of spent also time engaging T-Systems to say to them we 
have had too much trouble already.  Let us not spend time to eternity in 
court finding the technicalities.  The issues facing us are not only this 
20 
one.  There are other historical issues that are affecting you.  Let us 
agree that you do not oppose further this application of – of Transnet 
and indeed to the credit of the T-Systems they cooperated and the 
order was - was given.  I do not want to pretend that it was simply a 
clean fight in court which Transnet won.  It was facilitated also by the 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 88 of 130 
 
fact that T-Systems was willing not to oppose that application.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  I understand this however to be 
an example of where a procurement process at that hands of the 
procurement management of Transnet was overridden by the BADC – 
the Board Acquisitions and Disposals Committee.  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson.  In this 
instance we must give credit to the management of Transnet.  They did 
the right thing but they were overruled by Directors and it is strange 
that – well of course we do not know why – it is strange that Directors 
got involved in procurement instead of exercising oversight ja but it 
10 
was a demonstration of instance where they were overruled.  
CHAIRPERSON:  As a matter of interest the management that you are – 
you are referring to that was involved in this one was it the same 
management that you found as a new Board when you came in or was it 
new management or was it a mix?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE: 
 
No 
Chairperson 
is 
it 
the 
same 
management that we … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That you found there. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  We found there.  There might well – I do 
not know when Mr Garry Pia left Transnet.  He might well have been 
20 
there at the time.  I cannot remember now …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  But Mr Gama was there and … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  He supported the management …  
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 89 of 130 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Application …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Submission to the Board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  For – in favour of Gijima. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In paragraph 10.12.15 you make 
reference to an audio recording of a meeting of the BADC held in 
February 2017 in relation to the appointment ultimately of T-Systems.  
10 
Have you listened to that recording?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I – I know that we discussed that 
recording in the Board Meeting.  We were given the transcript of the 
recording.  I personally did not listen to it but it - it was listened to by 
our investigators. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  What conclusion did you draw or 
did the Board draw or your investigators draw having had regard to the 
recording or the transcript?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Well what we are saying is that the – 
having seen the transcript and those who  listened to it collectively with 
20 
us arrived at the conclusion that the so so -called procurement in this 
regard was a mere charade or a sham, was sham because you listen to 
– you read what Mr Shane was saying there in the – in that audio that 
he didn’t have respect for anybody and he’s basically saying in that 
thing, by the way when we issued this RFP it was not our intention to 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 90 of 130 
 
get the best service provider.  We were just issuing it as a mechanism 
that would enable us to control pricing so that we could ne gotiate 
better pricing but we didn’t really intend that the contract would not go 
to T-Systems.  So a predetermination had already been made that this 
contract is going to T-Systems but we must create this facade or this 
charade of procurement. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:    In paragraph 11 Mr Molefe you 
focus on the remedies employed under the auspices of the Board to 
deal with the circumstances or some of the circumstances which you’ve 
described to the Chair, would you relate those please to the Chair.  
10 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     Perhaps, and I haven’t had the 
opportunity to discuss this with the evidence leader, perhaps that is 
one section where we need to tweak the formulation.   We established a 
steering committee on the 1064 locomotives but we had agre ed that  
this structure would not be really called the steering committee per se 
because – well it would act like a steering committee not a Board 
committee that would form the formal detailed definition of the terms of 
reference. So it was really for purp oses of engaging with MNS regularly 
to see how they are implementing the recommendations and to debate 
those matters that they would want referred to the Board and find a way 
20 
of processing them before they come to the Board.  I must say that the 
structure did not consist of audit committee members and the Board 
Chairperson only, it consisted of, on the contrary, the Chairman of the 
Board and the Chairs of various sub -committees of the Board.  Of 
course other people, especially those who are lawyers and who are on 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 91 of 130 
 
our Board would participate in those meetings and one of the members 
Ms Ursula Fikelepi we asked here to constantly liaise with MNS and 
coordinate us.  It was purely about ensuring that the recommendations 
in the report are implemented. 
CHAIRPERSON:    So from the fact that it consisted of the Chairperson 
of the Board and Chairpersons of other committees of the Board it must 
have been a strong committee but you say it was not a formal 
committee is that correct or is it difficult to describe it?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     Yes it was not – it was an adhoc 
structure for this specific...(intervention).  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:    An informal kind of structure or maybe not really 
informal, just for the time being?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     I beg yours. 
CHAIRPERSON:    It was for a specific purpose it wasn’t going to be 
there all the time, it was just going to be there on an adhoc basis.  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     On an adhoc basis. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     And it would meet also with MNS on an 
adhoc basis, it was not the – you know the Board Committees have a 
schedule. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     Of meetings that is planned well in 
advance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     This one would meet with them on an as 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 92 of 130 
 
and when basis.  It was a strong committee because the Board 
considered these matters very serious but that committee could not 
make any final decisions with the investigators.  
CHAIRPERSON:    Oh okay. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:   It would still revert to the Board – defer 
to the Board for decisions.   
CHAIRPERSON:    So it was kind of facilitatory?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     Facilitate and (indistinct) assisting also 
on processing some small issues before they go the Board.  
CHAIRPERSON:    And to make sure that when issues that – when 
10 
certain issues came to the Board they came to the Board when they had 
been properly looked at for the Board to make a final decision.  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Ja. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:    But it was also the kind of a committee 
that would also reflect on the complex issues I raised about whether 
you cancel a contract, what are the business imperatives, what are the 
ramifications 
for 
the 
funding 
structure 
of 
the 
programme 
of 
modernisation, of freight transportation system.  
CHAIRPERSON:    So for all intents and purposes if one calls it a 
20 
Board Committee provided one bears in mind that it was not like other 
Board Committees in certain respects and that it could not make final 
decisions.  That description wouldn’t be wrong, if one understands that 
context, is that right?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     That is correct. 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 93 of 130 
 
CHAIRPERSON:    Okay thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :    In summary Mr Molefe you 
have commissioned several reports, from amongst  others, MNS and 
Funduzi and in these reports recommendations are made to Transnet.  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     It is correct Chairperson. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:    And if I understand the Board 
to have put together a mechanism to enable it best to co nsider these 
recommendations and to supervise their implementation.  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     The Board having received all these 
matters yes, it then took a view that MNS who were au fait with these 
10 
investigations be appointed to implement all matters tha t arise out of 
this investigation.  I said I’m a difficult witness, of course, in my 
discussion with the leader – the lead investigator of Funduzi he made it 
clear to me that in the course of the investigation there are many other 
extraneous matters that arose which was identified affecting Transnet 
which relay to further irregularities in Transnet which could not be 
overlooked but they could not deal and conclude anything on them 
because the scope of their work did not cater for that.  So  those would 
be some of the matters that the mechanisms we spoke about earlier of 
– for dealing with other issues, like your relocation from the Carlton to 
20 
Waterfall, you know your Ambrose Park leases investigation and so on, 
they would also be looked into, comprehensively  by our risk committee 
together with the management and relying on the panel of National 
Treasury that National Treasury allowed us to use, in terms of the 
Transversal contract arrangement would then look at all of those 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 94 of 130 
 
investigations. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:    Thank you, in paragraph 11.3 
and following Mr Molefe, you talk of the engagement between Transnet 
on the one hand and the Directorate of Priority Crimes Investigations, 
the Hawks on the other, would you tell the Chair about that engagement 
please. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     Chair the – when we got into Transnet 
as we indicated there were investigations that had ensued and the 
reports – one report was ready of Werksmans the other one of MNS 
came about – was released around, I think 13 t h of June, if I remember 
10 
the date but then on the side we have the SIU proclaimed by the 
President and expressly to investigate Transnet amongst others.  They 
were doing, of course, Eskom as well.  So we had to ask ourselves a 
question, now that we’re aware that the  SIU is doing its investigating 
and it is investigating matters similar to what these other law firms 
investigated and also that the Hawks in their own right as a Law 
Enforcement Agencies having seen all the reports in the media and the 
Public Protector report on the irregularities and violation of the law in 
Transnet’s procurement we’re also investigating.  The Board took the 
view that we can’t allow this process to go uncoordinated because 
20 
there’ll be duplication both in terms of work that we do but also in 
terms of the resources all of which are the resources of the South 
African public so we needed, therefore, to bring all these entities 
together to agree that there are certain things that we will need to 
share information on and that we would not duplic ate, that we would not 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 95 of 130 
 
run ahead of one party in litigating and if we don’t talk MNS can go and 
litigate on the OEM’s matter but the SIU is also working on that and you 
have also, the issue is that, my advocate, it think he is now feeling that 
I’m talking too much I’m going to try and summarise sir.   
 
If you look at the importance of coordination it is that where 
monies have moved around and some monies left the country other 
monies are here, even if Transnet knows where the money is, Transnet 
has got no powers to subpoena, search and seize.  The SIU is able to 
do so, the Hawks are able to do so, so it’s important that we do the 
work together but they also work with the Asset for Future Unit and with 
10 
the existence of the legal assistance programme between o ur country 
and other countries and Law Enforcement Agencies and the Extradition 
Treaties signed, those Law enforcement Agencies are in a  position to 
chase the monies outside the borders of South Africa, they can 
collaborate with the Reserve Bank and the b anks outside South Africa 
to get the money they can subpoena the banks to give them bank 
statements, we can’t, we can’t do so.  Even if I were to get whistle 
blowers report I would not be allowed to talk about it because how do I 
become privy to private ba nk details of a person or a company.  So 
there 
is 
the 
importance 
therefore 
there 
Chairperson 
of 
this 
20 
collaboration but we have also that we have these regular meetings 
with the SIU in particular where we share reports and you would hear 
us referring – we do refer to the fact that the SIU has written us a letter 
because I’d asked them to tell me where they are in the – their own 
investigations because by the way, Transnet is paying for their 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 96 of 130 
 
investigation as well because the proclamation and the Act provides  
that, if they’re investig3ating Transnet, Transnet becomes the recipient 
of their services and therefore must pay for that but Transnet has to 
account to Parliament.  The way in which we account to Parliament is 
that we must show the product for which we are paying.  I don’t know if 
I need to go more than that Chairperson.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Well I – we understand from your 
evidence Mr Molefe that Transnet and the Board of Transnet in 
particular is working with the Law Enforcement Agencies to a ddress the 
consequences of what has occurred in Transnet about which you have 
10 
testified.  Two questions if I may, the first is, what steps, if any is 
Transnet taking to recover monies lost as a result of malfeasance 
within Transnet and the second question,  if I may just ask at the same 
time, on everybody’s – well on the minds of many people is – are 
prosecutions contemplated and if so can you assist the Commission in 
relation to detail? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:   Chairperson I know advocate Pretorius 
sees that we’re going to say everything as it is here but it looks like in 
this instance I have to move rapidly because the issues are similar.  
The first point is that, yes we’ve begun the process, Chairperson of 
20 
recovering those monies that we have identified and  able to do so.  In 
respect of China South Rail we have already received back 618million 
which was paid in advance to them for a maintenance programme under 
Material Reliability Supply Agreement which they had entered into with 
Transnet.  It was entered into pretty early, even before they delivered, I 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 97 of 130 
 
think, the locomotives, they already our money.  They have cooperated 
with us, they paid us 618million but the full amount that was paid to 
them was 700million.  It became 700million because VAT was inclusive,  
we are still waiting to – awaiting the repayment of our VAT they’ve got 
to go and claim it from SARS pay it to us, so we are doing that but in  
addition I said I’m galloping there are many other service providers who 
we said received payment either for services that they had not – they 
had not provided or they had received payment because the prices had 
been inflated.  Chairperson if we look at – if counsel would agree that I 
move there, under the category of recovery monies, I could move then, 
10 
counsel, to deal with paragraph 11.8.1 onwards.  Otherwise I can go 
back and follows...(intervention).  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :    Shall we follow the sequence 
of your statement, my apologies for taking you out of sequence.  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     Ja okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   What I wanted to refer to is the 
global amount of monies that have been lost to Transnet.  Now I know 
I’m putting it very  loosely and perhaps as a legally trained person I 
shouldn’t put it loosely but what is remarkable about your evidence is 
the frequent mention of amounts running into billions of rand and 
20 
hundreds of millions of rand.  In your press statement of 19 May – sorry 
19 January – 18 January 2019 you referred to an amount of 8.1billion 
rand reported in a regular expe nditure during 2018, what sort of 
amounts are we talking about here in total, the cost to Transnet, are 
you able to give us an estimate?  
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 98 of 130 
 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     Chairperson the – I would rather stick to 
the 8.1billion and simply add to that 8.1billion th e figures that are 
contained in the statement which counsel said we would come to later.  
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:   There are other monies that we are aware 
that Transnet needs to recover, I think in that regard we estimate 
7.2billion rand part of which has already left the country but part of that 
is still in the country.  I think what is still in the country is 
approximately 1.8billion but those are matters that we would like to 
deal with when our collaboration with the Law Enforcement A gencies, 
10 
including the Reserve Bank, have reached a point where we are now 
able to follow but the monies that are inside the country we will chase.  
So what then are we talking about, I have not added these figures that I 
have here, we can do so later on b ut they are there, we can add them 
but you’re probably talking a loss running into 17/18billion rand.  You 
talk about this other money that we are tracing and it doesn’t end 
there, there are many other monies that we need to recover but in 
respect of these locomotives we’re talking approximately 16billion.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :    That’s in relation to the 
locomotives? 
20 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     It’s in relation to – well if you combine it 
with the audit findings it’s in the region of 16/17billion.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :    And perhaps it was an unfair 
question because there are different categories of expenditure which 
comprise fruitless, wasteful, unlawful and the like.  If we may then go 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 99 of 130 
 
to the next section please of your statement and where  you deal with 
suspensions and dismissals and if you could tell the Chair please of the 
actions taken on behalf of the Transnet Board in relation to discipline 
of Transnet Executives and senior managers.  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     Chairperson thank you very much, 
Chairperson 
the 
Board 
sought 
to 
act 
expeditiously 
on 
the 
recommendations of the reports of the investigators and in this regard 
several suspensions were effected starting with Mr Gama which was – 
and as the Group CEO of the company and whilst he was  suspended 
the Board took a view that because his position is such a senior 
10 
position and an important – in fact he was a Director that he should not 
be treated as if he was  a junior employee where we’re going to spend 
months on end in a disciplinary process, we got legal opinion from 
counsel which advised that we could actually act decisively and dismiss 
him, we did that.  He took us to the Labour Court which he lost and he 
re-appealed he lost the appeal as well, so for us the matter is closed.  
We have also then said that because he’s involved in matters that could 
have caused matters to lose money that we would freeze his pension.  
We asked the pension fund to freeze his pension and that is what we 
did. 
20 
 
The next person is Mr Thamsanqa Gianni, the matter is still 
before the disciplinary panel.  Evidence has been led against him so 
the hearing is continuing it had started on the 31 s t of January 2019.  
The next – the third employee subject to disciplinary process is Ms 
Lindiwe Mdletshe who was suspended in S eptember 2018, her matter 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 100 of 130 
 
has also sat before the disciplinary hearing and it was set for February 
2019 but I’m not going to go into the details of the postponement but 
we’re at a point at which I’ve been advised that she proposes a 
settlement and Transnet is awaiting a formal settlement proposal, the 
parting of ways.  Then there is Mr Edward Thomas who was the acting 
Group Chief Supply Office – Supply Chain Supplier Officer, he was 
suspended in October 2018, his hearing was set for April 18, 2019.  I’m 
advised that on the eve of the hearing he asked for electronic devices 
to enable him to prepare for the hearing, Transnet has consented to 
that on – in a controlled way, give him that access to devices in a 
10 
controlled environment.  So alternative days of hear ings are being 
discussed in respect of Mr Thomas.  Then there is Mr Phetolo 
Ramosebudi, Mr Phetolo Ramosebudi was the Treasurer of Transnet.  
He was very much involved with the regiment and the entities like 
Trillian and later given notice so the intention  to suspend him was sent 
to him.  On receipt of this letter he decided to resign, so he resigned, 
again here Transnet has freezed his pension fund.  Thabo Lebelo, 
Thabo Lebelo was the CEO of Transnet Property which is an important 
division of Transnet, res ponsible for its real estate, he too having 
transgressed many regulations, policies and PFMA requirement a letter 
20 
was served on him of intention to suspend him, he also resigned and I 
see we are not saying his pension has been freezed but we have 
instructed management to do that.  Anyone who was involved in causing  
the company to lose money should not be allowed to draw their pension 
until the matters have been settled.  
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 101 of 130 
 
 
Mr Ravi Nair, some people say Nair, but I grew up with us 
calling that name Nair, Mr R avi Nair is Transnet Freight Rail (indistinct) 
Chief Executive, he resigned in January 2019 shortly after receiving 
notice placing him under precautionary suspension, again here I have 
to check...(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
 
I’m 
trying 
to 
see 
Mr 
Nair 
on  
my 
statement...(intervention). 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :    Yes that name doesn’t appear 
in the version that was signed. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:     It is paragraph 11.6.10. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh it’s much later.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Yes which we do not have in the 
signed version. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh it is much later. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Oh okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Okay. Then I must apologise. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is fine. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Now I understand.  I met with the 
lawyers… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I guess Mr Pretorius you must guide him about 
whether if it is not in the statement he should still deal with it or not.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Well we have not given any 
notice in respective persons not in this  particular statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 102 of 130 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  But then again I stand to be 
corrected because we have been presented with a number of versions 
of the statement by the attorneys for Transnet and I would have to 
check that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  But perhaps the evidence should 
be given in its complete form and then we will deal with the 
consequences in terms of the rules in due course.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well… 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Or otherwise it can be done at a 
10 
later stage. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja maybe at a later stage.  Maybe later – maybe at a 
later stage. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Alright.  Yes.  So the one – as 
this matter is being dealt with Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  It has been suggested that he 
should give his evidence and we can file a supplementary affidavit and 
then issue the notices immediately thereafter.  
CHAIRPERSON:  No remember we try where we can as far as possible 
20 
we strive to make sure that people are noti fied so that they are not 
taken by surprise when they hear their names being mentioned in 
relation to maleficence. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Without any – without being alerted to.  Unless of 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 103 of 130 
 
course which might be a factor if it  is something that is already in the 
public domain I am not sure but we must just be careful because we do 
not want to be seeing as not giving people notice when we should be 
unless there are exceptional circumstances.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Yes I agree Chair.  The only 
qualification that I would add is that notice might have been given in 
respect of the statement that he is about to make but not having had an 
opportunity to check that it is premature to insist that the evidence be 
given. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no that is fine ja. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  So if we can then go on Mr 
Molefe to the civil action that you talk of in paragraph 11.7 and 
following.   
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I do not know if I am allowed to comment 
on the earlier discussion?  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Yes of course. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On the earlier discussion ja. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We excluded you.   
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Yes I was excluded.  Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  The point I want to make is that these 
matters came in when I said I wanted an update on where we are in 
respect of each case. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 104 of 130 
 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  That section that we are dealing with is 
not accusing anyone of those from Mr Ravi Nair to  Mr [indistinct] and 
Ms Shiceka of anything it just states that they have resigned that is all.   
CHAIRPERSON:  No. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  But alright of course… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I defer to 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I defer to the Chair of the commission if 
that requires us to you know still…  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  No as I said I do not have that part so that is why…  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  The names you have mentioned 
are persons I understand who have resigned.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Who have resigned? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Yes so there is nothing…  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Not against [indistinct] 
allegations of wrong doing. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  There is nothing more to it than that at 
this stage. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRE TORIUS SC:  Well that solves that problem.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no it does okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you can continue. 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 105 of 130 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Paragraph 11.7 you highlight 
civil action taken by Transnet in order to recover monetary losses.  
Could you deal with those please?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  The monetary losses were to juristic 
persons and natural persons.  And who were found to have been paid 
monies – who were paid monies that they did not deserve or they had 
cost the company to lose money.  And that is what we are dealing with 
and dealing with the juristic persons we state that we had instituted 
civil action to recover these loses and the civil actions relate to at 
11.8.1 I do not know now in the – what it is – Regiments we are 
10 
Regiments Capital PTY LTD arises.  That little part that we are dealing 
with might have cost a bit of disturbance.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh I think what… 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  No we still at 11.8.1 so we are 
on the same …  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Oh we are on the same okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Paragraph if not the same page. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Okay that is fine.  So 11.8.1 we instituted 
action – two actions against Regiments.  Their claims are for the 
20 
amount of R189 240 000.00 and R79 230 000,00 respectively and both 
claims relates to unjustified payments.  But I hasten to say that in 
respect of Regiments there have been engagement, negotiat ions with a 
view to getting them to agree to pay back these monies to Transnet.  
And we do so Chairperson because you see you can rely on litigations 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 106 of 130 
 
and win a litigation but it will be a hollow victory if at the end of that 
litigation the money is finishe d and the assets have been dissipated.  
So these matters are the subject of negotiations and the – we believe 
they will be resolved in due course.  And then in respect of Trillian 
Asset Management the amounts claimed is R145  920 000,00 and the 
second one – amount is – okay it is computed or it is broken down as 
follows.  R93 480 000,00 for monies paid without just cause for work 
purportedly executed by Triallian as lead arranger of the 1 billion, 1 
billion US dollars in SRA equivalent club loans.  Club loan s as I 
understand is equivalent of syndicates of lenders who club together to 
10 
provide the loan. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Historically within Transnet are 
you aware of the role of Transnet Treasury?  Its capabilities, its 
reputation and its ability to  arrange financing? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I know I should not do this.  Chairperson 
may I ask counsel to allow me just to finish the amounts.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay yes, yes, 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  And then I will come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  To that question. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  The next figure which is part of that 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 107 of 130 
 
computation that I referred to is R41  040 000,00 paid without just cause 
for work which was not done.  Then the – and this we are informed that 
it was for the optimisation structure – the property structure.  Basically 
they went to Transnet and said look you have got lots of properties we 
can unlock value out of your properties so we are going to advise you 
and for that they got 41 – they got R41 040 000,00 when they had not 
done any work.  And then the next one is R11  400 000,00 for monies 
paid when work was not done in relation to a proposal for fina ncial 
structuring advisory services.  What is quite clear here Chairperson is 
that people would just come and say look we will do work for you and 
10 
even before anything is approved the terms agreed on Transnet would 
just start paying them and so these monie s went to them.  And this is 
the kind of the horror show that we talk about in our statement because 
nowhere does one find a properly run business just pay monies out like 
that as if these monies are plucked from the trees.  But that is what we 
have.  Now I may return Chairperson to the question raised by counsel.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  In the course of our discussion we said 
Transnet had world class treasury.  Highly qualified, highly experienced 
financial people and for years they have been the ones from the deal 
20 
room that they had created at Transnet who were doing capital raising 
for Transnet they never needed any external entity to assist them to do 
that work for them.  If anything the Transnet employees in treasury 
were heads and shoulders above a whole lot of financial managers who 
are in – and transactional advisors who are in consultancies.  So they 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 108 of 130 
 
did not need Trillian or Regiments to do their work for them.  Even that 
club loan they would have done it on their own.  But in order  to 
advance the agenda of the capture of Transnet those in senior positions 
particularly Ms Anoj Singh and Ramos – well Ramosebudi was not there 
when it started simply brought in these consultants and instructed 
treasury that these consultants are the ones  who are going to do work 
for Transnet.  So these people were paid huge salaries every month 
were made redundant by Transnet.  And I am advised that I mean 
globally Transnet treasury received recognition that placed them in the 
top 3 – top 3 treasuries in the world. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Yes.  You then deal with 
summonses issued against Mr Siyabonga Gama in paragraph 11.8.4.  
Would you relate those circumstances to the Chair please?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  The – Chair the full amount claim – that is 
being claimed from Mr Gama is R323 760 000,00 that too is computed 
in the following manner.  R93 480 000,00 for monies paid without just 
cause for work purportedly executed by Trillian as lead arranger of the 
club loan of 1 billion US dollars.  But it wil l be translated into South 
African Rand.  The next one is R41  040 000,00 paid without cause for 
work that was not done by Trillian in relation to the property 
20 
optimisation structure and thirdly that R187  240 000 – R189 240 000,00 
for monies paid to Regimen ts without just cause as a result of 
purported funding and financial advisory services rendered.  We insist 
Chairperson that – maybe let me make that summary at the end.  Let 
counsel lead me. 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 109 of 130 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Mr Molefe has then dealt with in 
the next paragraph? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  In the next paragraph summons were 
issued to recover R79 230 000,00 and that is under the case number 
443 4 – 44359/2018 and that is against Mr Molefe.  The claim relates to 
the unjustified payments made to Regiments for advisory work done 
during post tender negotiations. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  The claim then against Mr Anoj 
Singh. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  A claim… 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Or claims against Mr Singh. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  The claims are for varying amounts totally 
the sum of R303 510 000,00 computed as follows;  R41  040 000,00 paid 
without cause when work was not done by Trillian in relation to property 
optimisation.  Then there is R189 240 000,00 for monies paid to 
Regiments without just cause as a result of purported funding and 
financial advisory services rendered.  In addition there is the amount of 
R79 230 000,00 paid to Regiments.  The claim relates to unjustified 
overpayments. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  You deal then with Mr Gary 
20 
Peter. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  The summons issued to Mr Gary Peter 
total claims of R335 160 000,00 computed as follows:  R93  408 – R93 
million sorry – R93 480 000,00 for monies paid without just cause for 
work purportedly executed by Trillian as lead ar ranger of the US 1 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 110 of 130 
 
billion club loan.  The next amount is R41  040 000,00 paid without 
cause for work that was not done by Trillian in relation to the property 
optimisation.  The third one is R11 400 000,00 for monies paid when 
work was not done in relation to a proposal from Trillian for financial 
structuring advisory services.  The fourth amount is R189  240 000,00 
for monies paid to Regiments without just cause as a result of 
purported funding and financial advisory services.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Transnet has also instituted civil 
claims against Mr Ramosebudi.  You detail those in the next paragraph.  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  The – there is – the claims in respect of 
10 
Mr Ramosebudi is a total sum of R282 720 000,00 and this has been 
computed as follows:  R93 480 000,00 for monies paid without just 
cause for work purportedly executed by Trillian as lead arranger for the 
R1 billion dollar club loan.  The second amount is R189  240 000,00 for 
monies paid to Regiments without just cause as a result of purpo rted 
funding and financial advisory services.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And then finally against Mr 
Edward Thomas. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Claims against Mr Edward Thomas total 
R11 400 000,00.  And the amounts relate to monies paid to Trillian 
20 
when work was not done.  At the time Trillian had merely presented a 
proposal for financial structuring advisory services.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Right. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  So now the – the underlying reason 
Chairperson for all these claims in respect o f managers of Transnet is 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 111 of 130 
 
that it cannot be that managers deliberately ignore their fiduciary 
duties or they breach their fiduciary duties and they get away with it.  
That it is proper that South Africans see that there is an effort being 
made by Transnet to recover monies that they have lost which had 
those managers not made the kinds of decisions they made would not 
have been lost to the company.  And I think some of these employees I 
would believe that especially those where the asset for future unit and  
the Hawks are investigating their accounts would have been freezed.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Right.  You have dealt already in 
your evidence Mr Molefe with the money recovered from China South 
10 
Rail the R618 million that is dealt with again in your s tatement at 
paragraph 11.9.  We need not revisit that unless you wish to add 
anything? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  No we do not need to revisit it.  I only 
dealt with it earlier because a question was directed to me which did 
not arise from that section of the statement. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  So I take full responsibility for 
that. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  But because I had to show respect to 
counsel I had to answer. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  It is late in the day I will be 
more cautious now Mr Molefe.  And then you have also dealt and I 
presume I deserve similar comment with the negotiations with the 
suppliers of the 1064 locomotives?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson save to add 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 112 of 130 
 
that Transnet has secured legal opinion in this regard .  That legal 
opinion would be the subject of discussion in the next board meeting 
and because of the urgency of the matter we might not even wait for 
the scheduled meeting we can convene a special meeting just for 
purposes of considering that submission a nd recommendations from our 
legal division in Transnet supported by MNS.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Alright.  Then in paragraph 12 
you deal with the consequences that could have ensued had matters 
not been arrested for want of a better word under the w atch of the 
current board and what the consequence would have been of a 
10 
Transnet collapse which was not as I understand our discussions an 
unrealistic prospect.  You have also asked whether you could read 
paragraph 12 because of the nature of what is state d there and the fact 
that it has been carefully crafted.  May the witness read paragraph 12 
Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine.  That is fine. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  May I add a further request Chairperson?  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  That I do so in respect of paragraph 13 as 
well? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine ja. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I think I have been denied to read my 
statement throughout my evidence that it be the first time that I say 
things as I have recorded them.  Thank you very much Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 113 of 130 
 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  The – the – it does emphasise some of the 
points we made earlier on.   
“We saying that Transnet is the largest and most 
crucial part of the freight logistics chain that delivers 
goods to each and every  South African and to other 
parts of the continent.  Every day Transnet delivers 
thousands of tonnes of goods around South Africa 
and across the continent.  Through its pipelines and 
both to and from its ports it moves cargo onto ships 
for export whilst it unloads goods from the – that 
10 
comes from overseas.  Transnet is made up of five 
operating divisions namely Transnet Freight Rail 
which is known as TFR, Transnet Rail Engineering 
called 
TE, 
Transnet 
National 
Ports Authorities 
acronym TNPA, Transnet Port Terminals acronym TPT 
and Transnet Pipelines acronym TPL.  These are the 
core operating divisions of Transnet.  Although 
Transnet is fully owned by the South African 
Government it operates as a corporate entity which 
supports and contributes to the countries  freight 
20 
logistics network.  It aims at developing South 
African industry reducing the costs of doing business 
while at the same time operating efficiently and 
profitably.  Given the centrality of Transnet in the 
economy of South Africa in the region we be lieve that 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 114 of 130 
 
its collapse would have had devastating effect not 
only on the country but on the Southern African 
development region called SADAC and the continent.  
We talk about it – it would have done this because 
we believe that we came in just as Transnet  was on 
the precipice or the edge of the cliff waiting to 
collapse.  It is for these reasons that the board made 
every effort in its first three months in office to 
ensure that the lenders do not recall loans.  This was 
equally to protect the sovereignty o f the country’s 
10 
ratings which is necessary for the overall economic 
sustainability of the country.”  
I may have to come back to that paragraph 12.5 to elaborate more.  
“The 
significance 
of 
Transnet 
infrastructure 
is 
unmatched in the region and the continent at large.  
Transnet Pipelines consist of fuel and gas pipeline 
business which – well and other I mean petrol, 
chemical products and it pumps and manages the 
storage of petroleum and gas products through its 
network of high pressure, long distance pipelines  in 
20 
particular Transnet’s national multipurpose pipeline 
acronym NMPP plays a significant role in the 
transportation of petroleum all over the country.  If 
Transnet had collapsed inadequate fuel would have 
been delivered to parts of the country and in the 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 115 of 130 
 
entire 
continent. 
 
The 
aircrafts 
which 
move 
domestically in the country to transport people and 
abroad would not have had jet fuel to move people.”  
So Transnet is very important.  But Transnet is also important to 
various logistics businesses of various co mpanies.  If you think of 
companies like Imperial Logistic, Barloworld and so on they use huge 
amounts of petrol and diesel.  It would ground itself, Transnet if it did 
not have diesel.  So would PRASA which removes – which moves 
millions of passengers.  I think it moves about 7 million passengers per 
day.  So the importance of Transnet Freight business in the 
10 
transportation of goods in South Africa and many parts of the African 
continent is further indicated – is further indication of Transnet’s 
centrality in the economy.  It was apparent that Transnet’s operations 
are to the economy and this is what I thought I would say that when one 
imagines how a human body functions Transnet would be equated to 
the heart and the lungs of a body, would be equated to tha t vital organ 
that makes the economy function.  So it is like the lung and the heart to 
a human body and we do know that the body dies when these two 
organs - so vital - become dysfunctional.  They become dysfunctional 
the body cannot function itself and t hat is how serious Transnet – how 
20 
important it is to the economy.  A dysfunctional Transnet leads to a 
dysfunctional economy.  A great proportion of that economy.  If one has 
regard to the precarious financial situation in which State Entities such 
as Denel and Eskom find themselves in it is implicit that consequences 
would have been disastrous had Transnet collapsed and having regard 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 116 of 130 
 
to the aforesaid it is clear that the task of cleaning up, of ending 
corruption, of ensuring that we build without any furth er delay cannot 
be overemphasised.  I said I would want to return to – to the 12 – 
paragraph 12 - 12.5. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  12.5, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But before you do so please do not forget the point 
you want to make about 12.5. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  That is the one I want to make. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, do not forget to make it.  I just want to say …  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Okay. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  If your – if your comparison is correct Transnet to the 
economy - the heart and lungs to the human being - and then it seems 
if your Board had delayed coming in at the time that it came in it seems 
from your evidence then there was to be quite catastrophe to the 
economy of the country. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  It certainly is…  
CHAIRPERSON:  You said – it was on the precipice you say – you 
said? 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Yes it certainly seems so Chairperson.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  When one looks at the alacrity the speed 
at which …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Those who were siphoning off the money 
out of … 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 117 of 130 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Transnet …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Were moving. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  I mean it is clear they were not stopping.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  They were just taking – taking – taking … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  And that was beginning to impact on the 
10 
moral of the employees as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  So it was just a matter of time for 
Transnet to be like Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Not that we like where Eskom is…  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  But it is in serious trouble …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  And because it is in trouble the economy 
20 
is in trouble. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Yes, so you say …  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  So … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Transnet was on the verge of collapse as well?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Yes. 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 118 of 130 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Was on the verge of collapse Chairperson 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, thank you. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  And this is what people must understand 
and – and Chairperson the point is that we listen to all kinds of stories.  
Sometimes I might use the language that is not nice but I am going to 
reserve that word that I was going to use.  I a m not going to use it.  
People like engaging in chit talk which they use to manipulate people 
they think are ignorant.  When we deal with these maleficent – this 
10 
corruption – we have demonstrated here what people who have 
qualifications, who are senior executives in the organisation have done 
to the company but out there will be people who say what Molefe - 
Popo Molefe.  I must distinguish myself from Brian – what Popo Molefe 
is doing is to destroy Black excellence as if Black excellence is 
synonymous with corruption, synonymous with negligence, synonymous 
with – with recklessness.  They say they are Black therefore do nothing 
about them and then they say ja if it is a Black person they say you are 
corrupt.  If it is a White man they say they are not corrupt .  We are 
dealing here at Transnet with everyone regardless of the colour of their 
20 
skin.  Edward Thomas is not a Black person.  We are not interested in 
the colour of the skin.  We are interested how the actions of the 
individual are causing damage to the company.  A company that serves 
a South Africa in which all races belong.  A South Africa that the 
Constitution says to us it belongs to all of us.  So I need to make that 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 119 of 130 
 
point … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Because it is important that peopl e who 
keep … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Making these statements …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  They must realise just how reckless they 
are. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the fact is if something is wrong it is wrong 
10 
whether it is a White person who does it, a Black person who does it, a 
female or a male if it is wrong it is wrong.  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Yes Chairperson many years ago when I 
was still a very serious political activist I was inspired by the writings 
of president – the President of Frelimo, Samora Machel – even before 
the independence of Mozambique which came in 1974 I think.  Finally 
he concluded probably 1975.  He made a very important point similar to 
what the Chairperson says.  He said when you have lies in your blanket 
you do not wait to determine whether they are white or black.  You just 
take – and you put them in boiling water to bend these lies so that you 
20 
can use that blanket to sleep peacefully after that.  It is a very – I 
found that a very amazing analogy by this revo lutionary philosopher of 
front for the liberation of Mozambique.  So again people must 
understand that is what we are doing but it also says Chairperson and I 
am not a politician but it says they only way – well amongst the many 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 120 of 130 
 
ways that Transnet can give  lie to these prophets of doom and if you 
like charlatans – is the word I was trying to avoid – is by ensuring that 
Transnet plays its developmental role that results in the inclusiveness 
in the economy.  It has to deal with that question with regards to o ur 
national ports, the land around those ports, at our terminals, gas 
terminals and so on more and more.  Companies of emerging - Black 
people’s companies must also have access.  The youth of our country 
who get education Transnet Asset create jobs and acc elerate 
implementation of programs must be having them in mind for 
incorporation 
in 
the 
economy 
but 
also 
through 
its 
enterprise 
10 
development program to make sure that companies owned by the youth, 
women and the disabled people are supported in a focused way.  I think 
in the coming period the Board of Transnet is going to have to create 
that mechanism because we are responding to the frustration of 
millions of South Africans there and we have this very important 
instrument which in one of my communique to man agement and stuff I 
said it is the family silver and we are privileged to have been the 
chosen few amongst millions of South Africans to be the ones who are 
asked to look after this family silver and we must make it work for the 
rest of our people.  I am n ot done.  I have to go to paragraph 13 and 
20 
read it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  (Laughing). 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  10.5 first. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Oh 12.5. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  12.5 rather. 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 121 of 130 
 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Now … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  12.5 Chairperson – we – we spoke about 
how hard the Board of Transnet engaged the lenders in order to avoid a 
precipitous action of pulling of the loans that they had given to 
Transnet asking them to pay that.  Transnet has liabilities - loans – 
amounting to R125 billion.  There might be a little comma something 
there but R125 billion. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Molefe may I – may I just and 
I am sorry to interrupt you.  Chair we have about 10/15 minutes to go 
10 
but I know you have a flight to catch. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now I think we can – we can finish. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  My apologies. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Okay.  So I am going to try and be quick.  
So … 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no we will – we will have enough time. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  So it has that – R125 billion.  I think 25.2 
billion.  Of that Transnet – 115.8 billion was with lenders with who 
Transnet had signed loan covenants where it undertook that it would 
not have a qualified audit opinion and that had meant that when it gets 
a qualified audit opinion it triggers a default and which means these 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 122 of 130 
 
lenders could immediately say give us our hundred and – give us our 
15.8 billion.  We want it now but if that had happened it would also 
trigger a cross default because the balance of the 125 billion would 
also say Transnet is no longer a safe place for us.  South Africa is not 
safe.  You the fiscus of South Africa - you the Sovereign come to the 
party.  We know you had not given a guarantee to Transnet but we want 
our money.  It is your company.  It is a State owned company.  So it 
was a very serious matter but it would have also impacted on Denel, 
South Africa Airways, Eskom and many  others.  So the Board then had 
to work hard to talk to these lenders to say please do not pull the 
10 
trigger on us.  We are going to do something about the wrong that 
happened.  It was a very serious matter here and outside the country 
and we are continuing to do that work.  One time I met with the African 
Development Bank during the Africa Investment Forum.  Even before I 
said anything to them they said to me do not come and ask for money 
from us.  You will not get it because we will no convince our Board t hat 
we should put money into Transnet.  I had to explain what the Board is 
doing to deal with the situation.  Fortunately we got letters of comfort 
from all these lenders saying okay we know there is a problem we will 
no pull the plug on you.  So this is w hat we mean when we say this 
20 
company was on the edge of the cliff.  People do not know out there 
because these things are not immediately apparent to them, but 
Transnet notwithstanding all that Chairperson is a very good business. 
Is a cash generative business.  It generates revenue of R72 billion.  It 
still makes profits.  It may not be as good as they should be but it does 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 123 of 130 
 
make profits.  Transnet does not go to Government to ask for 
guarantees.  The only guarantee it has is an old one which happened 
many years ago and it - I think it as I am told - it relates to something 
like 35 – I think 35 billion.  That is the only one.  So Transnet is able to 
service its loans.  I think I am done on that one.  I just wanted to 
emphasise that and then we can quickly …  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Before you go to paragraph 13 
may I just ask two questions Mr  Molefe.  The first is obviously the 
necessity to deal with the maleficent which you have referred to and 
which perhaps you have yet to discover has taken up a lot of the time, 
10 
energy and capacity of Transnet and in particular its Board and 
Executives.  Has that been done at the expense of the business of 
Transnet or have you made special arrangements in that regard?  
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Chair I was going to deal w ith that last 
point when I conclude but I can deal with it now because there has 
been asked.  We have – this question has been exercising our minds 
for a while.  We have been worried about that that very soon people will 
say this Board of Transnet is not i nterested in the business of Transnet.  
They are in the business of looking for thieves and looters.  They are 
looking behind every nook and cranny to find thieves.  Meanwhile the 
20 
business is going to die.  We have been very much aware of that and 
we have decided that we will emphasise the operations of Transnet in 
that 
regard 
ensure 
efficiencies, 
ensure 
that 
there 
is 
proper 
accountability management but also to define the performance targets 
for Transnet. TFG must say to us as South Africans that we want z ero 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 124 of 130 
 
derailments of our trains.  We want our trains to be on time.  We want 
the allocation of trains to the customers to be done in a manner that is 
systematic and efficiently managed.  That is what we are dealing with.  
Our ports must make sure that when c argo arrives there - when the 
containers arrive – they immediately are moved to – they are loaded on 
the trains to go where they are supposed to go.  That you do not have 
people waiting there forever.  A ship landing there unload it as quickly 
as possible.  So these will be some of the performance indicators that 
we are going to have to build into the – the performance agreements of 
our managers but we have also Chairperson as the Board said well we 
10 
are in a period of transition.  We have got on this Board very 
professional people some of them are engineers.  One of them was 
here.  I think he is still here in this room – he is here.  We say we are 
going to set up a task team of the Board on operations.  They must 
move close to the Group Chief Executive to ma ke sure that we agree to 
do in our corporate contracts and strategic plan is implement that they 
keep close to the key operating divisions of Transnet including 
monitoring Transnet International Holdings.  So we are aware of that.  
The investigations will happen there but they will not take the time of 
the Board.  We will in and out of bases keep asking for report and leave 
20 
most of them to the Board Risk Committee of Transnet.  So that we are 
not seen as a Board that is merely interested in investigations.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Mr Molefe and your 
concluding remarks. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Chairperson we believe that our approach 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 125 of 130 
 
- as I indicated earlier on – has rescued Transnet from its perilous 
state and it is gradually getting it back o n – on the road to recovery.  I 
must just say and one of the Directors sent me a message earlier on 
saying tell the Judge that notwithstanding all these negative news we 
have received Transnet is a good business and in April Transnet 
exceeded its volume – the target – Transnet – TFR Freight Engineering 
and I saw that report also from the Acting Group CEO.  He has also 
advised that there is the motivation that has never been seen in that 
Operating Division.  They reported so at my meeting with management 
last week as well.  So we are moving Chairperson.  We think that this 
10 
process we must emphasise that this process has neither been cheap 
nor easy.  We have teams of forensic investigators working on cases.  
We have regular meetings with Law Enforcement Agenci es such as the 
Special Investigations Unit and the Hawks.  May I add the FFAU as well 
to identify and prosecute all implicated persons immediately without 
having to wait for the end of the work of the Commission because we – 
where we have enough evidence to act we will do so and as I said also 
we have legal advisors who are preparing to institute – they have 
instituted several claims and continue to do so as new evidence arises 
as we go forward.  I am surprised that this document is still so long.  In 
20 
the period following our appointment Chairperson - as we indicated 
earlier on - we began seeing certain achievements getting some monies 
back and we have frozen accounts of people so that there is no money 
flight but what we need to say having said all the many  things that we – 
we have said Chairperson I have no doubt that we would probably all 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 126 of 130 
 
agree that the corruption in our society and in our company is endemic.  
It has very long claws and it has very wide tentacles.  It is just 
spanning the entire landscape of our business.  It has roots that are 
very deep which will require hard work to pull them out but also I think 
what is important if we look at society and the many instances of 
corruption reported.  When you look at how many Ministers suddenly 
and officials in Government have had to come before this Commission 
or who were implicated by the Commission you realise that this 
corruption has got no holy ghost.  It – it takes on the Ministers.  It 
takes on the officials but it says to us that it has become a cu lture or is 
10 
a threatening to become a culture and if it is threatening to become a 
culture it means Chairperson that there is a need for a deliberate 
program of re-education of society.  It must happen in schools.  It must 
happen in churches.  Everywhere w here South African gather.  It 
suggests that we should return to the message of Archbishop  Tutu, 
Emeritus that we needed a moral regeneration of our society but that 
moral regeneration is not going to happen simply because we 
pontificate about it.  We may – the Commission might want to consider 
whether it should not ask Parliament and/or Government to actually 
deliberately establish a mechanism whose business is to promote this 
20 
program of moral regeneration of society.  Also understand that to deal 
with this problem I am referring to is not a thing that will be done by 
Law Enforcement Agencies because Law Enforcement Agencies cannot 
end culture.  It requires an all-round mobilisation of South Africans - 
various institutions, civil society all of them to work  together to do this 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 127 of 130 
 
work but if Government sets up a mechanism to do so if it recognises it 
as a very important mechanism it must appropriate funds from the 
fiscus to finance it.  It would be the subject of review probably every 
five years to see how it is performing and it could be held accountable 
like all other institutions that get appropriation from Parliament.  It 
might sound like it is a small thing Chairperson but this problem we are 
facing is a very serious one that we need to – to deal with but from our 
side we think that notwithstanding the fact that we see those who 
embrace looters and fraudsters and businesses which give them bribes 
are organising and they have networks that are fighting those people 
10 
who are seeking to correct the wrongs of the  past.  We – we remain 
resolved and very strengthened to continue with our work and 
fortunately we have the President and the Minister to whom we report 
who have the political will and the determination to lead the country.  
What we do is really a little contribution we can make to strengthen the 
work that our President and the Minister of Public Enterprises and 
many other Ministers, Mayor and Premiers who have committed to 
ending the scourge of corruption at will.  So we believe that as we do 
all of those things there is a discernible move in the company that says 
we are no moving away from chaos and we are going towards the 
20 
stabilisation of the business – stability of the business and I think from 
that stability we should be able therefore to move towards a 
sustainable build of the economy and of Transnet.  So we putting all 
the procedures and structures in place to ensure that our work is done 
properly.  I should have dealt with the organisational design and the 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 128 of 130 
 
operating model.  I have not done so but I think the Acting Group CEO 
will deal with that matter.  We remain equal to the challenge before us 
and we believe that we shall constantly uphold the correct values of the 
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa and also insist on ethical 
leadership.  In the next three months we will be advertising, shortlisting 
and interviewing applicants for approximately nine strategic positions in 
Transnet and that will send a message that we are stabilising the 
organisation.  We are creating permanency in the organ isation.  
Chairperson I end on the note of thank you heartedly for inviting 
Transnet to present its views, what it has found – the Board - exactly 
10 
what it has found there, what it is doing about what we found and to 
send a message that I think small as it is should add to the efforts to 
build public confidence in this particular institution.  Thank you very 
much Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you have anything further?  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  No further questions.  Thank you 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No further questions.  Well thank you very much 
Mr Molefe.  I must also take this opportunity to thank you for coming to 
share your observations and experiences in regard to the matters that 
20 
fall within the terms of reference of the Commission with special 
reference to Transnet and the experiences that your Board has gained 
since it was appointed to Transnet.  We will hear more evidence as we 
go forward but I think that it is a very important that we have been able 
to get your observations as Chairperson of the Board of Transnet and 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 129 of 130 
 
as I indicated earlier on I does look like you may have to come back 
quite apart from whether or not there may be anybody who may apply 
for leave to cross-examine you.  It may be that you might come back to 
share your experiences with regar d to other parastatals or SOEs in 
regard to certain aspects about for example the oversight of Parliament 
in regard to certain matters but there may be other matters as well that 
you may feel would be important to the Commission and you would be 
in touch with the Commission with the legal team so that we can have 
the benefit of our experiences in those SOEs and interactions with 
certain committees of Parliament.  Thank you very much for having 
10 
come forward.  Thank you. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you are excused for now and that brings us to the 
end of today’s proceedings.  Is that right?  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  The only remaining question is 
the start time on Thursday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On Thursday yes.  We have to look - are we likely to 
deal with one witness who could cover both Thursday and Friday or it 
20 
will be different witnesses?  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  My – my information from 
Mr Mokoena who is dealing with the next witness Chair is that the next 
witness may well cover two days. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Then maybe we should start a 9 o’ clock on 
07 MAY 2019 – DAY 90 
 
Page 130 of 130 
 
Thursday. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  You have a very willing nod from 
Mr Mokoena. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright then.  We will adjourn then for today and 
on Thursday we will start at 9 o’ clock.  We adjourn.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
ENQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 9 MAY 2019  
 
