 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
09 JULY 2019 
 
 
 
DAY 129 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 2 of 114 
 
PROCEEDINGS COMMENCE ON 9 JULY 2019 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Ms Norman, good morning everybody. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Good morning Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes are you ready? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes I am ready but I do not know what the 
position of the legal representatives of Ambassador Koloane is.  Thank 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Let us hear counsel for the Ambassador. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:    Overnight night we have had the opportunity 
to consult and to listen to the audio recordings.  At this stage my 
instructions are that we intend to proceed we do not intend to apply for 
a postponement.  In light of the content in the recordings however the 
Ambassador has requested that he just be entitled to revisit or clarify 
some of the evidence which he gave yesterday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay no that is fine.  He will get that opportunity. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:    Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Okay thank you. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Thank you.  
20 
Ambassador yesterday we left off – we were still going through the 
report, the JCPS Report and those paragraphs where you were 
disputing some of the things that are recorded in the report itself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well maybe before that we should – I should just ask 
the Ambassador a question that I had in mind yesterday but later on 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 3 of 114 
 
forgot.   
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then maybe before you can ask him questions 
after that you give him a chance to clarify those parts of the evidence 
he gave yesterday that he wishes to clarify. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes.  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that as we move on we know exactly what he – 
what the clarification is. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ambassador with regard to the letter that your PA 
10 
wrote to Mr William Matjila you did give evidence to the effect that 
there must have been a misunderstanding either on her part or there 
must have been a misunderstanding on her part or you may have failed 
to articulate what you wanted to convey to her properly because you – 
you never intended to say that you had approved the request, is that 
correct? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Yes it is correct Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What I wanted to ask you is whether the reference to 
the request whether the position is not that the reference to the request 
is not – was not a reference to the request for a clearance because I 
20 
think your evidence was premised on the understanding that when she 
talked about a request in that email she was talking about a request for 
clearance.  Hence you said you had no power to grant a request for a 
clearance that was the job of the Department of Defence.  Certain 
requirements have had to be met before they could decide whether they 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 4 of 114 
 
were granting or not granting and you would know nothing about 
whether those requirements were met.  Is my summation of what you 
were saying correct? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Chairperson I was trying to 
convey that my aim was to ask my personal assistant to communicate 
that I wanted the officials there to process the application for the flight 
clearance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you were not – you were saying you were not – 
you did not want her to convey anything to the effect that you had 
approved the request for clearance. 
10 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Correct Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because that fell outside your mandate? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Now my question is whether the reference to the 
request was not meant to – to be a reference to a request for the visit.  
So that what she may have intended to say is that as far as this visit is 
concerned Ambassador Koloane has approved or DIRCO has approved 
the visit – the request for a visit.  You people must now deal with the 
request for clearance. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  No Chairperson because I 
20 
had not communicated with anybody within DIRCO who had confirmed 
that they had approved such and normally that will have to be approved 
by the branch which deals with the country.  In this case it will have 
been the brand Asia and the Middle East.  So I was merely 
communicating about the request to process the clearance. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 5 of 114 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if there was to be a visit I think one – I think 
Ambassador Jerry Matjila yesterday talked about two note verbales and 
said in regard to the visit one the – it might just be a request for a visit 
to do a visit to South Africa by a foreign head of state or Ministers and 
once that request has been approved then there might be another note 
verbale which then comes with details about flights and so on and so 
on which seemed to suggest to me that there needs to be an approval 
of the request first and I think either he or another witness made a 
reference and it may have been you I may be mistaken.  Made 
reference to the fact – I think it is another witness not you that if it is a 
10 
head of state or Prime Minister of Deputy Head of State who wants to 
meet with the President of the country the DIRCO would communicate 
with the Presidents – President to establish whether the President says 
it is fine they can visit and meet with him.  And the one could 
understand 
that. 
 
Is 
that 
something 
that 
accords 
with 
your 
understanding of what would happen sometimes with requests for visits 
where the Head of State in South Africa would be met? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Mr Chairman you are correct.  
Whenever there is going to be a request by any Head of State to come 
and visit our President the embassy of that country will then write – 
20 
well they will normally have a number of meetings building up to the 
visit but once they have agreed then they will actually officially 
communicate that the President through the note verbale to the desk 
that the President would like to pay a visit or a state visit or official 
visit during the following dates and that information is communicated to 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 6 of 114 
 
the desk.  And then the desk will consult with the Minister who in turn 
will check with the Presidency whether the President is available or the 
Deputy President depending on who will met and then once they 
confirm that the date is acceptable they will also communicate back to 
the embassy accordingly that that is acceptable.  After that then once 
the date has been set up during the DGF which is the Director 
General’s Forum where – which is chaired the Director General and all 
the DDG’s attend normally that is a platform for us to exchange 
information about what is happening in the department and then the 
DDG in this case if maybe it was Asia DDG if it was a Japan Prime 
10 
Minister coming then he will report that by the way we will have a visit 
from this day.  In some cases he may even ask for assistance from 
other colleagues.  Or if maybe that happens before the DGF happens 
he will normally then consult the office of the chief of state protocol 
indicating hey by the way we have got this thing coming I have asked 
the embassy of that country to start getting in touch with you regarding 
logistics.  And once the – and once that happens the embassy will then 
send a note verbale to us requesting a meeting.  Whether there is a 
flight available that would be landing in Waterkloof or not they will then 
communicate requesting a meeting so that we can deal with the 
20 
logistics.  So there are two separate note verbales but the one that 
goes to the Protocol office is dependent on the first one being dealt 
with by the desk and agreeing on the date that – of that particular visit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So it would be correct would it not be to say that 
there is approval of the visit that must happen before the defence force 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 7 of 114 
 
can consider request for clearance leaving out as to who must give 
approval for now but there is approval of the visit that must happen 
first, is that not so? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  The person who is targeted 
for that particular meeting by the foreign political principle of course we 
will have to confirm that they are available on that particular said date.  
If it is an official visit but if it is a private visit there is no need because 
there is no targeted person who has to approve but we still have to 
extend protocol courtesies depending and as well on the level of the 
person coming if it is a Head of State we provide more courtesies than 
10 
we would for example if it is just a Minister coming for a private visit as 
well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I – I wonder whether when one looks at that email 
from your PA it should not be read to mean what she was saying you 
had done was that the visit as far as DIRCO is concerned was in order.  
If she was saying that would that be in line with what could be said in 
the light of the processes that DIRCO has in regard to these – to 
request for visits and so on or would that be – would that not be in 
line? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  It will not be in line 
20 
Chairperson because the Chief of Protocol is not the one who approves 
visits.  It is dealt with by the line functions departments in this case the 
DDG’s of the various branches will be the ones who can only say yes 
after consulting then say yes the visit has been approved by the 
principle and communicate that to protocol. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 8 of 114 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  I am just wondering whether this is a case where 
she completely got the whole thing wrong in the sense that she thought 
you had said you were approving the clearance because that does not 
seem to – to tie in because the clearance was supposed to be approved 
by the Defence Force.  But what I was thinking is that it is possible 
maybe that there is something that you may have conveyed to say it 
was in order from DIRCO’s side other than saying the clearance was 
being approved and that maybe the misunderstanding if any might have 
been in that you may have intended to say, tell them that from DIRCO’s 
side everything is in order, they must do their side.  That is what I was 
10 
wondering whether that is where the misunderstanding if there is a 
misunderstanding happened.  You meant to say we as DIRCO we think 
everything is in order but they must do their side. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Mr Chairman there was 
nothing in DIRCO which said they planned or the application was in 
order and that the visit was approved by DIRCO. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm., 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  At all.  And that is why I am 
trying to indicate that that is not what I was communicating to her. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I was trying to communicate 
that she must talk to the people responsible with the processing of the 
flight clearance to do what they are supposed to do which is to process 
the flight clearance.  But I – again maybe failed to communicate 
appropriately or she misunderstood what I was saying. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 9 of 114 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Well I understood from Major Ntshisi and or Mr 
William Matjila’s evidence that Mr Ntshisi did indicate or had indicated 
or conveyed the position that he wanted something in writing.  I 
understood him to be saying and I am – my recollection may be 
inaccurate understood him to be saying that he wanted something in 
writing before he could go further with the processing of the request for 
clearance.  And if that part of his evidence is correct it is – it might be 
difficult to say he wanted something in writing to simply say process 
the application because once he has received the application I would 
imagine he would know his duties to process it.  He does not need a 
10 
letter from DIRCO saying process it.  He might have wanted something 
more.  What do you say to that possibility? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Mr Chairperson it is possible 
that he might have wanted something more but that something more will 
have had to come from the line function dealing with the visit.  If it was 
Asia then they would have actually said yes that date has been 
confirmed.  If it had been communicated or managed itself directly by 
the particular branch.  And maybe Chair also it might help it is please 
the Chair that the request made by my legal counsel if the Chair deems 
it good and fit to grant that may be – I talked to it because it might 
20 
address some of the questions that the Chair is actually trying to get to 
right now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No that is fine maybe let us do that.  Give 
whatever – all the clarifications you wish to give in relation to any 
aspect of evidence that you gave yesterday and then thereafter we can 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 10 of 114 
 
then take it from there. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Thank you very much Mr 
Chair.  First of all I want also to thank you for granting myself and my 
legal counsel the opportunity to get a copy – or to get the recording 
because it has helped us and helped me in particular to refresh my 
memory on some of the issues that had been raised and of course 
having taken place a long time ago it made some of the things I might 
not have recollected properly.  Hence in some instance I would indicate 
that I am not sure or I am not certain.  But now that we have had a 
chance to listen to the recording, try to think backwards I would like to 
10 
draw the Chair’s attention as well as the lead counsel’s attention to 
Exhibit FF1 which had been referred to yesterday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  On page 11.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  The first confirmation or 
correction I would like to make is that whilst I might have said in my 
discussion with Mr Ntshisi that there might be six to eight I think I was 
correctly reminded that I did indeed say to Mr Ntshisi during the 
telephone discussion that there were four to five Ministers on board. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  And that was based on the 
information which had been communicated to me by the High 
Commissioner of the Indian Embassy.  Immediately after that sentence 
he said, Mr Ntshisi said he added that the Minister of Transport Mr Ben 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 11 of 114 
 
Martins had been given instructions by the President to assist the 
Gupta family. That the Minister of Defence and Military Veterans has no 
objection and that at the meeting at the Minister of Transport the CEO 
of ACSA and the Gupta’s he had been told to assist.  And that this was 
a unit case.  Here Mr Chair I will like – I mean having listened also to 
the recording I would like to admit that indeed I did what has now 
become properly known as name dropping and used that – those 
sentences merely to – to push the officials who supposed to process 
the flight clearance to do their job, to do the flight – the processing.  
And I also want to go on record Mr Chair that that was fundamentally 
10 
nothing but name dropping and as it is properly known nowadays but 
that the Minister of Defence – of Transport nor the Minister of Defence 
nor the President did not at any stage communicate to me that I should 
in any way deal with this matter as it is expressed.  The only time and 
as I indicated where I had interaction with the Minister Ben Martins was 
at the meeting which I made reference to which was at OR Tambo 
where he wanted to solicit our advice together with that of the CEO of 
ACSA and where we advised that it will not be prudent for the plane to 
land there and for the reasons which I have already explained.  But he 
even in that meeting did not – I want to repeat he did not say that he 
20 
was given any orders to assist the Gupta’s.  And that was just a fault 
from my side which I take full responsibility for and again I want to 
stress that it was fundamentally to put if I may use the word, to put 
pressure on the officials to expedite the process of processing the 
flight clearance request.  And I think again whilst I was not certain as I 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 12 of 114 
 
indicated but it has already been cleared and again thanks to the Chair 
authorising the release of the recording that indeed the pre- - the pre-
check at the Waterkloof actually happened before the flight clearance 
was actually issued.  And maybe also to clarify Chair what I meant by 
the fact that this was a unique case.  Unique in that as far as I can 
recollect in the history of South Africa we have never had family 
chartering a plane with so many individuals and one requesting to land 
be it either at OR Tambo International Airport or requiring also to land 
at the Waterkloof.  So there were uniqueness in terms of something 
that has never happened before and there was no precedent in terms of 
10 
how those kinds of things get dealt with.  Did the – I state that it was 
for the Gupta family.  Now that I have been helped by the recording 
indeed Chair because in the discussion it is a pity not everything is 
captured here but in the discussion of course we will talk about the 
Gupta family trying to land at Waterkloof – at OR Tambo and then later 
on there is an application also for – to attend a similar event.  Because 
I do not think it was hidden that the Ministers are also coming for the 
wedding.  So I – it was sinister that that could happen like that and I 
think clearly the Gupta’s must have negotiated with the High 
Commission and one made that kind of observation and that is why I 
20 
actually said this was clearly and also compounded by the fact that as I 
stated yesterday one of the people who were present with the event or 
management company to go and do a pre-inspection was a member who 
worked for the Gupta business so indeed I did also therefore 
accordingly in that context state that.  And I fully concur with the 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 13 of 114 
 
statement that in that last sentence that the Presidency has never ever 
even in the – for the total duration of the time I served as the Chief of 
State Protocol the President or the Presidency has never ever 
interfered with the process – with the administrative process of 
facilitating the landing of airplanes nor has it ever interfered in any 
protocol related activities and the only way that sometimes it will 
influence that is by only suggesting that the President would like to 
have a state banquet or dinner or lunch so that we can accordingly 
adjust the program but in terms of the logistics we take full 
responsibility – we took full responsibility for that.  So therefore Chair I 
10 
would like to again repeat that by my own admission that I erred to an 
error of judgment in using – in wrongly and wrongfully using the names 
of the Minister of Transport the then Minister of Transport Mr Ben 
Martins, the current Minister of Defence as well as the Presidency and 
in this statement that I made to try and exert pressure to the officials at 
– who were supposed to facilitate the processing of the flight 
clearance.  And I thank you Chair that is the clarification that I wanted 
to make. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  And I thank the Chair for 
20 
again authorising that we be given the recording. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you.  Ms Norman. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you, thank you Chair.  
Ambassador I so wish that it would be that easy that a senior official 
like yourself can come here like you did yesterday and tell the Chair 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 14 of 114 
 
and deny all the things that are read out to you in that paragraph and 
then once you have listened to the recording everything must be perfect 
now because now you have since recalled. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well maybe .. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  If… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry before you proceed. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe Ms Norman it is not accurate to say he denied 
everything.  He did say he did not recall whether he had made certain 
statements and it may be that you might wish to … 
10 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To talk about that. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    To rephrase. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Let us – maybe not … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja but – he had – there are some he – there may be 
some things that he denied there are some things that he said he did 
not recall.   
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Remember that I had to explain to him the distinction 
20 
between denying and saying I do not recall.  So I think in regard to 
some of the things here my recollection that he may have said he did 
not recall but it may be that there are some on the same page that he 
denied. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 15 of 114 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I just want you to – to say – it might be inaccurate to 
say he denied. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To say he denied all of those things. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you.  Let me rephrase.  
Ambassador I wish it was that easy that an Ambassador of this country 
can come to the commission as you did yesterday and when certain 
things are put to you and you cannot recall some you said they never 
happened and you would not have said that.  And now today once you 
listened now to a recording then the commission must accept that you 
10 
made a mistake and now you recall that you name dropped.  Well surely 
yesterday when that sentence about Minister Ben Martins was read out 
to you when the Minister of Defence and Military Veterans was read out 
to you if you knew that you had name dropped that would have 
triggered that recollection, is that correct? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  No it is not correct Ma’am 
because number 1. I may want to make reference to what I said 
yesterday.  On Thursday this week – last week when we were talking to 
you you indicated that when we requested this recording that we could 
not get it because it is classified.  And you already had it on Thursday 
20 
because you told us so.  Had you given us that because I assumed that 
it is only proper that if you are going to be bringing witnesses you 
furnish them with all the necessary information particularly for 
something that happened more than six years ago?  So had we 
received that recording I am sure that the issues that you are raising 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 16 of 114 
 
will not have occurred? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  No that does not answer the question.  Let 
us start afresh.  First of all I did not have the recording on Thursday.  
We were told that it was a classified recording and the Chairperson 
advised you and your team yesterday that the recordings were made 
available to us on Sunday.  So I did not have any recordings on 
Thursday.  Let us just get that clear. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Maybe I misunderstood you 
when you said that we cannot access it because your words were but 
sorry you cannot get it because it is a classified document. 
10 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  No we even said in a response to your 
lawyers that we did not have the recording.  Mr De Beer who 
communicated with them can confirm that. 
AMBASSADOR 
VUSI 
BRUCE 
KOLOANE: 
 
I 
could 
have 
misunderstanding that. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  But that is not – I am not here to argue 
that with you.  But let us talk about your recollection of the events that 
happened.  You are now – you want the Chairperson to believe that as 
of yesterday before you listened to the recording you did not know – 
you could not recollect that you did name drop. 
20 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Yes.  I did not recollect all 
the things.  That is why and also if I was speaking with certainty I will 
have responded accordingly but like I said this event happened more 
than six years ago the incident and I tried to put it behind me for a 
number of reasons particularly related to my family and that is why 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 17 of 114 
 
some of the facts – facts related to that are not as vivid to me as they 
may be to you ma’am. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  So if then yesterday your answer to you 
having used the name of Mr Ben Martins, the Minister of Military and 
Defence and the President.  So if your answer to that question was no 
you did not say so that would have been a lie? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Yes it would have been a 
misrepresentation and again because I did not have a recollection of 
the words that – that were actually there. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  So if then this Commission had not been 
10 
furnished with the recording it would mean that the Commission would 
have continued on the impression that you attacked this report because 
it had factual inaccuracies as you said yesterday and without that 
recording the Commission would never have known what exactly 
transpired. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Most probably some of the 
facts will not have been available not only to the Commission but to 
myself as well but also to indicate that I did not only exclusively attack 
the report on the basis of this paragraph but I indicated that the four 
people who were – who were actually the authors of the – of the report 
20 
did not at any stage intercede with me as the team of four to interview 
me.  So that was my case as well. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  No, no, no but your – your – you – we 
were dealing with the report and you were identifying the factual 
inaccuracies in the report. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 18 of 114 
 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Indeed.  As – as far as my 
recollection went I identified errors which I thought were not accurate. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN 
SC: 
 
Now 
let us just 
talk 
about 
this 
namedropping.  You not having recollected it.  Why were you charged? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I do not understand the 
question? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Why were you disciplined? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I was disciplined because the 
– one of the recommendations of the report was that all the affected 
sister departments must take – must undertake internal disciplinary 
10 
processes to take appropriate action against those who might have 
been implicated. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes.  What were the charges that you 
faced? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Although I do not remember 
them off my head but it was basic.  One of them was I think breaching 
the – the procedures if I recall or protocols that have to be followed to 
process the – the flight clearance – flight clearance application.  The 
undue influence on the other – I think there is a document somewhere.  
If maybe you could help me … 
20 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Because you obviously might 
know what it is.  Where there are three charges which are actually 
tabled there. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes, thank you Chair.  May I refer the 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 19 of 114 
 
witness to FF3? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, do so please. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  FF – FF3 please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I see them in EXHIBIT FF3 and I am looking at 
the Chairperson’s ruling starts at page 25.  The charge sheet … 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Starts at page – I think – six or seven. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Page 5 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, ja. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  The charge sheet begins at page 5. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you; and then if you go to – it just 
the – it deals with a letter to you pages 5 and six and then if you go to 
annexure – to page 7.  That is where the annexure is and that is where 
the charge sheet is. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Ja. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you.  Now my interest really is in 
charge one because it – that is where I am going with the question. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  On page? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  At page 9.  Could you just read paragraph 
20 
8? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Should I read it? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes please. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  “It is alleged that 
during the period February 2013 to April 2013 …” 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 20 of 114 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  That is charge one hey? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Charge one.  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  You can just mention charge one and then read. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that even those who do not have the benefit of 
looking at the document they know which one is charge one. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which one is charge two and so on. 
10 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Charge one Chair it says and 
I read: 
“It is alleged that during the period February 2013 
to April 2013 the employee abused diplomatic 
channels and took it upon himself to facilitate an 
illegal request for landing of an international 
aircraft at the Air Force Base Waterkloof on 
30 April 2013 between 06:50 and 07:00.” 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes and then there were factors to support 
that charge? 
20 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I am not sure I understand 
the question. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Sorry.  This … 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLONE:  Oh you mean the ones below? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 21 of 114 
 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Okay.  The factors in support 
of charge one are the following: 
“The Indian High Commission failed to provide a 
note verbale to the department of international 
relations and cooperation.  This is a serious 
infringement of diplomatic protocol and heralded 
that this was not state business but a private 
matter.” 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  9.2 says: 
10 
“The employee spoke directly to the Command Post 
Air Force Base Waterkloof which was in conflict of 
the protocol to be used in that the employee did not 
follow proper process by communicating with the 
Head of Defence Force responsible for the affairs of 
the base.” 
9.3: 
“The employee stated that there will be four to five 
Ministers on the flight.  This will be the equivalent 
of the members of the Executive Council in South 
20 
Africa whereas this was not the case and this 
constituted a misrepresentation.” 
9.4: 
“The employee in his communications with the 
Command Post dropped the names and the titles of 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 22 of 114 
 
the Minister of Transport, Minister of Defence, 
Military Veterans and the President in an effort to 
pressurise 
the 
Command 
Post 
to 
issue 
the 
clearance for such illegal landing.” 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes.  So one of the charges that you faced 
had the namedropping as part of that charge. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Ja. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Which is charge one. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Yes I did. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  So yesterday you did … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well – I am sorry Ms Norman.  Would it be – not be 
better that … 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  He finishes? 
CHAIRPERSON:  He deals with all the charges. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  All three. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that those who are watching or listening they know 
what was charge one. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What was charge two and charge three. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that if we have – have to ask him about charges 
two and three there is clarity in the mind of those who – in the minds of 
those who would do not have the benefit of the documents … 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As to what those respective … 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 23 of 114 
 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Charges related to. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you Chair.  Yes.  Could you please 
proceed Ambassador, charge two? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Charge two. 
“It is alleged that the employee misrepresented 
facts in an endeavour to procure the illegal and 
unlawful and/or wrongful landing.” 
The facts in support of this allegation are the following: 
“The employee represented to the Command Post 
10 
Sergeant Major Ntshisi in charge of permitting such 
landing that this was a unique case with the 
knowledge that it was not.  The employee motivated 
why he could not put the request in writing by 
innuendos that the (indistinct) to be of assistance 
to the Gupta family.” 
Charge three: 
“The employee compromised the processes and 
procedures of his employer in that there was no 
review and/or recommendation from the political 
20 
desk in the department on this particular request 
and the interdepartmental coordination process that 
normally ensures that did not take place.” 
The evidence in support of this charge will be: 
“On April, the 9 t h 2013 the employee presented to 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 24 of 114 
 
the directorate state visit that the request for flight 
clearance and landing at Waterkloof Air Force Base 
for 
the 
Indian 
delegation 
was 
telephonically 
approved by himself.  The employee failed to 
provide an official clearance request requested to 
do by Sergeant Major Ntshisi at the Air Force 
Command Post.  An individual in the Indian High 
Commission 
requested 
the 
employee 
on 
24 April 2013 to 
facilitate arrangements 
for 
a 
private wedding reception at Waterkloof Air Force 
10 
Base and this amounted to the use of a Senior 
Government Official to arrange a wedding reception 
at a strategic entry point which was a major 
security violation.” 
ADV THANDI NORMAN 
SC: 
 
Yes 
and 
then 
this 
was 
dated 
27 June 2013? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE: 
 
Yes 
it 
was 
dated 
27 June 2013. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  And you acknowledge receipt on the same 
day? 
20 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Correct.  I was called by the 
DG to his office and I did acknowledge it on the same day. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes and how did you plead to those 
charges? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE: 
 
I 
pleaded 
guilty 
to 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 25 of 114 
 
administrative negligence and also inappropriate influencing of the 
officials but I did not plead guilty to actually issuing say for example to 
some of the things like just to make an example in the – in the charge 
that is written here. 
That the – the request for the flight clearance and landing at 
Waterkloof Air Force Base for the Indian delegation was telephonically 
approved by myself because like I said I do not have authority to do so. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes and in charge one how did you plead?  
In respect of charge one how did you plead to that charge? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE: 
 
I 
again 
pleaded 
10 
administrative negligence because the impression that had been 
created was that there had not been any application and I had been 
informed by the Higher Commissioner of India that he had applied and 
since I had indicated also yesterday that before that they had actually 
followed the same – a similar process when they were hosting the Head 
of State. 
I was of the assumption that all was done properly - by the 
book and that is why I followed up because I thought these are the 
people who already knows how it gets done and I did agree that is my – 
I erred in that because if – if I were to be Chief of Protocol again which 
20 
of course I do not envy anymore I will definitely have asked if there 
was – if all the documents were furnished. 
Like I will specifically ask in detail has the following things 
been furnished but at that time there was an oversight on my side but 
that is basically what happened. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 26 of 114 
 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes and did – when you pleaded guilty to 
charge one did you take into account what is stated in 9.4 which you 
have already read out which relates to namedropping? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Yes I did and I think I did 
although I cannot recall it fully but I think I did but also indicated to 
that meeting maybe the line of questioning was not the same either but 
I did indicate that at no stage was Minister of Transport, Minister of 
Defence and Military Veterans of the President did they in anyway 
communicate with me either by themselves or through their offices or 
anybody else in the offices that I should assist. 
10 
So the only difference is that maybe the line of questioning 
was not the same and probably the answers I provided are not 
necessarily going to be consistent with the line of questioning now. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes.  You see this is what troubles me 
Ambassador … 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Hm. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Because you had pleaded guilty to 
namedropping but then yesterday before you listening to the recording 
this is one of the things that you said you would not have said to – to 
Warrant Officer Ntshisi. 
20 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Hm. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  So any person who had been charged 
knowing that my charges related to namedropping and any person now 
who is confronted with the report by the DG is saying that there was 
mentioning of the President, of the Minister of Defence, of the Minister 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 27 of 114 
 
of Transport that would have triggered a response that Chair inasmuch 
as I cannot recall that this is how I put it but I know that I did admit 
guilt that I did namedrop. 
That – that perhaps is what I would have expected a 
response from you to be yesterday. 
ADV DON MAHON:  Chair if I may? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV DON MAHON:  I apologise for interrupting my learned friend but 
…. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV DON MAHON:  I object to the fairness of the question on this 
basis.  The question is put to the witness in the form of the manner in 
which he pleaded guilty to the charges and it is put to him as a 
proposition on that basis and he is expected to either admit or deny 
that recalling from 27 June 2013 whereas in this very same exhibit that 
we are looking at we can see what the Chairperson’s ruling is and we 
can see that although he pleaded guilty to the charges there were 
reservations and it would only be fair to the witness rather than asking 
him to recall back so long ago but to actually put to him exactly the 
nature of – of what took place at the inquiry. 
20 
Rather than putting to him as a proposition you pleaded guilty 
to namedropping.  We should see what in fact took place and that is 
contained in the Chairperson’s ruling. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I think they may be wrong to sort out your 
concern without a ruling.  Let me hear what Ms Norman has to say. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 28 of 114 
 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Chair there is – there is nothing wrong 
with the question because the question deals with the recollection.  The 
witness says I did not recollect yesterday but then when I listened to 
the tape I did.  So I am just showing him the materiality of the issue at 
hand which is namedropping, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just repeat the question you put to him so that I can 
… 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Ambassador the question I put to you was 
10 
having being charged and one of the charges like charge one which 
dealt with namedropping and – and when you started out by clarifying 
saying that you are clarifying to the Chair you said that you had used 
people’s names to – to exert influence on officials. 
So the question is now if then you had done so and you had 
pleaded guilty to charge one that - but you will correct me if I am wrong 
- would have triggered that recollection yesterday that when I referred 
you to paragraph 2.1.15 of what is it that the DGs had said in that 
paragraph knowing that you had been charged and knowing that you did 
in fact namedrop as you have told us that would have triggered that I 
20 
recollect that this is what I said or I recollect that this in fact did 
happen. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I … 
CHAIRPERSON:  May – may … 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 29 of 114 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe let me put it this way without saying there is 
anything wrong with the way you put it. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes, yes thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think the question amounts to this.  Having faced 
among others a charge which included an allegation that you had done 
what you call namedropping and I am not sure that this is 
namedropping but what you call namedropping and what Ms Norman 
calls namedropping. 
You have hinted that – you had stated that the President 
knew about this or wanted the Gupta family to be assisted and that the 
10 
Minister Ben Martins had been instructed to assist and the Minister of 
Defence had no objection.  Knowing that in your disciplinary inquiry 
this was one of the allegations you had faced and that you had 
admitted that as I understand the position. 
The question is:  how could you have forgotten about that 
yesterday.  Have I captured it correctly Ms Norman? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DON MAHON:  Chair if I may? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV DON MAHON:  That is the very problem with respect. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV DON MAHON:  Is if we look at the Chairperson’s ruling … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV DON MAHON:  He did not plead guilty to namedropping.  He 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 30 of 114 
 
pleaded guilty only to the charge but excluded specifically the facts and 
evidence as represented. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine but he is – he can say – he can say 
exactly what you are saying.  He can say no I did not plead guilty to 
that.  I pleaded guilty to that and I excluded the facts.  That – that is 
what he can say. 
ADV DON MAHON:  As it pleases Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I think Chair my legal 
counsel has represented what I would have liked to express. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  So maybe we should start here you 
pleaded – you pleaded guilty to charge – to all the three charges.  Is 
that right? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  If I remember Chair I think I 
did to all the three charges. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and you said as I understand from the ruling of 
the Chairperson you were – were excluding the facts.  Is that correct? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Come again sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You said if I understand the Chairperson’s ruling that 
is the disciplinary hearing Chairperson’s ruling if I understand it 
20 
correctly you said you were excluding the facts.  You were not pleading 
guilty I think to the facts or you – you may have intended to say you 
were not admitting certain facts.  Is that correct? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Correct Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Now let us hear from you in regard to charge 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 31 of 114 
 
one where the allegation was that: 
“During the period February 2013 to April 2013 you 
abused diplomatic channels and took it upon 
yourself to facilitate an illegal request for landing of 
an international aircraft at the Air Force Base 
Waterkloof on 30 April 2013 between 06:50 and 
07:00 in the morning.” 
That allegation you pleaded guilty to that allegation.  Is that correct? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Chair if I – I am not again 
100 percent certain but if I recollect I think the three charges were 
10 
discussed as – they were mentioned individually but during the 
engagements and the discussions the three charges tendered to be 
discussed together and because if you look at them as well they 
actually overlap in some cases particularly if you look at charge one 
and charge two. 
So whilst I did plead guilty to the charges there were certain 
components that I did not agree with for example which I then raised 
during that particular meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  What we do know there were three 
charges? 
20 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What we do know is you pleaded guilty to three 
charges? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What we do know is there was charge one, charge 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 32 of 114 
 
two and charge three? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what we must take as given is that faced with 
these charges you would have applied your mind to each one to say 
what do I say to this one.  What do I say to that one?  What do I say to 
that one in preparation for the hearing?  Is that correct? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Yes, correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is correct.  Now I - in order to try and understand 
what it is that you were pleading guilty to or what it is that you were 
admitting and not admitting.  I ask the question look at the allegation in 
10 
regard to charge one – the allegations at page 26.  Then tell me 
whether you were admitting those allegations under charge one. 
Let me leave out the issue of the factors supporting the 
charge which is mentioned elsewhere.  Just that allegation.  Did you 
admit that allegation - that charge or not?  I repeat the charge – charge 
one. 
“It is alleged that during the period February 2013 
and April 2013 the employee abused diplomatic 
channels and took it upon himself to facilitate an 
illegal request for landing of an international 
20 
aircraft at the Air Force Base Waterkloof on 
30 April 2013 between 06:50 and 07:00 in the 
morning.” 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Chair if I do recollect quite – 
I am not sure again because it is a long time ago I had certain issues 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 33 of 114 
 
with the language and the manner in which the charge itself was 
phased.  One of the things that I remember for example is that it says 
on line three “an illegal request” and I was actually asking what is 
meant by an illegal request because I facilitated a request for landing. 
I did not facilitate an illegal request.  I facilitated a request 
for landing and the – the ruling or decision that was granted will not be 
with me.  So for me I raised – I am just making an example of one of 
the things that I do remember that when I read it now I see that I had 
an issue with the fact that it is phrased “illegal request”. I am just 
making one of the examples of what I can remember. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but the primary allegation there is that you 
abused diplomatic channels and took it upon yourself to facilitate an 
illegal request blah, blah, blah.  Let us leave out the illegal request for 
now.  Let us assume if it was just a request would you say that you 
admit that you – you admit that allegation? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Again I think if I remember 
Chair on that allegation I indicated that there was a context into which 
this allegation can be premised and the context of my involvement was 
based on the assumption that the proper diplomatic procedures had 
been followed by the Indian High Commission but it only turned out that 
20 
indeed it had not because I learnt that for example the note verbale 
had not been furnished and I took responsibility therefore accordingly 
that I erred and that I should have checked first whether all the 
administrative requirements had been met and in that context therefore 
I feel that I contributed to the situation because there was an oversight 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 34 of 114 
 
on my side that I did not check that based on the assumption that it had 
already been submitted given that a few months earlier they had had 
the Head of State coming to visit and we are therefore accordingly 
familiar with the – with the processes. 
So I am trying to say Chair even during that disciplinary 
action I had to explain the context in which these things happen which 
at least helped everybody understand exactly what was said and the 
phrasing of charge one as it is in its current form does not fully reflect 
the engagement and the discussion that transpired when this charge 
one was admitted was expressed to me. 
10 
However I then said with those qualifications that I had made 
I do plead guilty to administrative oversight on my side and also I think 
something along the lines of influencing of the officials who was 
supposed to process the – the flight clearance.  I did plead to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well did you abuse diplomatic channels in order to 
facilitate the request for clearance for the landing of this aircraft? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  No.  Chair I actually abused 
the power of my office … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  In facilitating - by – my office 
20 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Calling officials who are 
processing and exerting pressure on them but at no stage did I have 
control over diplomatic channels because diplomatic channels will refer 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 35 of 114 
 
to also the correspondence flowing from the Indian High Commission to 
DIRCO and the (indistinct). 
In this case as I – I indicated the diplomatic channel that was 
utilised for applying for this flight clearance in question was that it was 
sent directly from the Indian High Commission to the Department of 
Defence and what I agreed and I accepted then and accept now is that I 
used my office to follow up on why the flight clearance was not 
processed and in light of what I have just said this morning to the Chair 
whilst I had an intuition that obviously there is an involvement of the 
Guptas here as well I think it will have been appropriate of me in 
10 
hindsight even if it means I had gone to one of the Senior Officials in 
Defence and said look of course everything looks good on paper but I 
have got the following intuition. 
You may want to look into it and I admitted to that as well 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so you – you accept that in the process of 
seeking to put pressure - and you must just tell me if there is a part of 
what I am saying that you do not agree with – in – do – do you admit 
that therefore in the process of what you did to put pressure on some 
officials in the Defence Force you – to put pressure on them either to 
20 
approve the request for a clearance or to expedite the processing - one 
of the two you can indicate which one – in the process of putting 
pressure on them for one of those two you abused your powers in the 
office that you held at the time? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Chair I do accept that it is a 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 36 of 114 
 
clear abuse in hindsight and I look in hindsight.  It is a clear abuse of 
my – of my portfolio as the Chief of Protocol to have put pressure on 
the officials in this case Mr Ntshisi to expedite not to - to expedite the 
processing of the flight clearance particularly given that I had not 
myself 
verified 
even 
with 
him 
whether 
all 
the 
administrative 
requirements have been met and also in the context of what I have just 
said Chair that although there was no documented evidence but I was – 
I had the intuition that there was something that one could look at in 
terms of the – one of the members of the Gupta family or business 
members being part of the team that went for the inspection. 
10 
 
I should have already sensed that there was something here 
untoward and communicated that to the, to my counterpart in defence, 
be it the head of the General charge of the Air Force base or whatever. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That which you say you had an intuition of that was 
untoward, what was that? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I was saying, chair, early on 
we had been talking to the Guptas in the meeting which was held at the 
OP Tambo International Airport. Where they indicated clearly that they 
were going to have guests coming for a wedding etc. wherein we 
advised that it will not be appropriate and the minister accordingly 
20 
informed them, Minister Martins. That sorry, I cannot assist you. You 
cannot land here. Try Pilanesburg or the other airport. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Lanseria? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  And then secondly, when 
they then applied also for the flight clearance at Waterkloof, they also 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 37 of 114 
 
did not hide that they had wedding guests coming but in there will also 
be ministers who will also have some official engagements. And that is 
why I am saying, no my intuition told me that this is one of the same 
thing but I am saying, I failed in my duties because I should have 
communicated such to the, to my counterpart or at least to somebody 
senior in the Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence so that they 
could look into the matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That part which you say you failed to communicate to 
your counterpart, the Defence Force and the Department of Defence. 
Was it that this was simply a private visit? What was it? I just want to 
10 
make sure I do not speculate about what you are talking about but that 
you articulated. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Chair, what I am saying is 
that I should have, my intuition was telling me that there is far too 
much coincidence here. That is basically what I was saying but I was 
not aware whether they were indeed going to have meetings as was 
stated when we during the Commission that some went to Bloemfontein, 
others to Cape Town. So I was not privy to the official meetings they 
were having. I was just making reference to the fact that this seems to 
be the same people who actually were going, who had actually asked 
20 
first to land at OR Tambo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And if it was the same people, would I be correct to 
say that your attitude should have been, if you understood that it was 
the same people, your attitude should have been but we told these 
people that they must go to Pilanesburg or Lanseria. They should not 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 38 of 114 
 
come anywhere else. How are they wanting to land in Waterkloof now? 
Am I correct to think that is what you maybe your attitude should have 
been if you made the link? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  When I said, Chair, when I 
failed in my duties, I failed in my duties because I should have advised 
one of the senior managers in defence and said, look whilst it is your 
principal’s responsibility to process either grant or not grant. Be aware 
of the following and taking them to confidence in terms of what… 
(indistinct) had gone through with them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  And left it to him or her to 
decide if they will grant or not grant because. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  That coincidence in itself 
does not necessarily mean that they could not have been granted or 
could have been granted because it falls squarely in the hands of 
defence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it would have helped to give them a full picture? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  That is why I began I said I 
admitted that as a government employee, not only just as a DIRCO. It 
was my responsibility also to assist colleagues even in the government 
departments if I come across information that could benefit them. I 
should have communicated that and that is why I admitted if like 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 39 of 114 
 
negligence on my side on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Ms Norman? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN:  Yes. Thank you Mr Chairman. So can we 
accept then from the responses that you have given the chair that at 
the time when he used the name of the Minister of Transport, the 
Minister of Defence and military veterans and the President, you knew 
that was a lie because none of them has told you anything about this? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Correct. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN:  So and as senior as you were, you conveyed 
that lie to these employees in order to put pressure on them as you 
10 
have already mentioned? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Something I am not proud of 
but yes it is true. I did put pressure on them to process that. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN:  Yes, and then from what you have told the 
Chair already. What is recorded which is what you listened to yesterday 
is a correct recording of these conversations? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Yes, it is an accurate 
recording and although I am not an IT specialist but the voice there in 
sounds exactly like my voice. So I cannot, I do not have any expertise 
to do verification but the content of the recording is familiar. And 
20 
therefore I cannot the accuracy of the content of that recording. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN:  Yes. And would you then except that in those 
instances where the DG’s have quoted to the extent that those 
quotations are consistent what is contained in the recording then the 
chair can accept those as being accurate? 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 40 of 114 
 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Can you say the question 
again, Ma’am? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN:  Okay. 
LEGAL COUNSEL:  Chair, again I am sorry. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN:  Oh please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I am sorry I did not hear the question. Maybe I 
should hear it before you object. 
LEGAL COUNSEL:  Chair, I think we must just make clear what 
recordings are being referred to because some of the recordings, Mr 
Koloane was not even a party to. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Okay thank you. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN:  Chair, Mr Koloane understands exactly what 
recordings we are talking about. Those are the audios that he has 
listened to that relate to him. I would not be asking him about 
recordings that do not relate to him. Thank you. I was just saying 
Ambassador Koloane. To the extent that to the DG’s have quoted 
certain paragraphs, certain things that you may have said. In order for 
the Chair to find that those are reliable, the chair must listen to the 
recording and those you would accept then as accurate. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  If you are making reference 
20 
to the recordings that were given to us last night. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Yes, Ma’am I do. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN:  Thank you very much. Now let us just… 
(intervenes). 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 41 of 114 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, maybe. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN:  We take the tea adjournment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you proceed, do you accept Ambassador that if 
what you say is true namely, the President of the Republic at the time 
and the Minister of Transport at the time, Mr Ben Martins and the 
Minister of Defence then who I think is still the Minister of Defence 
now. If it is true as you say that they never said the things that in the 
recording or in the conversation you had with Mr Ntshisi. If they never, 
what you said about them was untrue that was something very, very 
serious to say about people occupying those positions in the executive. 
10 
It would be a serious thing if you said about anybody but you were 
referring to the President of the country, the Minister of Defence, the 
Minister of Transport. Do you accept that if you said this is what they 
said when they never said that to you and you knew that they never 
said that, then what you did by using their names was very, very 
serious? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Chair, I will agree that it was 
wrong of me to use their names not only because I just used their 
names to put pressure on the officials to do what they were supposed 
to do which is the processing of the flight clearance but also it 
20 
potentially can taint the reputation and image of the three that you 
have just mentioned. And it is something that I do take seriously and I 
do. That is why I admitted responsibility for my actions in that regard 
and yes it is a serious thing like you said for anyone to use anybody’s 
name out of context. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 42 of 114 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  As I understand the position, it did not take long after 
the landing that the media suggested that you had made these 
statements about the President, maybe and the ministers but I think 
about the President. Is that your recollection as well? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Although… (intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:  That it did not take long before the media was going 
with the story that you, who had made a statement that number one or 
the President had a role to play. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  It was not very long 
thereafter but I am not sure about how many weeks or whatever. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but it would have been a matter of weeks. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not a number of months. Is that right? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. And I would have imagined that when that, when 
you became aware that now this was all in the newspapers, you and 
you knew or knowing that this what you had said was not true, you 
would have taken steps to correct this. Did you take any steps to 
correct this? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I did, chair within when I was 
20 
called by NICOC I categorically stated that none of the three ever gave 
me any instructions. Maybe my fault which again I think I will still act 
consistently with is that I have never ascribed to playing into public 
gallery through the media. I have never, ever granted any interview to 
any media people on this saga or on any other matter at that. I do not 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 43 of 114 
 
believe in doing my official business through the media and since there 
were official structures that were set to deal with the matter I did set 
the record straight both in the NICOC as well as in the extended NICOC 
meetings as well as in the committee of the Director generals. In all 
three I did not mince my work in stating categorically that they did not 
give me any instructions, the three executives in question. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you admit to them that it was true that you had 
made these statements but that you were not being truthful when you 
made the statements? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Chairperson again, I do not 
10 
remember the exact question. I will have to go back to them. They 
could have asked a question of saying, did you get instructions from 
the President and the answer was no. But I mean the line of 
questioning now is different and I do have, I am sure also the 
Commission has a copy of the questions that I was asked and the 
answers that it provided. And if I remember from looking at some of 
them in this last week. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I think the questions were 
like, did the Present instruct you to do this or did anybody in the 
20 
Presidency instruct you to do this. There were even follow-up 
questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  And then I have to provide 
appropriate answers but had the questions been phrased the way that 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 44 of 114 
 
you of raising now I would obviously provide answers that talk to the 
question, the nature in the form of the questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, it is possible that they might not have asked you 
the question whether you had made those statements and only ask you 
whether you did get instructions. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But do you not think as you sit there now that even if 
they had simply asked you, did you get instructions knowing that you 
had falsely said, made those statements about those three officials; the 
President and the two ministers. Did you not think it was important that 
10 
you take them into your confidence and say, it is true that this is what I 
said but it was, I was being untruthful? The President and the Ministers 
had no role in this as far as I know. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  No, Chairperson is that 
maybe if we were sitting in a format of this nature or even in a room 
having a discussion, a question and answer session maybe that might 
have happened. But because when I was called into the meeting, I was 
not told. I was going there under the pretext that I was only going to be 
meeting one person which is Mr Dhlomo. But when I got there is I 
indicated, there were a number of people and I asked the legal status 
20 
and I felt that my rights will be violated if I do not exercise my right to 
legal representation. And they took a decision then that they will send 
me the questions in writing and I also then provided answers in writing. 
So I was only responding to the specific questions that they actually 
put down on me. And also having consulted my legal counsel, my legal 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 45 of 114 
 
counsel just advised that try to answer the questions that you have 
been asked and that is what I did, chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And in the or did you ever communicate either to the 
then President and the two Ministers any apology that for using their 
names falsely the way you had. Did you ever communicate to make any 
communications to say, I know that the newspapers are saying this that 
I made statements that you had a role to play and I want to admit that I 
did make the statements but I was untruthful and I apologize to you for 
whatever wrong I have done. Because now your names are being 
mentioned in the media as people who had a role in the landing of this 
10 
aircraft. Did you over the years, over the past six years did you ever do 
anything like that? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Chair, I do not recall and of 
course I might have missed it partly because I, there is a time when I 
was not necessarily attached to reading the newspapers for a number 
of reasons but I cannot recall that there was specific reference to 
Minister Martins giving me instructions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  There was reference, Mr 
Martin’s meeting that was held at OR Tambo. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  An equally also on Minister 
Sivuyo Mapisa Nqakula. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  And as regards, yes there 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 46 of 114 
 
were article regarding the President himself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  And the answer is, no I did 
not go back to him out of shame because I was too ashamed to even 
face him understand the gravity of what I had done and therefore, I 
cannot get myself to look them in the eye and say I am sorry. I had 
wrongfully used your name to put pressure on the officials to process 
the flight clearance application and that is basically the truth. I was 
ashamed like I am ashamed now. I mean although, I am admitting the 
guilt but it does not make me feel good or any better. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  At the disciplinary hearing you also have to deal with 
the situation of the statements you had made about the President and 
the two Ministers. Is that correct? You have to, the discussion included 
that. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Not in the same context, 
Chair. If I remember, I think and again here is a long time that it 
happened. I may not recollect everything but I think the context of the 
two ministers was about, one Minister Ben Martins was about the 
meeting we had at the airport. If I remember well again, I do not 
remember very well. I will have to look at the report if it is here so that 
20 
I can jerk my memory because although, yes the documents were all 
given to me and my legal counsel, I must admit I did not read all of 
them because I just could not read more than so many pages on my 
own. I mean I focus on some of the areas. I might have left out one 
which is of interest now to the Chair. So I will have to go back to it and 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 47 of 114 
 
look at it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. Well, we will take the tea break now but part of 
an earlier question that I think Ms Norman was asking amounts to this. 
The landing of this aircraft at Waterkloof was something that was talked 
about in the country for a long time. Mr Ramatlodi gave evidence here 
earlier this year. I cannot put words into his mouth but whatever he 
said I understood to mean something like that such aircraft landed at 
Waterkloof was an abomination. Those are my words not his but my 
understanding of what he was saying. My understanding he was saying, 
is that he was saying as a nation we were ashamed that this could 
10 
happen. Now that landing was such a big issue in the country and it 
went on for a long time. One would think that knowing what role you 
had played in regard to the landing, knowing that you had been charged 
with allegations relating to it at work and you have pleaded guilty and 
the issue of your using these names was mentioned there as well. How 
could you forget that indeed you had used these names wrongly or 
falsely when you spoke yesterday, when you gave evidence yesterday? 
I think part of, one of the questions she put amounted to saying, how is 
it possible that having been involved in something so big you would 
forget that you did actually use these names and made these 
20 
statements? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Well, Chair first of all I can 
only say that I am human like everybody else is. There are some things 
that are pleasant memories that you want to linger on for the rest of 
your life and there are some that you want to forget and close the door 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 48 of 114 
 
on them and never, ever get back to them in your life. So I have gone 
through the process in my life of the latter and there are many things 
related particularly to that whole process. My family, everything that 
happened to me, my family in particular and my children in particular 
that I would like to completely forget. So we tried to find, to go through 
therapy for me and my wife and my children in particular to try and 
forget about some of these things. So I think maybe it is just the 
refusal of the memory bank to deal with some of these realities 
because they do not bring anything unnecessary pain to me and my 
wife and my children. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think let us take the tea adjournment. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then we will. It is 20 past. We will resume at 
11h35. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN:  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you may proceed Ms Norman.   
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you Chair.  Chair just before we 
20 
adjourned Chair had taken, had asked about the disciplinary, certain 
matters about the disciplinary, may I just refer the witness to FF3, 
Exhibit FF3 at page 35. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you.  There on that page Chair this 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 49 of 114 
 
is where the Chairperson of the disciplinary deals with aggravating 
factors and he alludes to – I see now my page 8, I don’t have a page 8, 
I might have taken it out.  Yes, alright thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, and actually I forgot to raise that with you 
yesterday, the – I thought there were two pages missing there but it 
looks like it’s one. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes it’s page 8 we’ll have that replace in 
due course Chair…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:     Well actually there’s no page 6 as well, so those 
are the two pages. 
10 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes, thank you Chair, we’ll attend to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Can somebody try and get it while we are sitting – 
while I’m sitting, get those pages.  
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  I’ll ask Ms (indistinct) to look into that 
thank you.  Ambassador could you just look at – can I just refer you to 
paragraph 7, although it will be incomplete but for our purposes just to 
– because this is a matter that the Chair had asked you abut, could you 
just read what is contained there in that paragraph. 
CHAIRPERSON:     What paragraph? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Paragraph 7 Chair at page 35. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:     The facts show that Ambassador Koloane abused 
diplomatic channels and took it upon himself to facilitate the illegal 
request for the landing of the aircraft.  In mitigation, Ambassador 
Koloane admitted that due to error of judgment he failed to verify if the 
(indistinct) provided a note verbale to the department, that was despite 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 50 of 114 
 
the fact that is expected to be well versed with diplomatic protocol, he 
went further by directly speaking to the command post, Air Force Base 
Waterkloof and stated that there will be four to five Ministers on the 
flight and furthermore dropped the names of Minister of Transport, 
Minister of Defence and President in order to pressurise the command 
post to issue the clearance for the illegal landing of the aircraft.  In 
mitigation, Ambassador Koloane submitted that whilst they are, and 
thus is why…(intervention). 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  That is where the – yes so in other words 
this is one of those factors that you regarded as aggravating factors by 
10 
the Chairperson of the disciplinary. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Well part of that paragraph 
because the rest of the paragraph is not here so I’m not sure what the 
rest of the paragraph will be saying. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you and then just at a practical 
level, then because then you had put pressure as you’ve already 
admitted, on these officials might I just refer the Chair to FF4 at page 
193. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Is this connected with the hearing – disciplinary 
hearing or not? 
20 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  It is not connected but it is relevant in the 
sense that it shows that Major Ntshisi approved the clearance on the 
same day that he received the call. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh maybe before you take him there, Ambassador, 
may I take you back to the ruling of the Chairperson of the disciplinary 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 51 of 114 
 
hearing and I’d like to take you to the end of paragraph – of page 32, 
starting with the last sentence at the bottom of page 32.  The 
Chairperson’s ruling is the one to which Ms Norman just referred you 
to.    
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, that sentence, the last sentence says, 
 
“The employee and then it goes on, on page 33 and says, 
 
admitted that he betrayed the trust that the employer entrusted 
 
in him by assigning such crucial responsibilities to him.  The 
 
nation look up on cabinet under the leadership of the President 
10 
 
for guidance and sound leadership, particularly on matters of 
 
national interest by virtue of their positions and authority.  The 
 
mention of their names is therefore associated with authority, 
 
the employee admitted that he misrepresented the facts in 
 
order to secure an illegal landing.  This is clearly a dismissible 
 
offence”, 
 
Do you see that part which I’ve just read? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Yes I do Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I draw attention to that last sentence – well not the 
last sentence, the second last sentence which says, 
20 
 
“The employee admitted that he misrepresented the facts in 
 
order to secure an illegal landing’, 
 
I take it that the Chairperson of the disciplinary inquiry in 
recording that this is what you admitted got that right, is that correct? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Chair it – my 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 52 of 114 
 
understanding was that in that she said – we debated that and 
(indistinct) by saying that Chair because the fact that I told Mr Ntshisi 
that there are four to five Ministers was not misrepresentation for me, I 
was told so by the High Commissioner of India so I had no reason to 
dispute it, so I  communicated what I had been told which turned out 
not to be accurate and the argument is, did I misrepresent or I was 
given wrong information, upon which I then reacted.  So we debated 
that for a very long time but at the end of the day, Chair, I am not in 
control of writing the final report and she is and she was expressing 
her own views which even now I do not necessarily contend were 
10 
accurate because some of the things that I did, which I admitted, and I 
admit also in this Commission for example, exerting pressure on the 
officials to process the application speedily, I agree – accept that 
responsibility. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no, no I think the sentence to which I’ve drawn 
your attention, where it says, 
 
“The employee admitted that he misrepresented the facts in 
 
order to secure an illegal landing”, 
 
I think the facts that the Chairperson of the hearing that’s 
writing there is talking about must be your mention of the President’s 
20 
name and mention of the two Ministers because she refers to that 
earlier in the paragraph, so I just want to confirm that  - whether I can 
accept that one of the things that you admitted in the disciplinary 
hearing before the Chairperson of the disciplinary hearing was that you 
had used those three names wrongly, you had mentioned them in order 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 53 of 114 
 
to put pressure on the officials of the Department of Defence. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Yes I did admit that in the 
internal disciplinary process and I’ve also admitted it in this 
Commission that it was wrongful use of such names, yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes that’s fine, the reason I wanted to confirm that 
because earlier on, you’ll recall I asked a question which sought to 
understand which facts you admitted and which facts you did not admit 
in the disciplinary inquiry.  So the context here is that from what you 
have said at the meeting that you talked about where you were given 
questions and you answered, they asked you whether the President 
10 
ever gave instructions or knew about the landing, you said no, but you 
were not asked, as I understand it, whether you had made this 
statement about either the President or the other Ministers. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But what we do now know at least, is that in the 
disciplinary inquiry you also admitted that you had wrongly used those 
names. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay thank you. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you Chair, just referencing 
20 
paragraph 2.1.15 which we are dealing with of FF1 to the clearance 
that appears in Exhibit FF4. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Are we looking at FF1 or 
FF4? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  FF1, Ambassador, page – if you go to 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 54 of 114 
 
page 11 okay and then you just leave that open and then you take FF4 
and then page 193, thank you and then in FF1 as you can see the first 
sentence 
says 
it 
was 
on 
the 
9 t h 
of 
April 
2013 
when 
you 
called…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:     Sorry you are way ahead of me, you want us 
to…(intervention). 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Look at FF1 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:     At what page? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  At page 11. 
CHAIRPERSON:     I’ve got that. 
10 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you and then FF4 Chair, which is 
the Board of inquiry bundle at page 193 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Yes. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you, I just want to highlight that the 
date of the call to Major Ntshisi appears to be the same date that the 
external clearance was issued which is the 9 t h of April 2013, do you see 
that Ambassador? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Yes I do. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes and then – then the other dates they 
follow in RSA4 but the one that’s relevant for our purposes which deals 
20 
with the main aircraft is the one that appears at page 193. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
I’m 
struggling 
to 
see 
where 
that 
date 
is…(intervention). 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  The date is right on top just below or next 
to where the…(intervention). 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 55 of 114 
 
CHAIRPERSON:     9 April 2013 under the address- beneath the 
address, I can see that. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  That’s correct, that’s the date. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes.  
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  And then, Chair will find then the 
signature of Lieutenant Colonel Van Zyl at the end.  We did deal with 
this with one of the General’s that testified. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Yes. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes, thank you, I just wanted to close that 
– to show that on the same day the call was made then the same day 
10 
the clearance was issued. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Was done yes. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    Thank you Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:     Yes okay. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you and then, if you may now just 
…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:     Well now while you are doing that let me just 
confirm Ambassador, it may be understood that maybe so far the 
conversation that we  have been talking about that you had where you 
mentioned the name of the President and the two Ministers, may have 
20 
been only the conversation that you had with Warrant Officer Ntshisi, I 
just want to confirm whether you also told Colonel Anderson, you 
mentioned these names in the same way when you had a conversation 
– a telephone conversation with Colonel Anderson at particular stage, 
whether recorded or not recorded? 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 56 of 114 
 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Although I do not recall 
whether I might have used all the three names but I know that we 
definitely did enter into discussion I think the word – the use of the 
name of the President might have come up.  Again, I am saying, I could 
say it to Mr Ntshisi, probably I would have said it as well to Colonel 
Anderson because we had an even more matured and developed 
professional working relationship having worked together for two and a 
half years and I had not done so with Ntshisi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I think in the recorded conversation that you 
appeared to have had with Colonel Anderson – no, no I’m sorry, in the 
10 
recorded conversation that Colonel Anderson appears to have had with 
Warrant Officer Ntshisi, I think she does say that you told her about 
number one or the President, did you hear that part in the recorded 
conversations? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     I did hear her making 
reference to number one, I’m not sure whether she said I told her or 
she was just saying that this is a very sensitive matter, I’m not sure 
how to say it because number one is also aware of this, or something 
like that, but yes she did make reference to number one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes she might not have said she got that from you so 
20 
I just wanted to find out whether that would help in terms of your 
memory to say no, I think I did say it, if she says she got it from you, 
you may be right, maybe she doesn’t say she got that from you. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Correct Chair, I mean and 
again by admission I want to state categorically that if I can say it like 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 57 of 114 
 
that to Mr Ntshisi then the probability that I did say it to Colonel 
Anderson is extremely high. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes of course the question that arises out of the 
evidence that you have given this morning in regard to you putting 
pressure on officials of the Department of Defence is why you would 
have sought to resort to these measures of mentioning the President’s 
name, mentioning the Ministers names to put pressure on them, just to 
process the request for clearance irrespective of whether they, 
ultimately turned it down or not? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Chair I think the mere fact 
10 
that, as I said earlier, my intuition told me that the Gupta family might 
be involved in this and also what confused things is that even the High 
Commissioner was also a Gupta albeit not related.  One I wanted the to 
process it so that they could give an answer saying yes or no but like I 
said for me to use the names of the principals was fundamental to make 
them move at lightning speed and as indicated it was also issued on 
the same day and again it could have been declined on the same day if 
it didn’t meet the merits and also if the systems within the Department 
of Defence themselves had also not collapsed because, clearly,  there 
is evidence that – as was presented by General Ngwenya that I think 
20 
their systems also needed to be jacked up because they had checks 
and balances which didn’t seem to work. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But what was it – what was in it for you in this whole 
thing, why would you resort to untruthfully mentioning certain people’s 
names in order to put pressure on officials about something that really 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 58 of 114 
 
had nothing to do other than you had done your part by passing on the 
request to the Department of Defence, why couldn’t you simply say to 
whoever may have been putting pressure on you to say, the Defence 
Department is not dealing with these things expeditiously.  Why was it 
not enough for you to say, look I’ve no control on their processes we 
have passed – we have done our part and all I can say is, ask them to 
please attend to it expeditiously, more than that I can’t do. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Well Chair to answer the 
first part there was nothing in it for me at all, two, why did I  push, I 
mean, I indicated when I said it in my testimony that one of my core 
10 
responsibilities was servicing strategic (indistinct) relations with all the 
diplomatic missions in South Africa and India being one of the strategic 
countries at that we are part of IBSA together, part of BRICS together 
as well, I think I had an interest to appease him and besides that also 
build a personal relationship over time because I was interacting with 
all the Ambassadors, whether on their national days or sometimes just 
for lunches and things like that, so that really was fundamentally the 
reason why I wanted to  - I think to appear to him to be the most 
effective guy who can make things happen and again, I admit, without 
any reservations that it was a wrongful act on my side and that I 
20 
indicated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you Chair and just a follow-up on 
Chair’s question, was it also not because you didn’t want this clearance 
to be declined because otherwise, why use those names? 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 59 of 114 
 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Yes you can say that 
because, like I said, mine was to make sure that I’m seen as well by 
the High Commissioner (indistinct) of India to be a man who can get 
things to happen and also shortly before – I think after that we were 
going to be having a BRICS summit so I was really trying to appease 
him to the best of my ability. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you and then – then the aircraft 
lands at Waterkloof…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well maybe before it lands, I understand the part that 
you have just said now Ambassador, that, look you wanted to – you had 
10 
a certain relationship with the Embassy of India, the two countries have 
a special relationship and from your side you wanted to be seen as 
somebody who could get things to happen but the question that Ms 
Norman asked you, namely, is it not true that you also wanted the 
result of the request for clearance to be positive?  Your answer was, as 
I’ve understood correctly, yes that could happen as well is that correct 
or did I misunderstand? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Working on the assumption 
that the Indian High Commission had submitted all the relevant 
documentation, since not long before that incident they had received a 
20 
head of state through the same process.  I assumed that they had done 
it properly and of course, I had no reason to believe that it wasn’t going 
to be granted and all I wanted was to – I felt that it was just 
incompetent on the side of the officials and that’s why I was pushing 
them to actually do the processing and yes, of course, I was hopeful 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 60 of 114 
 
that it would be approved because I was under the assumption that al 
was kosher in terms of the documentation that had to be submitted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the part that I wanted to draw attention to is that 
my understanding of your evidence yesterday and I think it may be that 
earlier today as well at some stage, your evidence as I understood it 
seemed to be to the effect that all you wanted was that they should – 
the Department of Defence should process the request for clearance, 
what the outcome was neither here nor there for you, you just wanted 
that they should process the clearance and – but I seem to understand 
what you’ve said to be, yes you wanted the outcome to be a positive 
10 
one as well.  So you’re getting a chance to just tell me if I’ve 
misunderstood anything. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Chair I was one, pushing 
so that they would process the application for the flight clearance and 
of course, I do understand, like any other government department there 
are internal processes, but of course, I was hopeful that it will be 
granted because it had been granted a few months earlier and I had no 
reason to suspect that it would not be granted but was just – in my 
head it was an assumption that there’s just some administrative 
incompetence by the officials who either were just put in somewhere 
20 
there not really processing it at all and yes to make – to bring about 
the degree of urgency I wrongfully then dropped the names of the 
principals but again, you can -  I can drop the name of the principal but 
if the internal processes were followed properly and they decide, sorry 
we cannot grant, that will not really affect any direct effect or bearing 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 61 of 114 
 
on the issue because the process would have stopped it from being 
processed positively, let me put it that way. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What would you say to the proposition that 
mentioning the President’s names and those Ministers to Warrant 
Officer Ntshisi and maybe to Colonel Anderson as well, was meant to 
improve if not guarantee but at least improve the prospects that the 
outcome would be an approval? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:   I would say…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:   And not that they were – not that you used those 
names just to have the process expedited, irrespective of the outcome? 
10 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:   I would have argued Chair, 
that mine was to ensure that there was going to be efficient attention to 
the process itself with the full appreciation that there were internal 
processes to be followed which could have led in either the acceptance 
or the decline of the application and yes, like I’ve indicated I was 
hopeful that it will be issued so that the India High Commissioner or 
Ambassador will also see that I’ve actually acted on the matter 
expediently to make sure that it’s dealt with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you, Ms Norman? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you Chair, there’s just some – I’ve 
20 
got this nagging feeling which is something that I think I must just deal 
with, with you Ambassador because every time you give an answer to 
the Chair’s questions, you say, of course there were internal 
processes, had people followed internal processes then maybe this 
would not have happened but I just want to understand at what point 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 62 of 114 
 
did you realise that a wedding party for the Gupta family was going to 
be the persons that were going to be landing at Waterkloof.  I just want 
to understand in terms of the timeline. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     When the High 
Commissioner told me he also indicated that there would be – he didn’t 
lie, he said there will be people coming for the wedding and therein – in 
that same plane there will also be Ministers but like I indicated in my 
earlier testimony in the meeting also at OR Tambo, it was stated 
categorically that there are actually going to people coming for the 
wedding but they will be Ministers.  So in terms of the timeline, if – and 
10 
also my intuition you can – I can actually argue that I learnt about it 
from the first meeting that was held at OR Tambo International Airport. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:   Yes and then in your assessment then, 
you knew that there were going to be Ministers and there was going to 
be a wedding party, did you regard that as a aircraft that could land at 
the Waterkloof Base? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     I do not have the right to 
decide whether an aircraft can land or not at the Waterkloof Air Force 
Base, I have indicated that there have been some instances where 
private planes have landed there so – but again it’s not in my 
20 
jurisdiction to decide whether – or in my, it wasn’t in my mandate to 
decide if a plane, private plane or not cannot land because as was 
stated 
also 
by 
the 
people 
from 
Defence 
that, 
under 
certain 
circumstances they do consider private planes to land there but  it’s not 
me who can make that decision. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 63 of 114 
 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes okay, ja you’re quite right you’ve 
already indicated that but let – just tell the Chair, if then all of this had 
to deal with Defence, Defence had to clear this, why was it necessary 
for you to call Mr Matjila? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     I think I indicated that one 
of the principle mandate for the Chief of State protocol is to mention 
the maintenance of cordial bilateral relationships by servicing every 
single diplomatic mission in South Africa and anytime when they have a 
problem they come – you are the first point of call and also if they’re 
creating a problem you’re the first one who (indistinct) the to come and 
10 
attend to it.  So the Indian High Commissioner called me because that 
is the protocol routine that they will have to follow and that’s why I 
called Mr Matjila. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  No but what was expected from DECO, 
when that call was made what was expected from DECO and why is it 
that you thought that you had to call Mr Matjila to deal with the 
process. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     I’m not sure, maybe I’m 
failing to express this madam but what’s expected from the Chief of 
Protocol is to follow-up and establish if there’s a problem and if so 
20 
what the problem is and I made an example also yesterday, that if 
somebody parks in front of the Embassy all the time, what’s expected 
of me is to call the diplomatic police and say, please can you attend to 
that matter and give me update once you’ve done so, so that I can 
make sure that I can confirm with the Embassy in question – the 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 64 of 114 
 
Ambassador in question.  So the role of protocol, basically is to make 
sure that whenever a diplomatic mission has a problem, and that he 
attends to it because some of these small nuisances can actually 
create unnecessary protocol tensions between two countries.  So every 
time they have a problem they will call the Chief of Protocol. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes, no, no I understand that but what I 
wanted to understand, you must remember you are dealing with the 
processes yesterday and today, you are saying that I wanted to say to 
them, look just check why is this process not moving, you know, what 
are the problems, but I want to understand at what point then, did you 
10 
say, DECO has done what it’s supposed to do it’s got nothing to do with 
us anymore and we all walk away.  At what point did you reach that – 
did you, at all, reach that stage or did you continue to make this whole 
flight issue a part of the State Protocol matter? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:   No, after I had spoken to Mr 
Ntshisi, I called the High Commissioner of India and I told him that I’ve 
spoken to Defence and they’ve promised me that they are looking into 
process – into  the processing of your application and that they will, 
apparently be getting in touch with the military attaché, I’m sure the 
matter will be attended to, however, if you’re not happy, please get 
20 
back to me and then he called me, I think, a day or two later and said, 
hey I forgot to tell you my brother, thank you very much we’ve got the 
flight clearance issued and that was – basically that was the end of 
dealing with it then.   
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  And then – so I take it that thereafter you 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 65 of 114 
 
never had any dealings with this aircraft? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     I did not have any dealings 
with the facilitation process at all. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Okay did you attend – did you go to 
Waterkloof on the date when this aircraft landed? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Yes I did. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Okay what were the reasons for you to go 
there? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     I got a call from the Indian 
High Commissioner saying – and also from Colonel Anderson if I’m not 
10 
mistaken, saying that the plane has landed and – I’d completely 
forgotten about it and – I was actually on the golf course and I just had 
to stop playing golf and go and see what was happening there and 
when I got there saw the many cars and many people had left already 
from what I was told but it was late when I already got there. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes.  And did you attend the wedding? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  No I did not. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Were you invited? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Yes I was. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes.  Then do you have any or even at 
20 
that time that is in 2013 around May or April did you have any relations 
with the members of the Gupta family as in being friends, as visiting 
each other? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I knew them because they 
attended most of – some of the functions that the President hosted.  
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 66 of 114 
 
For example the State of the Nation Address there used to be a 
traditional banquet dinner afterwards and the President would invite a 
number of guests from military veterans to family friends or businesses 
and my job of course was to make sure that I take care of all the guests 
of the President as part of my protocol expectations. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes.  Then – so now that your memory has 
been refreshed by the audio I take it that when you went through the 
report where it deals with your interactions with Colonel Anderson, your 
interactions with Warrant Officer Ntshisi you accept those as they are? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Correct. 
10 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Can I just take you back Ambassador. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To Exhibit FF3 that is the volume that has got your 
disciplinary hearing documents.  If you go to page 27 that is the 
chairpersons ruling there.  Excuse me.  It says at paragraph 4 – are 
you there? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  It says at paragraph 4 that the parties asked for 
the adjournment of the proceedings in order to deliberate among 
20 
themselves on the point raised by the employee.  I think the point you 
had raised was that the charges were split if I understand correctly.  Oh 
there – ja.  And then in paragraph 5 it says: ‘when the matter resumed 
the employee informed me that he is ready to plead to the charges as 
captured above with the exclusion of the facts and evidence in support 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 67 of 114 
 
of the charges.’  That is part of what you emphasised I think. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then in paragraph 6 it says: ‘the employee 
pleaded guilty to all three charges,’   Then the chairperson says: ‘I 
went through each charge in order to satisfy myself that the employee 
understand the elements of each of the charges.  The employee 
persisted with his guilty plea on each charge.’  You understand that? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Have you got any query with what the chairperson 
recorded there particularly in paragraph 6? 
10 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  No I do not except to 
indicate that earlier on when the Chair asked me 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I did indicate that the 
heading of the charges itself I agreed with that and I am not talking 
about the facts but I talk about the sub bullet points. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  But the actual [indistinct] 
charges. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes. 
20 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I agreed with that and where 
we had differed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Is in some of the  
CHAIRPERSON:  The factors. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 68 of 114 
 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Sub points under those 
charges. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  Yes I think there was another part which I 
wanted to draw your attention to.  Okay no I think I may have missed it 
now. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If I see it again we will talk about it.   
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  You may proceed. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes.  Thank you Chair.  Ambassador there 
10 
is also Exhibit FF2[b] you have mentioned to the Chairperson that were 
given a list of questions and you answered those questions.  This is 
part of the bundles that we received from the Public Protector.  FF – 
Exhibit FF2[b] Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Exhibit FF2[b]. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  FF2[b] yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  What page? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you.  Page 440 Chair.  They have 
started with the answers at page 435 but I just want the Ambassador to 
identify that these are in fact the questions that he was referring to.  At 
20 
page 440 there are questions for Ambassador Bruce Koloane.  Are you 
there Ambassador? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I am trying to get there. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Alright page 440.   
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Yes I am there now Ma’am. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 69 of 114 
 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you.  Are those the questions at 
page 440/441 that you were referring the Chairperson to? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Yes I think they are. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes.  So you received these from the DG’s 
because it has got – you have got – when you responded at page 435 
you mentioned Ms Sindane. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  At page 4? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  435 When you were dealing with your 
responses dated 14 May. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Is it in the same document 
10 
435? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Same, same, same yes.  435.   
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Ja. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Okay you have got Attention T N Sindane 
Director General Justice and Constitutional Development. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Hm. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes so these are the responses that you 
gave to those answers – to those questions. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Correct. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes.  Sorry I just want – Just a minute 
20 
Chair I am sorry I just want to get this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Correct.  20 out of 20.  And you were 
asked a question if you go to page 440.  Chair 440.  If I may direct your 
attention. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 70 of 114 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  To para – to page 20.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Excuse me. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Sorry Chair a note has just been brought 
to my attention that Mr Koloane’s legal representatives are complaining 
that they did not get the full Public Protector’s Report. But may I just 
establish whether these questions were furnished to them? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja just talk to counsel.   
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The two of you can talk and see if you can sort it out. 
10 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes, ys. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You can just talk to her. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  We are not complaining at this stage I just 
pointed it out. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Just the questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That you did not get the full report? 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  If something arises and I need to object. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:    I just noted my learned friend was a bit 
animated when I objected earlier. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  No, no that is alright. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  No thank you.  Thank you Chair, thank 
you.  Thank you. The question was asked who stated that the Ministers 
would be arriving.  That is at paragraph 20 of that question at page 440 
and then the question was – I take it that you had answered in the 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 71 of 114 
 
same format of the questions, is that correct? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Ja the answer was the Indian 
High Commission. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes alright.  And then – then you asked for 
example let us take the one question.  And then you asked at paragraph 
26, was Ambassador Koloane aware that Airbus A330 was given 
clearance to land?  And then your answer to that. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I said yes. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes.  Thank you.  28 – and then paragraph 
28 you were asked, who at the Indian High Commission asked 
10 
Ambassador Koloane for processing assistance?  What was the 
Ambassadors response?  What did Ambassador Koloane understand the 
request to mean?  And then what was your response to that question? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  The number 2 and the 28 
hey? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes,yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  The number 2 and I agreed 
that I will follow up to check what the cause of the delay was.  I 
understood the request to mean exactly what it meant.  Check with 
relevant authorities. 
20 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes who is number 2 that you referring to 
there? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  The Deputy – the number 2 
in charge in the embassy. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Yes. That would be the 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 72 of 114 
 
Indian Embassy? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Yes Ma’am. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes.  And then – and then there is 
question 30.  On all clearances the reason given is delegation why did 
departmental officials get the impression it was an official delegation?  
And then what was your answer to that question? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I am not sure I get the 
question however DIRCO protocol has the responsibility to facilitate 
arrival for Ministers, Heads of State and government and eminent 
persons even if they are in a country for private visits. 
10 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes.  So is it correct that on this – on 
these questions I would imagine because then you were not asked you 
did not volunteer any information other than to simply to respond to the 
questions that were put to you? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I am not sure whether I was 
supposed to volunteer anything Ma’am but I thought the instructions 
were clear to me. They were just saying we are going to send you 
questions and can you please provide an accurate response to all these 
questions.  So I just provided responses to the questions themselves 
that I answered. 
20 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes.  And this – your questions are dated 
14 May 2013 and the report that is FF1 the date on the report is 17 May 
2017. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Can you say that again 
Ma’am? 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 73 of 114 
 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  So your report – that is your answers. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Ja. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  To the questions.  Those answers are 
dated 14 May 2013. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Right. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes and the report that Ms Sindane 
testified to is dated the 17 May 2013. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Correct. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes.  So I am going back to what you 
testified to yesterday that you were not really given a hearing because 
10 
before you left a particular meeting you heard Mr Radebe making 
announcements on the findings. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I can help clarify that. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  If it will please the Chair. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  What I said is as follows:  I 
was invited – I submitted the answers to them in writing.  And then I 
was invited to a subsequent meeting by the same team of Ministers – of 
DG’s to come and provide clarity on some of the answers that I had 
20 
provided.  And I went to that meeting to provide clarity but when I 
walked out of that meeting after providing clarity Minister Jeff Radebe 
was already reading the report that had been compiled so I was 
wondering whether there was – it was an exercise in futility to ask me 
to come and provide clarity on the answers when walking out the 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 74 of 114 
 
Minister was already reading the report. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes.   
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  And secondly I also said if it 
will also help to please the Chair to mention this that I said there were 
four members according to what Ms Sindane herself said who 
constituted the JCPS team and I said that Mr Moyane never sat in any 
of those – of the meetings so I was not sure whether that did not in any 
way prejudice me that I was not given a chance to sit with them but 
secondly the answers I gave were not to the JCPS team although she 
was a member of the bigger team but the JCPS was a properly 
10 
constituted body of four people.  I would have expected that under 
normal circumstances they will also call the people and say, according 
to the report received from the DG’s this is what is being said, do you 
have anything to say?  Or this is what somebody else says which 
contravene or contradicts your testimony, do you have anything to say 
on that?  I was saying that exercise was never done and I felt that in 
terms of the rules of procedure one would have expected that that is 
what they would have done. Again it is an assumption.  Maybe they 
were told only take reports from others and do not bother to cross – to 
engage with them.  I do not know but I am saying I was just stating a 
20 
fact for the record that I never once got subjected to in front of the 
team of the four people who were members of the cluster I 
coincidentally interacted with them through other structures except of 
course for Mr Tom Moyane. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes.  But you would agree that this was 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 75 of 114 
 
interaction between you and JCPS team members, Ms Sindane in 
particular? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I would not say… 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  You were given questions. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Chair I would not say JPCS 
members because that was a NICOC – it was an extended NICOC team 
so I did not want to conflate the extended NICOC team with JCPS 
because she stated categorically that the JCPS team was chosen by 
Ministers and that those were four people only.  So the – I am not sure 
therefore how to relate to what you are suggesting Ma’am. 
10 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  What I am saying is there was a point 
when Ms Sindane whom we know was part of the JCPS cluster 
investigators where she had given you a list of questions and you 
responded to that list of questions. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I think maybe there must be 
context that is put into this because it presupposes that the JCPS 
cluster after meeting through the extended NICOC meeting then went 
on its own to set up the questions.  The questions were raised – all 
these questions were raised with me initially verbally in that extended 
meeting.  I then asked what was the legal status of the meeting 
20 
because I could look – I could see the pattern of the questions.  That 
was not in the JCPS cluster but it was in the extended NICOC meeting.  
And then they promised that they will give me those questions in 
writing.  They could have asked her to then do that but I am saying 
these are the questions which had emanated or which came up directly 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 76 of 114 
 
in the interaction between myself and the extended NICOC [indistinct]. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Okay.  But what is correct is that whoever 
gave you the questions you responded to those questions? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  That is correct. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you.  And in those questions 
you were dealing with the one issue which is the facilitation of the 
landing of the Waterkloof – at the Waterkloof base? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I was just dealing with the 
questions that I had been asked. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  yes. 
10 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Ja. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  And those questions related to that 
incident? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  No it is not because it also 
talks about the arrival phase. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  No but arrival of what Sir? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  I am saying Ma’am if you 
look at the questions and the answers. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  It is got questions which are 
20 
pre-arrival. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  And pre-arrival phase and 
then it has got questions which says arrival phase as well. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes but that is arrival of the aircraft at 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 77 of 114 
 
Waterkloof. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Correct so not only the pre-
arrival but it was the pre-arrival as well as the arrival phase. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes but the incident is one, is that 
correct?  It deals with the… 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Arrival of the aircraft yes 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  That is correct.  Thank you.  Okay.  Then – 
thank you if you could just take that away.  Thank you Chair I think we 
have – sorry – I think we have dealt with the questions on the matters 
that we wished to raise with the witness but there is one remaining 
10 
issue.  The audio transcript has not yet formed part of the evidence 
before you and we were hoping that we would ask for leave to play a 
five minute audio which relates to Ambassador Koloane because the 
other 22 minutes there is certain conversations there but we could 
listen to both because Major Ntshisi is present and the bulk of what is 
contained in the second audio relates to Major Ntshisi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am not sure what you are saying.  I expect that the 
recordings that we – that we have got which Ambassador Koloane and 
his legal team have listened to that they would be played, is there a 
problem with that? 
20 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  No Chair that is what I am requesting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes let us play them. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Thank you Chair. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 78 of 114 
 
[AUDIO RECORDING BEING PLAYED] 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  I am sorry Chair I think it is too loud. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja it might be too loud but we need to also indicate 
which conversation. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  It is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are starting with. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which one so that everybody knows which – who are 
10 
the participants in the conversations. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But do you need a five minutes adjournment to try 
and get the right level of audio? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you Chair we would appreciate that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which will make it … 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Audible. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Properly audible. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes Chair thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are going to adjourn for about five minutes to 
allow the legal team and technicians to find the right level of the 
volume so that we can hear the recording.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 79 of 114 
 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you.  Thank you Chair for the 
indulgence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you.  Chair … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Have you found the right level? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes Chair thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  I beg leave Chair to – to hand up a 
10 
transcript which was done last night of the first recording. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes which is recording number six and 
that is a conversation between Ambassador – I have given to the 
witness yes thank you – which is a conversation Mr Chairman between 
Ambassador Koloane and Major Ntshisi.  At the time he was a Warrant 
Officer. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The whole of this relates to that conversation? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  To that conversation.  That is correct 
Chair and may …? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you ask that it be marked as EXHIBIT FF13B? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  As – as.  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
The 
transcript 
of 
the 
conversation 
between 
Major Ntshisi and Ambassador Koloane will be marked as EXHIBIT 
FF13B. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 80 of 114 
 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  As – as Chair pleases thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you find the two pages that were missing? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Chair Mr De Beer will – will contact him as 
soon as we are finished.  He has made – he is looking for it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I wanted them before we finish. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  With – with the witness?  I will … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  I ask somebody to go over … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  To him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you Chair.  Yes may we then play 
…? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then play the recording. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us hear which one that is now.  That is between 
Ambassador Koloane and Warrant Officer Ntshisi – Major Ntshisi.  Is 
that correct? 
20 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
(Audio being played) 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 81 of 114 
 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is – is that the end of the conversation between the 
two? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes that is the end of the conversation.  
That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  And then the second conversation also is 
– it relates to Major Ntshisi and I think there is a bit between 
Major Ntshisi and Ambassador Koloane but on a very limited issue.  If – 
if you could continue with playing number seven. 
10 
(Audio being played) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that …? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  It continues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that the end of one? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes that – that one – sorry Chair.  Could 
you – could you just put it on hold, thank you.  Chair that was an 
interaction 
between 
Major Ntshisi 
and 
an 
assistant 
to 
Colonel Anderson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  He was – he was requesting to speak to 
20 
Colonel Anderson on that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  But he could not, yes thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  The next one will be who and who? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  The next one Chair - I hope my sequence 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 82 of 114 
 
is correct.  I think it is going to be between Major Ntshisi and 
Colonel Anderson because she returned then the call. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you. 
(Audio being played) 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you Chair.  Thank you Chair.  The 
next one is going to be a conversation between Ambassador Koloane 
and Major Ntshisi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you. 
10 
(Audio being played) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was that the last one? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  No, no Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The next one is between who and who? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  The next one Chair will be between 
Major Ntshisi and Captain Corty. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
20 
(Audio being played) 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you Chair.  The next one will be 
between 
Lieutenant General 
– 
Brigadier 
– 
I 
am 
so 
sorry 
– 
General Lombard and Major Ntshisi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 83 of 114 
 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you. 
(Audio being played) 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Chair I apologise.  That was between 
Major Ntshisi and Ambassador Koloane. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your mic is not on. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  I beg your pardon Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  That was between Ambassador Koloane 
and Major Ntshisi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  With Major Ntshisi reporting as to how far 
he is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja (intervenes). 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Then the next one Chair will be between 
Brigadier General Lombard and Major Ntshisi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
(Audio being played) 
ADV THANDI NORMAN 
SC: 
 
And 
Chair 
this 
will 
be 
between 
Major Ntshisi and a certain lady called Sarah – a certain lady called 
Sarah.  I think there is somewhere her surname.  (Indistinct) I think.  
20 
No, no it is not.  No it is just – just referred to as Sarah yes.  Thank 
you Chair. 
(Audio being played) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Have we not heard the relevant part? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes Chair but we could – this – this … 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 84 of 114 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Really is a personal conversation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja.  If we have heard the relevant part we do not 
need to hear personal stuff.  Okay.  If any of the relevant parties want 
to listen to the whole conversation then maybe they can do so but we 
have heard the relevant part. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  (Indistinct) transcript of – of the – the 
other conversations including the first one which was transcribed. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, your – your mic – your mic. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  I do not know why I keep on doing that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you.  Thank you Chair.  May this be 
handed in as FF13C and I will give to my learned friends a copy, thank 
you.  FF13C and then may the recordings be marked FF13A? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Take – take that. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why is this written interviews emergency and not 
conversation between somebody and somebody else? 
20 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  I have just noted that the transcribers that 
– that would be corrected Chair.  In fact I will ask the transcribers to do 
sort of an index to identify all the conversations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  This is a – this is a transcript of the conversation it 
seems between Major Ntshisi – then Warrant Officer Ntshisi and 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 85 of 114 
 
Colonel Anderson.  Is that right? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it will be marked as EXHIBIT FF13C? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  As Chair pleases. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you.  Chair, may we then adjourn 
for … 
CHAIRPERSON:  We … 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Take the long adjournment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are at 1 o’ clock … 
10 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I think we are closed to finishing with 
Ambassador Koloane. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If that is so I suggest we try and finish so that when 
we adjourn then we adjourn for the day. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Adjourn for the day.  Yes Chair thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  No thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would that suit you Ambassador? 
20 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  It will Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes … 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I am sure your counsel … 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Oh. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 86 of 114 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is happy with it as well. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you Chair, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Let us do that. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you Chair.  Maybe just one 
question Chair from our side.  Ambassador in the transcript as you 
listened to the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  You – you were also talk – you also said 
you were asking that the recording that the recording be marked 
(intervenes). 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Oh the audio – F … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  But where is the recording? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  The recording Chair will have to be given 
to the Registrar in a flash disk – in a memory stick. 
CHAIRPERSON:  When you do that … 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is when we will … 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  We will enter it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I will – I cannot enter something that is not here. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Alright, thank you.  Ambassador in the 
transcript between - the conversation between you and Major Ntshisi 
there is somewhere where he is saying that it is not possible – the 
transcript at page 5.  That is FF13B. 
“The challenge that I cannot put all the detail I am 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 87 of 114 
 
giving you in writing.” 
Was there a reason for not putting those details in writing? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  Yes ma’am.  I think before 
the recording I explained that I had wrongfully used the names of the 
Ministers and the President and I was not going to risk putting that in 
writing because I knew that it was wrongful misrepresentation basically. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:  And I have admitted that 
earlier on too. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes, thank you Chair.  I think – I think we 
10 
have covered most of the – of the areas we needed to cover with 
Ambassador Koloane, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the two pages that I have not got? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  The two pages, unfortunately they haven’t 
come to hand Chair, but I had requested that – because Mr De Beer 
apparently does not have them and then I’ve asked that they must just 
approach DIRCO with those. 
CHAIRPERSON:     There might well be something in those pages 
which might be relevant. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:     Which I might want to – might wanted to have 
raised with the witness. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Ambassador, Ms Norman suggested to you this 
morning, after you had given clarification of your evidence of yesterday, 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 88 of 114 
 
that it may not be true that when yesterday, you gave the evidence that 
you gave, with regard to mentioning the name of the President and the 
Ministers, it may not be true that you did not remember to the extent 
that your evidence may have suggested that you did not remember 
whether you had made those statements or not or she might have been 
saying in regard to some of those statements you actually denied 
having made them and she was suggesting if that was the case that it 
could not be true that you denied in the genuine belief that you did not 
make those statements.  I’m putting this in my own words but my 
understanding is that it reflects the gist of what she was saying, Ms 
10 
Norman am I right? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes that is correct chair, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:    You understood that suggestion from her? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Yes Chair I did and I found 
it to be her own or subjective assessment of the situation. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Yes. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Which cannot be backed 
up with any, you know, tangible evidence it’s all speculative, that’s 
what she thinks but I also indicated that when people go through very 
unpleasant experiences in their lives and they go through therapy, one 
20 
of the reasons is because they want to close that chapter and so some 
of those things don’t linger on for the rest of their lives and just for the 
record Chair, I also want to  indicate that it was myself, through my 
legal counsel who requested the recordings, it’s not that we were 
offered, we requested them because we wanted to refresh and despite 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 89 of 114 
 
the fact that the information contained therein incriminates me directly 
or puts me directly responsible in terms of trying to influence officials.  
We did not make an effort to try and postpone or do anything untoward, 
all we did is, we used that to jack up the memory and I didn’t come 
here to lie, I came here to tell the truth and that’s why thanks to the 
Chair, authorising that we be given that, I had the benefit of refreshing 
my mind through the use of a memory stick and I was able to provide a 
correction, that’s why I requested that in the beginning of the session.  
So I believe Chair that with all due respect, she is entitled to her 
opinion like I am as well entitled, on my own opinion on any other 
10 
matter but I will not, therefore want to give it any status in my 
assessment. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Well I think you have a good understanding of what 
she was saying as she was putting to you what, either she makes out of 
your evidence in that regard or what she could be saying, that’s how 
somebody else might look at it and you have indicated what your 
reaction is to that.  Now in the end, I must listen to all sides and look 
at all perspectives and make findings as to what the position is.  It is 
therefore important that I get your perspective and different perspective 
as clearly as possible.  So part of the questions I’m going to ask you 
20 
now – part of the reason is, I just want to make sure I understand your 
perspectives properly.  Now you would have known, I think we dealt 
with this, you would have known within weeks after the incident had 
happened, that the nation, through the media was being told that you 
made statements suggesting that the President of the country, at least I 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 90 of 114 
 
can’t remember what the Ministers had, had a role in this thing, do you 
remember that?  You would have known after a few weeks that, that’s 
what the media was saying is that right? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:     I guess that you would have also appreciated that 
in the disciplinary hearing the issue of your use of the names of the 
President and the Ministers was raised again, is that right? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:     And it ought to have been something that had an 
impact on you to know that if your version is true that the Ministers and 
10 
the President had never had a role in this thing, it ought to have been 
something that had an impact on you that he nation was being told that 
you made these statements that, for example, the President had a role 
and yet you knew that, that was not true and you knew that you had 
said that, is that correct? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:    Yes, I did Chair and I must 
also, again maybe reiterate that at that moment my confidence in the 
media had been eroded because they had made all sorts of allegations 
about me without any tangible evidence, an example was an allegation 
that the Gupta’s bought me a property for 6million dollars in Mauritius 
20 
and all sorts of things.  So I knew if I went to the same people who 
have been peddling lies like that, they were not going to publish an 
article which contradicts what they’re actually peddling and also, like I 
said, I had also just had too much of the media writing, I mean 
everything that – to be quite honest, the Chair will also be aware that 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 91 of 114 
 
before I even sat in some of the Committee meetings where I was 
asked questions, I had already been tried and found guilty in the 
media, it’s a method of common cause, everybody knows about that and 
all sorts of permutations were presented etcetera and that’s why I could 
not go to the media I do not – like I said I do not believe in playing in 
the public gallery but indeed – in hindsight, maybe I should have at 
least have written a letter or letters to the President and expressed my 
apology because I was just too scared or ashamed to go an approach – 
and see him in person and again, it’s something I may consider doing, 
now that the Chair has actually, you know, raised that with me belated 
10 
as it is, I will still at least endeavour to write the letters to the three, 
that is the President and the two Ministers to express my unwavering 
apology for what I had put them through.  I know it’s late, maybe even 
too late but at least to take heed of the Chair’s wise recommendation, I 
will definitely take that under consideration and I can assure the Chair 
that such letters will be drafted by myself and sent to them as an 
expression of apology but if they then say, no I must go and meet them 
in person, I will but right now I’m just too ashamed to even go sit and 
look at their faces. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Well I wasn’t making any recommendation that you 
20 
should do anything, I was just asking whether you ever considered 
anything like that because, on your version, the media was saying 
something that was true to the extent that it was saying, you had made 
statements that suggested that at least the President had a role, you 
knew that, that was true that you had made the statement but on your 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 92 of 114 
 
version you knew that no such statement had been – no such thing had 
been done by the President. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:   Chair maybe I must first 
apologise for saying you’re making recommendation, you were asking 
and I was saying from that I extrapolated that actually maybe it’s 
something I ought to be doing, so I do apologise for misrepresenting 
the  suggestion or the statement that you were making but as to the 
issue of what the media was saying Chair, I do fully concur that, you 
know, it was wrong of me to do it in the first place but what also got me 
even more concerned and worried is that every single thing that I was – 
10 
was in the newspapers were matters that I was discussing in a 
(indistinct) forum and if issues coming from (indistinct) start leaking to 
the media then the confidence you know starts being raised into 
question.  The highest security cluster in the country leaks things in 
less than 24hours after the meeting, you realise that, no matter what 
you do, or whatever you say, it’s going to fall onto dead wood because 
the mere fact that it leaked it was a deliberate thing that somebody 
from within that committee decided to leak that kind of information 
because I’ve never said it in a public forum, it was leaked when it was 
actually within the (indistinct) frame.  So for me the issue was, if the 
20 
institutions which you believe is the custodian of secrecy and all the 
norms and values that come with that, starts leaking information, it 
makes you wonder whether you can actually, you know, win or succeed 
if you even go make an effort to go talk to the media and that they 
could have accused me of trying to deal with the issue of the 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 93 of 114 
 
investigation through the public domain in the media.  So there were all 
those issues that I had to take into consideration, I’m not saying I’m 
justifying or I was right in so deciding but I’m explaining the 
circumstances under which I took a decision to just keep quiet and not 
talk to anybody, definitely not the media. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Now I heard of the – I heard of you giving evidence 
in the Commission, you had the opportunity of going through relevant 
documents that the Commission has, to refresh your memories, is that 
correct? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:    Yes some Chair, I did but 
10 
I’m not a legal brain so I’ve also been struggling to comprehend some, 
but I did identify the ones I thought might be relevant, so I didn’t go 
through all of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Yes would it be correct to say that after all the 
questions that you would have known that you would be asked one that 
is very prominent would be whether you had made those statements 
suggesting that the President and the two Ministers had played a role 
in regard to the landing of the aircraft. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:    Chair when I was talking to 
my legal counsel before I read any document, I just said to them, well I 
20 
believe that there are the things that the Commission wants to establish 
because there was an internal disciplinary process that took place on 
this matter so all I was doing was speculating about what else will the 
Commission be looking for, other than the issues that were dealt with 
already by the independent disciplinary committee which was chaired 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 94 of 114 
 
by some Advocate, I think from a bar somewhere in Pretoria which dealt 
with that.  So I didn’t focus too much on that, maybe it was my fault, I 
was trying to speculate what else will be something that they’re looking 
for. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Can I take it, from what you’ve just said that you 
did identify the documents relating to the disciplinary process that you 
went through as some of the documents that would be important for you 
to go through? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:   No Chair I didn’t because I 
thought that because the Commission also had access to that and they 
10 
will know that, that had taken place I thought that there was something 
over and above what transpire during that process that the Commission 
might have uncovered or wanted to raise with me because I didn’t come 
here with a preconceived idea of the questions that I’ll be getting and 
what the envisaged outcome from this exercise will be. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Well I take it that you would have said you want to 
be as ready as possible for any questions that you may be asked at the 
Commission in going through the documentation, is that not the 
position? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:      Yes that is correct Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:     And I would have thought that the documents 
relating to the disciplinary hearing would have been high on the list of 
documents that you would need to go through to refresh your memory in 
terms of what had transpired there, what did you say there or what was 
found by the Chairperson with regard to those charges. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 95 of 114 
 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:    Chair I think I had the 
benefit that my legal counsel had looked at those documents, so when I 
met with them, they did talk to some of those issues, so I then put 
priority into reading documents I had not seen before so that, at least, I 
will understand what is happening. 
CHAIRPERSON:     And the other documents that you talk about, would 
that have been the report of the justice cluster investigation team? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:    Correct Chair I went 
through the – because I’d never received it before, being contacted by 
the Commission, the report of the JCPS cluster, so I had to go through 
10 
that as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:     You went through that report? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:   Yes I did Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and the report of the – the report and documents 
relating to the SANDF Board of inquiry, did you also go through those? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:   Chair those I got very late 
and my legal counsel had looked at them so we just had a discussion 
around some of the contents of that internal inquiry or Board that was 
conducted in Defence yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes now when you went through the justice cluster 
20 
investigation team report, of course you would have come across that 
part of the report to which Ms Norman drew your attention yesterday 
where it was suggested that Mr Ntshisi had said you said to him that 
the President had a role to play in this – in regard to the issue of the 
request for clearance and the landing of the report and that the two  
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 96 of 114 
 
Ministers – that Minister Ben Martins had been instructed to assist and 
that the Minister of Defence had no objection.  You saw that part as you 
were preparing? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Yes I did Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Yes and are you saying when you saw that part, you 
still did not recall that in fact, you had invoked the names of the 
President and the two Ministers in order to put pressure on officials of 
the Department of Defence to either expedite the process or grant the 
request? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Chair  I was not sure, I 
10 
was wondering whether I did or I didn’t because there are certain 
things, like any society there are certain cultural or social practices 
that tend to dominate and when you are talking to some of your friends 
you speak differently in terms of what you say and how you say it 
compared to when you’re talking to somebody who’s a total stranger 
and like I indicated before I had never ever in my life, met or seen Mr 
Ntshisi so it was the first time that I spoke to him telephonically that 
day when I made the enquiry.  So it was in my head like, could you 
have said this to someone who’s a total stranger and that’s why I was 
not certain Chair, whether I actually said it and that’s why I’d requested 
20 
my legal counsel that we request the audio recording so that we’ll be 
able to jack our memory. 
CHAIRPERSON:     And did it not occur to you that in the disciplinary 
hearing one of the allegations had been that you had invoked these 
names to try and put pressure on the officials of the Defence 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 97 of 114 
 
Department and did it not occur to you, to go back to that 
documentation and say, let me see what I said or what was said here? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Well I might have just 
browsed through some of these but like I was saying, Chair,  I thought 
through the question section I might remember some of the things but I 
think my principle focus was attending more to new documents that  I’d 
never ever come across because I thought it would be extremely 
prejudicial if – to myself if I did not read the files, the thick file of 
documents that I’d never ever come across in my life and focus my 
attention more on the documents that, at least had crossed my desk 
10 
before.  So it could have been a miscalculation on my side but I just 
didn’t want to come to you and the Commission in front of you Chair 
and the Commission and not have had a chance of even at least having 
a glance at some of the documents in question. 
CHAIRPERSON:     You didn’t think it would be prejudicial to not go 
through the documents relating to, for example, the disciplinary 
hearing, see what was said there and what you said, you didn’t think it 
would be prejudicial for you not to do that and then give an answer that 
might turn out not to be what you had said? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Chair, again, I just want to 
20 
indicate that when we made my opening remarks yesterday I did 
indicate that we wanted to give full cooperation to this Commission and 
I further indicated that unfortunately we received the bulk of 
documentation very late and Chair if you look at all the files that we 
have been given yourself, that have also been given and I’ve only had a 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 98 of 114 
 
few days, literally to look at – I could have create – appealed for at 
least justification through my legal counsel to have this session 
extended by another whatever, it could have to allow me to go over the 
documents accurately, but because I also had the benefit of the legal 
counsel I agreed to cooperate and for somebody whose not a legal 
brain, having to go through all of these documents I can assure you 
Chair, and you know it yourself it’s a mammoth task and in the number 
of days that I’ve spent here because Wednesday and Thursday I spent 
my days right inside the session listening to the session, so effectively 
I only had a Friday and part of Saturday with my legal counsel to 
10 
engage on these issues but still I have said to my legal counsel and 
they have also wisely advised me that they do not believe that it’s wise 
for me to want to  appeal for an extension so that we can – for 
whatever reason and despite the shortcoming.  So that we had 
identified and that’s why we came for – and I’m trying to explain that 
Chair because if you look at the files and the number of documents I’ve 
had to go through I think even people who are students studying, if you 
give them all of these documents and want them to pass an example in 
the same period of tie that I’ve been, it will really be very unfair on 
them. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:     Well I just want to emphasise again I’m asking you 
all of these questions because it’s important for me to understand 
various perspectives, what’s possible, what could have happened, what 
could have made you give certain answers and so on.  So to be fair to 
you but to be fair to whoever might be thinking of something different or 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 99 of 114 
 
a different interpretation to yours.  So I – one of the things that was 
said by Warrant Officer Ntshisi in the conversation in the recording that 
we listened to – one of the things that you said to him, as I recall, is 
that this case was a unique case, you remember that? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Yes I do Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Yes why – what was unique about this case? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     I think I tried to respond to 
that question earlier Chair, but I’ll …(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:     Yes you did but I just to…(intervention). 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     And Chair, what I was 
10 
saying was for me there was a question in my head of saying is this 
just sheer coincidence or is there a correlation because not too long, in 
February they had – we had been called to a meeting wherein the 
Guptas indicated they wanted to land in OR Tambo, where, in the 
presence of the Minister of Transport, CEO of ACSA and myself where 
we advised against it and they indicated in that meeting it’s because 
they were going to be having a wedding reception and again when the 
application from the High Commissioner of India was sent to – directed 
to Defence, they did not hide that they were actually going to be 
hosting these people for a wedding reception but that they had 
20 
Ministers on board who were coming.  So for me – that’s why I thought 
there’s far too much coincidence here and that’s why, earlier, I admitted 
that maybe I failed in my duties because I should have advised 
somebody senior in the Department and say, look, whilst I’m not saying 
grant or not grant but this is my observation and at least share that 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 100 of 114 
 
information with them. 
CHAIRPERSON:     My understanding is that you may have said this is 
a unique case to suggest that whatever may be – they have been his 
understanding whether in this type of situation you should grant or 
refuse, this is a case which he needed to treat with special 
considerations, is my understanding of what was meant by unique case 
correct? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     I’ll say to a certain degree 
yes it is correct because like I said earlier Chair that I also wanted, not 
only for him to process but also I was hoping that it will be a successful 
10 
processing of that application. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Well I was going to go to that aspect of hoping, it 
may be that when I review all the evidence at some stage, look at your 
evidence, look at the evidence of Major Ntshisi, look at what was 
recorded and listen to it again and look at the evidence of other 
witnesses, it may well be that I have to ask myself the question, 
whether your case is a case where when you said yesterday in regard 
to certain statements that you could no longer remember whether you 
made them or not, whether this was a case where you genuinely could 
not remember or did not remember or whether it was a case of 
20 
somebody who was hoping that there would be nothing that could 
contradict him and if there was nothing, that’s how it would stay but 
once he saw or he had the recordings he then realised that this could 
not work.  So I may have to look at which one of the two the position is, 
you understand? 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 101 of 114 
 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Yes I do understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Yes and I’m just mentioning that, part of why I’m 
asking these questions is to try and make sure that I have your full 
perspective, your side of the story and with regard to saying, this is a 
unique case I get the impression that it was more the result that you 
were looking at, a favourable result but you have emphasised a number 
of times that your focus was on the process but you have said, there 
was hope the result would be a positive one. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:    You understand and that’s where you stand? 
10 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Yes I understand exactly 
what the Chair is saying and I also hope that the Chair will take into 
account the timing of when myself and my legal counsel were provided 
with all the documents we had to go through and look at the bulkiness 
of that to also appreciate that, for somebody like myself who’s not a 
legal brain, I want to repeat, going through all of these files plus the 
three that are here and all of this, it’s a difficulty and that I did Chair 
want to appear before the Commission so that – because when the 
Commission invited me, the first one letter was just basically saying I 
must come and listen to the testimony of  Ms Sindane so that I can 
20 
exercise my right to question her or cross-question or cross-examine of 
course following the procedure as was explained to me by legal counsel 
that had to be followed to request such and all of that and that’s what I 
understood I was suppose to come and do and then two days before 
flying in I got another correspondence saying that I have to come to – 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 102 of 114 
 
two or three days I can’t remember,  that I actually have to come and 
testify but it all happened within – the correspondence was all within a 
week of each other and I know that my legal counsel also wrote to the 
Commission to try and clarify what – I don’t know is it rule 303 or 
whatever the case may be, what it means and the references and – so 
there was that to and fro in terms of communication.  So the actual 
process of starting to really prepare for coming down, happened, for me 
Chair, effectively on Tuesday – no on Monday afternoon when I got an 
email saying, cay you confirm which airport you fly from, from where 
you stay to Johannesburg do you need transport to pick you up, that 
10 
was on Monday, I responded in the afternoon, I got a ticket saying, 
tomorrow you’re flying in.  So I was flying in on Tuesday, arrive here 
Tuesday evening, Wednesday and Thursday I was sitting here in this 
very same room listening to the other testimonies.  So all of that also 
took away the time I could have utilised to go through some of the 
documentation myself but I just thought I must put that on record as 
well so that the Chair will be aware that, whilst I’m not in any way 
insinuating that the Commission is not fair, but I’m just raising issues 
which were worrisome issues for me when I considered everything else 
and – which almost promoted me to pursued my legal counsel to 
20 
consider requesting a postponement but in hindsight I also thought that 
the national duty and some of the important conferences that is going 
on, starting from tomorrow, effectively, where – which are very critical 
for the work we do, also in security council etcetera, I thought, you 
know, we would not also want to come with an unreasonable request to 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 103 of 114 
 
the Chair and say we want a month or two month extension because 
that will appear as though we’re running away from seeing the 
Commission conduct it’s business properly and efficiently and finishing 
as and when they would like to.  So that’s why we agreed and again I 
must admit, my legal counsel also wisely advised me that it may be to 
my best interest, nor to their best interest either, that’s why we’re here 
but we just thank the Chair for giving us all the recordings – for 
authorising to get the recordings because they helped, they were very 
helpful. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Thank you, Ms Norman. 
10 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:   Chair I apologise…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:     Anything arising? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:   Yes Chair just to put – because I think it’s 
only fair to place this before the Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Yes. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:   These are notes that relate to a meeting 
that Ambassador Koloane had with the investigators for the Commission 
at the Haig on the 29 t h of May 2019.  I’m just thinking, there’s three 
matters which he might want – which are matters that are in the public 
domain which he might want to comment on, you know, with your leave 
20 
Chair, I beg leave to just – it will – it shouldn’t take more than five 
minutes to do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Okay. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:   Thank you, Ambassador is it correct that 
you had a meeting with some of the investigators from the Commission 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 104 of 114 
 
on the 29 t h of May 2019 at the Haig? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:     Yes it is. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    Yes and your counsel has confirmed that 
a copy of the notes that the team made from that meeting was made 
available to you? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:   Correct. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    Thank you, I beg leave Chair to hand up 
the notes and I ask that they’re marked Exhibit FF14.  I just want to 
draw your attention – thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:    The document appearing to be notes made when 
10 
certain investigators of the Commission, which looks like Mr (indistinct) 
and Mr Lionel Groenewald interviewed Ambassador Koloane on the 29 t h 
of May 2019, that document will be marked as Exhibit FF14. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    As the Chair pleases, thank you Chair.  
Ambassador because these are matters that are out there in the public 
domain and I think it’s fair that you must comment, you had commented 
to the investigators and gave them your version on those allegations 
that were put.  I’d like to direct your attention to page 14 paragraph 
54…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:    I’m sorry are you referring to the same Exhibit? 
20 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    Same – I beg your pardon, yes Chair 
Exhibit FF14 and then the page Chair is page 14. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    Thank you Chair, and then paragraph 54, 
you answered a question there Chair – Ambassador where you aske 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 105 of 114 
 
about allegations which were in the press relating to negotiating 
business deals on behalf of the Guptas and KPG Greenhouses whilst 
you were still occupying that position as the Ambassador in the 
Netherlands, could you just briefly tell the Chair what your response 
was to that question? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:    Yes Chair, I was asked the 
question and I confirmed that, indeed one of the Gupta associates or 
Gupta related companies wrote to me or to – on my capacity as 
Ambassador and asked if I knew of a company called KPG Greenhouses 
because they’re interested to have a meeting and can I assist them in 
10 
setting up a meeting and they’ll send me the information about the 
company because I didn’t know the company and one of the duties of 
Ambassadors Chair is that we service all South African citizens 
irrespective of race, gender, colour, religion or creed or any particular 
affiliation.  So since the Guptas had then, I don’t know whether that 
status has changed now, they were also bone fide South Africans, I had 
a responsibility not to discriminate but to ask my team to assist in 
setting up that meeting for them and that meeting was arranged for 
them and they went to meet with the particular company and 
subsequent to that, because agriculture is one of our key sectors that 
20 
we’re focusing on in the Netherlands, I’ve also arranged meetings for 
other people to go to the same company so there was no exclusivity 
afforded to them.  When the – I did not go with the Guptas for that 
meeting – to the Gupta (indistinct) to that meeting but when the, then 
MEC for Economic Development in Eastern Cape MEC Somyo came to 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 106 of 114 
 
visit the Netherlands together with the CEO of Eastern Cape 
Development Corporation and some other members of the Board, and 
they told us they’re also interested in the agricultural space we also 
arranged meetings for them and also went with them to that meeting 
and we subsequently facilitated that, that same company come and visit 
them in the Eastern Cape in (indistinct) and they even – MEC Somyo 
assisted them to identify potential raw material suppliers that they’ll 
require in the processes but there’s also other companies, I think about 
five or six companies that we have actually linked with them because 
Agri business and Hydroponics is one of the centres we were interested 
10 
in. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    Yes thank you and then in paragraph 60 
you were also asked about the coal asset at Mpisi near Empangeni. 
Could you just explain to the Chair what that was all about? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:   Chair that was nothing else 
but just an introduction, there is a gentleman – I come from Northern 
Natal I know my surname, Koloane could be deceiving and people may 
think I’m from Limpopo but I’m not and having grown up in KZN I know 
a lot of people there and some of them happen to be in the business 
space and one of the guys who knew me told me that he has a coal 
20 
asset and that he has done a lot of geological report and survey or 
geological survey and he’s now looking for potential investors and he 
had seen me talking to one of the Gupta members when we were having 
the State of the Nation Address banquet dinner and he asked if I could 
introduce him to him or introduce him to them so that they could 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 107 of 114 
 
consider whether they would invest with him in the business or not and 
that’s exactly what I did, just introduction. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    Yes thank you and then again you were 
asked about allegations of arranging for private accommodation for two 
friends at the Gupta’s luxury Clifftop Lodge. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:    Correct, I did there is – I 
was – I’ve been privileged Chair to serve government in different 
capacities in my young life, one of them was that I was working in 
Japan as the Minister for Economic Cooperation basically charge with 
promoting trade and investment market excess issues etcetera in Japan 
10 
and when I was there I interacted with a lot of people of course also in 
the same space and there was a lady and her partner who were also 
there at the time doing their -  I think it’s part of their MBA Exchange 
Programme that we were working with.  So we became very good 
friends and one day – and we have been in touch, ever since with them 
and when she sent me an email saying, no we’re looking at going to 
South Africa we want to go to a safari and I remembered that, oh by the 
way, the Guptas had at some stage at one of these events offered they 
told me that they’ve got one of the best lodges and I said to them, well 
can you please write to these people and consider if, you know, you 
20 
could go there, ask them what are the prices and also I said to the 
Guptas I’ll be happy if you give them a good rate. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    Yes and then lastly Ambassador the 
allegations that you solicited golf sponsorship from the Guptas for your 
wedding anniversary. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 108 of 114 
 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:    No it’s a lie that it’s on my 
wedding anniversary.   Every year, except last year, for the last say, 
10/11 years I’ve been doing charity golf tournament in my small 
hometown called Pietermaritzburg and all I do is, I write to all the 
people that I know have got businesses and I write, not only to one, I 
write to many people to see if anybody will be willing to provide a 
sponsorship, unfortunately they did not come to the party. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    Yes and then just lastly, Chair, if I may 
just refer the Ambassador to Exhibit FF5, the email that makes 
reference to the wedding party, I wouldn’t want a situation where 
10 
there’s an allegation that you made no reference to your wedding 
anniversary, at least you clarified that before we part ways.  It’s FF5, 
it’s an email – sorry at page 252, thank you.  Is that – do you recognise 
that email? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:    Yes I do. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    Okay and it’s dated the 29 t h of January 
2016, what do you say there to Ashu – it was Ashu Tjwala, is that 
correct? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:    That, “this year marks 20 
years 
since 
I 
married 
my 
wife 
and 
(indistinct) 
December 
in 
20 
Pietermaritzburg on my celebration”. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    Yes as part of? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:    Can I read again? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    Yes, yes sir. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:   “As part of my celebrations” 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 109 of 114 
 
I said.  
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    Yes could you just read the entire email. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:   “This is besides the party I’ll 
have at home with family, I’m writing to you to request your support in 
sponsoring some prizes that I could use during the golf tournament.  
Should you be in a position to help any indication of type of prizes you 
might be able to sponsor, will help in the (indistinct).  I look forward to 
hearing from you”. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    Yes so this tournament was linked to 
your celebrations for your wedding? 
10 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:    I could have said that 
because it was coinciding with that, but general I’m just saying I’m 
going this golf tournament for the last 11 years or except for the last 
two years, I think last year or two where I’ve been doing them every 
year for a charity benefiting some of the people who stay in what you 
call the drop centre where it’s – there’s a place in my township where 
you’ve got people who are – often because of HIV and aids and 
whatever money we raise from there we then go and pay the 
supermarket and the butchery that they supply the with food every week 
or every second week, because if we give people the money, somebody 
20 
says they’re looking after the interest of the people and they use it.  So 
it’s – for me it’s because I do it every year, except for the last two 
years because the state of the – the weight of the rand has been very 
weak. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    Yes so it has not incorrect therefore to 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 110 of 114 
 
say it was linked to your wedding anniversary celebrations? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:    Well you can say that. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:    Yes thank you, thank you very much 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Just one last thing Ambassador, in the conversation 
that Colonel Anderson had with Warrant Officer Ntshisi, among other 
things she said if DIRCO approves the visit then you – I’m putting it in 
my own words, you can grant, you should grant clearance you 
remember that part in the recording? 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:    Yes I do Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes I note that there she talks about, if DIRCO 
approves and my mind goes back to that email from your PA saying 
Ambassador Koloane has telephonically approved. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:    Chair again, I may just want 
to reiterate that protocol does not approve visits that are incoming or 
outgoing because that is the principle domain of line function so the 
approval will not come from protocol but will come from the relevant 
Minister, if there’s a  Minister who want to visit, of agriculture from 
another country then our Minister of Agriculture will have to consent on 
the dates and then we communicate that information to the Embassy 
20 
and once they confirm the timing of arrival etcetera, the commercial 
airline, we facilitate protocol officers to assist at the – through the 
protocol lounge at OR Tambo or if it’s Waterkloof again, we activate 
accordingly but the actual approval – and I can only say for me it’s a 
misunderstanding of the internal workings of how DIRCO operates but 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 111 of 114 
 
definitely the approval does not come from protocol because we do not 
deal with the substantive issues and we therefore can’t say, yes come, 
when we don’t deal with those kind of issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:    But I think you may have said in your evidence 
earlier that there would be other sections of DIRCO which is supposed 
to approve. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:    Yes Chair, those sections is 
what I referred to as the various branches we have in DIRCO a branch 
that deals with Africa and then we run the deals with Asia and the 
Middle East on bilaterals.  Another one dealing with Europe and then 
10 
another dealing with America, besides the one that deals with 
multilateral issues.  So if a visitor is coming from Latin America the 
DDG who heads the branch America, and Latin America will be the one 
who will then be ultimately responsible for receiving or sending that 
note verbale which confirms that but it doesn’t come from protocol and 
they don’t send it through protocol either, they communicate directly 
with the Embassy’s and the only time we get involved, therefore is 
when we have to implement the actual logistical arrangements. 
CHAIRPERSON:    No thank you very much.  Thank you very much 
Ambassador for coming to give evidence, you are now excused. 
20 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:    Thank you Chair will I be 
allowed also Chair to – seeing that there is already a precedent set will 
I also be allowed to fly out tonight back to my mission in the 
Netherlands and of course avail myself for any future inquiries be they 
in an email form or otherwise? 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 112 of 114 
 
CHAIRPERSON:    No thank you, you may fly out this evening if there’s 
anything the Commission will be in touch with you and as you indicate 
you will cooperate. 
AMBASSADOR VUSI BRUCE KOLOANE:    Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Thank you very much. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you Chair, that will be the last 
witness for the day but Chair we are not closing Waterkloof and we will 
indicate to the Chair, maybe in chamber as to what else needs to be 
done. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Well I did indicate that I’d like Major Ntshisi to be 
10 
recalled. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes Chair there’s just a slight complication 
which we’ll explain to you in chambers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No that’s fine it might not be – it might not 
necessarily be tomorrow but I think I would like to have him recalled to 
the witness stand so that he can clarify certain aspects of his evidence 
but I also want to know what is the position with Colonel Anderson? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Chair we were advised by the 
investigators that Colonel Anderson is – now lives in Botswana and she 
was represented by – at some point by Griesel  Attorneys and then, I 
20 
think a couple of weeks ago, those attorneys indicated to the 
Commission that if you want to make contact with her we must do so 
directly and then a letter was written to them asking about their 
mandate and whether their mandate has terminated.  I have not 
followed upon that Chair but …(intervention). 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 113 of 114 
 
CHAIRPERSON:    But why was a letter asking – sent asking whether 
their mandate had terminated when they said write directly to her? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  That was the very reason Chair because 
you can’t represent someone and then later on you say to the 
Commission, we’ll direct these correspondence to her it’s either they 
act or they don’t.  
CHAIRPERSON:    If they won’t accept correspondence relating to her 
it means that they give permission. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  No Chair but…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:    Go directly. 
10 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  They had meetings with the Commission 
which dealt with the issues that related to Colonel Anderson. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes but what I’m saying is, if they represented her 
and they say from now on write directly to her, they are saying we have 
no further communication we are not going to be communicating with 
you on her behalf but anyway where is the process of establishing 
whether she can come and give evidence? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Chair from what they had indicated to the 
Commission at the time when they said they were representing her they 
said she was not prepared to come but then we need to follow up on 
20 
what I – because we’ve been engaged with the hearings we have not 
followed up to see how far that process is. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Okay if that – ja if that could be followed up that 
would be important. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes Chair. 
09 JULY 2019 – DAY 129 
 
Page 114 of 114 
 
CHAIRPERSON:    Okay not that’s alright. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:    That’s where we end for today. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:    And tomorrow it’s evidence relating to I think, is it 
Transnet? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  I think my colleague Sello is leading 
evidence tomorrow yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Okay alright, we are going to adjourn the 
proceedings now and tomorrow we’ll start at 10 o’clock, we adjourn. 
10 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 10 JULY 2019 
