 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
10 JULY 2020 
 
 
DAY 231 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757 
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 294 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
10 JULY 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 3 of 294 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 10 JULY 2020 
CHAIRPERSON: Did you know where that comes from?  
[Indistinct 00:00:59] do you know where that comes from?  
Because in the media briefings that I have seen with 
government 
ministers 
they 
have 
been 
sharing 
the 
microphone.  The Premier and the MEC’s the only difference 
has been that after everyone has used the microphone 
somebody would come and I think clean or whatever so that 
we know where that come from because one must careful 
about too many advices. 
10 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Indeed, Mr Chair it was just conveyed to 
me I cannot really recall if you were to ask me who the 
person was, I will try to recall as trying to find my seating 
arrangements at that stage. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I think it is fine in the meantime are 
you – whoever gave that advice I want to know where they 
get it from.  Because we cannot just be chopping and 
changing because somebody that they ask – so that should 
be enough on a certain issue. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am not a medical doctor, I am not – I rely 
on advices but all along there? that might – can be shared 
provided somebody comes and cleans up after every 
speaker. 
 ADV MASUKU SC:  Yes. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 4 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – but I am quite happy that for – for 
now until we know what the source of that advice is, I am 
quite happy that we – you do what you are comfortable with.  
So I will allow that we do what we are comfortable with and 
that therefore if [indistinct 00:02:53] more comfortable to 
address me from the position where they are I will – I will 
allow that and arrangements will be made to try and 
establish this advice that you have been talking about. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So if you are comfortable there?  Ja okay 
10 
alright. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Thank you Mr Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I was told – I was told that in last week or 
the week before I cannot remember – last week I think that 
the advice was that we could take off our masks whilst 
speaker.  Mr Vassan told us that so I wanted to know the 
source of that advice and he told me and I think you are right 
from Doctor? that he said it comes from the World Health 
Organization.  So – although I am comfortable with that 
source. Most of the time I kept my – my mask except when I 
20 
am speaking.  So I am just sharing that information. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With you. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Thank you Chair.  Chair this is the 
application that was brought by Mr Fuzile to cross-examine 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 5 of 294 
 
Mr Des Van Rooyen.  Just by way of some background Mr 
Fuzile had in fact had in a witness who had testified and 
implicated Mr Van Rooyen in respect of Terms of Reference 
1.8 of the Commission’s Terms of Reference.  In response Mr 
Van Rooyen brought an application for Leave to Cross-
examine Mr Fuzile.  That application was in fact granted and 
pursuant to that Mr Van – Mr Fuzile in turn brought an 
Application for Leave to Cross-examine Mr Van Rooyen.  
That is the application before you.  Mr – we as the 
commission may you have something to say once we have 
10 
heard the submissions that have been made on behalf of the 
– of the applicant Mr Fuzile in this matter but for present 
purposes we would ask that Mr Van – Mr Fuzile’s – Mr 
Fuzile’s representative to address you.  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Counsel for Mr Fuzile. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   And if I could be so bold Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Okay. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  They have prepared a bundle of 
authorities that has been relied or will be relied upon. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV MASUKU SC:  But I think by the Counsel for Mr Fuzile 
if I could beg leave to hand this up? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Counsel for Mr Fuzile. 
ADV HASSIM:  May it please the Chair.  I appear for Mr 
Fuzile together with my colleague Ms Raja. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 6 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  If I may let me hear who appears for Mr 
Van Rooyen for the record before you proceed. 
ADV MASUKU:  Together with Mr Mathipa I appear for Mr 
Van Rooyen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV 
MASUKU: 
Chair 
Mr 
Mathipa 
will 
address 
the 
commission on the – on Mr Van Rooyen’s submissions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you – thank you.  That is Mr Masuku 
for the record.  Counsel for Mr Fuzile. 
ADV HASSIM:  Thank you Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me just indicate my prima facie view so 
that you address it head on.  On the face of it it does seem 
to me that Mr Van Rooyen’s point that he can only be 
granted Leave to Appeal if you are an implicated person 
appears to be good in terms of the rules.  And as I – as I see 
if subject to argument it seems to me that the reference in 
the rules to an implicated person must be a person 
implicated in terms of the Terms of Reference of the 
Commission.  So in other words, somebody who is implicated 
in terms of activities which fall within the Terms of Reference 
20 
of the Commission.  It seems to me that it might not have 
been intended to mean somebody who – who says you are 
not being truthful about something that you have said.  Now I 
may have missed something that I did not see anything in Mr 
Van Rooyen’s affidavit which implicates or can be said to 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 7 of 294 
 
implicate Mr Fuzile in any of the activities that would fall 
within the Terms of Reference of the Commission.  It seems 
to me that what Mr Fuzile complains about is simply that Mr 
Van Rooyen denies his version of what happened and from 
that point of view maybe Mr Fuzile says by implication you 
saying I am – I was untruthful to the commission.  You might 
be able to alert me to something in the papers that I might 
not have picked up but that is my prima facie view and – but 
I am quite happy to hear your submissions. 
ADV HASSIM:  Thank – thank you Chair.  Perhaps let me 
10 
start by saying that there are three issues.  We understand 
the submissions of Mr Van Rooyen in this regard and as 
summarised by the Chair a moment ago.  We are of the view 
that the rules and regulations of this commission are in 
relation to applications such as this are broader than just in 
relation to an implicated witness.  So I would like to address 
the Chair on two things whether or not Mr Fuzile is an 
implicated witness which we have indicated in the replying 
affidavit we longer persist with that leg that he was an 
implicated witness and I will explain how that came about.  
20 
And the second is that it need not matter for the purposes of 
our application but he is not an implicated witness.  Because 
the rules and the regulation are broad enough to encompass 
the discretion of this Chair to grant the application that is 
sought by Mr Fuzile. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 8 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HASSIM:  So [indistinct 00:10:01] how I will address 
the question that you have specifically put to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I see that they did not bring my files 
with the rules and the regulations here.  Yes thank you. 
ADV HASSIM:  Chair [indistinct 00:10:23] to step back we – 
you – I ? argument without this address so at service before 
you I do not intend to go through the list of arguments.  What 
is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you do that can I check with you 
10 
how much time would be enough for your address and I do 
so because it is important that we – we do not take too long 
but at the same time we must do justice to each one who 
wishes to address me.  Fifteen minutes? 
ADV HASSIM:  That will be appropriate Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV HASSIM:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV HASSIM:  So Chair propose not to go through the 
heads of argument. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes no that is fine. 
ADV HASSIM:  This written submission that – and they are 
before you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HASSIM:  My proposal was to address you on the 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 9 of 294 
 
following talks and I managed to change this around if it 
would suit the Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HASSIM:  The first is on the issue of condonation to the 
extent that you wish to me on that – to get that out of the 
way.   
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no I do not wish to hear you on 
condonation. 
ADV HASSIM:  Thank you Chair then I will – that will save 
some time.  The second topic then which will now become 
10 
the first topic is what it is exactly that Mr Fuzile is seeking 
and not seeking.  Quite importantly I think it is necessary for 
us to change by the narrow requests that is in fact before the 
commission.  The second topic would then be the legal 
principles upon which Mr Fuzile bases his application.  The 
third is that the request that Mr Fuzile makes is not 
unprecedented in the commissions of inquiry and the final 
topic will be that it is in the best interest of the function of 
the commission to grant the application.   
 
On the first topic if I may say the following:  When 
20 
the application was first brought and Chair will recall that 
was brought on the 2 March 20189 more than a year ago.  At 
that [indistinct 00:12:36] time Mr Fuzile had been [indistinct 
00:12:36] read a statement by Mr Van Rooyen.  It – it 
seemed from the understanding of the rules and from the 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 10 of 294 
 
initial reading of the statement that it may be that Mr Fuzile 
is implicated and so the application was partly based on the 
rules as they apply to an implicated witness including that it 
needed to be filed within a certain period of time if you wish 
to make representations as an implicated witness.  But it 
was not limited to that basis.   
The rules that were cited in the initial application 
went beyond that to the rights of witnesses to legal 
representation in regulation 8 and in the rules that provide 
for legal representation and the rule’s discretion that resides 
10 
within the Chairperson of the commission.   
So using that second – that second aspect that we 
will stop the application it is not on the basis that Mr Fuzile 
is an implicated witness as understood and as has been the 
practice of this commission that is why we had learnt even 
more over the last year exactly how the procedure works and 
we are not relying on that provision that Mr Fuzile is an 
implicated witness.  We agree that he is not.   
So it is better for me to stress then what it is that 
makes this application and what it is that Mr Fuzile is not 
20 
seeking to assure the Chair of any concerns you may have 
with regard to the rules but also procedure and the 
practicalities.   
 
The first thing is he is not seeking to become an 
ongoing participant in this proceedings.  I am aware that 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 11 of 294 
 
there have been applications before the Chair in previous 
months and years in the commission for [indistinct 00:14:32] 
in the proceedings.  That is not what Mr Fuzile seeks.   
 
He has come to the commission and this application 
is based in terms of paragraph 1.8 of the Terms of Reference 
of this Commission.  That is what brought Mr Fuzile here.  
He 
was 
a 
willing 
participant 
in 
order 
to 
assist 
the 
commission.  His need to request provide the evidence 
because he would be Director General of National Treasury 
at the time of the heads that are covered in paragraph 1.8 
10 
and he had the most interaction with Mr Van Rooyen at the 
time.  He is most familiar also with the procedures and 
practices of appointments within National Treasury. 
 
So paint that one on – of Terms of References a very 
peculiar and specific and particular part of the Terms of 
Reference which distinguishes it from the rest of the Terms 
of Reference. 
 
[indistinct 00:15:27] to submit that he is not seeking 
an opportunity to cross-examine a witness on any issues that 
are not within his own direct personal knowledge.  Then 
20 
incurring to what occurred on those few days in question 
December 2015 is very serious indeed.  As it seems not just 
because it implicates Mr Van Rooyen but because the 
evidence that has been led before this important commission 
and has been to demonstrate that a ? to positions of 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 12 of 294 
 
influence in [indistinct 00:15:59] were part of the modus of 
state’s capture.  So any witnesses on behalf of National 
Treasury have spoken about Treasury being the last ball 
walk against the creeping acquisition of the levels of power 
for corrupt ends. 
 
The statement provided that Mr Fuzile and the 
testimony before this commission does not involve him 
personally in the periods – really at the end of period under 
[indistinct 00:16:28] not personally – not solely in his 
personal but also it involves National Treasury as an 
10 
institution. 
 
This Mr Fuzile and the other Treasury officials who 
have testified have invested heavily in this commission 
because of the importance of the Terms of Reference 
particularly 
paragraph 
1.8. 
 
And 
to 
press 
upon 
the 
commission the significance of those allegations of capture 
in relation to Treasury and the implications with those – if 
those attempts had been successful what the implications 
would have been specifically in relation to Treasury and – or 
? if the threats were to arise again.  
20 
 
Mr Fuzile has made a separate statement about 
broader concerns of the Terms of Reference that are – that 
make up the Terms of Reference of the Commission but he 
does not seek to participate in those aspects unless of 
course he is called upon to do so by the commission. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 13 of 294 
 
 
It is merely in respect of the limited narrow issue of 
paragraph 1.8 and the events of those four days that he 
seeks leave to put questions to Mr Van Rooyen and to do so 
as briefly as possible.  And I will explain a bit more on that 
in a moment. 
 
He is also very importantly not seeking to [indistinct 
00:17:49] the real evidence leaders.  He is seeking to 
supplement the role of the evidence leaders.  We appreciate 
the importance of the streamlined approach to this inquiry 
and the role of the evidence leaders is crucial in facilitating 
10 
that approach.  He is however concerned that there may be 
aspects even if one or two that may not elicit all the 
necessary information and nuances that the commission 
should be allowed to without his ability to put questions.  
 
The only reason for this is that he is the one person 
with the most adhoc knowledge of what took place.  He has 
not previously consulted at length with the evidence leaders 
of this commission even before his testimony in November 
2018.  His only consulted personally with his own legal 
representatives in the presentation of his evidence. 
20 
 
Fourth Mr Fuzile is also concerned to protect his own 
integrity.  He has referred in his replying affidavit to the 
allegations of Mr Van Rooyen has made against him 
including him and other Treasury officials I might add – 
including referring to him as a “hostile cell”.  It is not the 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 14 of 294 
 
responsibility of the evidence leaders to protect his rights.  It 
is only the responsibility of the evidence leaders to find the 
truth. 
 
He therefore wishes to be afforded the opportunity for 
his legal representatives to protect his rights should the 
need arise.  And that is first and it is only if the need arises.  
If at the end of Mr Van Rooyen’s evidence and at the 
conclusion of the questions by the evidence leaders there is 
no need to ask a question to correct the record then he will 
not insert his right to do so. 
10 
 
Which brings me to the final page.  Is what it is then 
that he does seek because he does not wish to delay the 
commission in its work?  All he requests is to have a 
placeholder if you will in order to address issues of import 
that were not elicited or to correct issues for the purposes of 
the record insofar as the [indistinct 00:20:03] or to his 
knowledge 
presents 
– 
Treasury 
and 
Treasury 
as 
an 
institution during that period in time. 
 
In our submission it would be a more efficient manner 
of conducting the evidence in relation to paragraph 1.8 then 
20 
either to stand down to be able to consult with the evidence 
leaders to put information to the evidence leaders in order 
for the evidence leaders to then convey that to Mr Van 
Rooyen and to the Chair and to clarify any remaining – any 
remaining issues that are not covered. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 15 of 294 
 
 
If you think that it is more efficient if his legal 
representatives go out even if it were fifteen minutes it 
necessary to put the few questions which remain and to 
ensure that all the bases are covered. 
 
That is what Mr Fuzile seeks.  You get the basis of 
the following principles.  The first in terms of the regulations 
that govern this commission and in particular Regulation 6 
which is an in person appearing before the commission may 
be assisted by an Advocate or an Attorney.  Regulation 8 sub 
3 provides further that any witness appearing before the 
10 
commission may be cross-examined by a person only if the 
Chairperson permits that cross-examination should he deem 
it necessary and in the best interest of the function of the 
commission.   
 
It is Mr Fuzile’s submission to the Chair today that it 
would be necessary and it was in the best interest of the 
function of commission.  He does not believe that he has a 
right to cross-examine he is seeking relief of the Chair to do 
so on those bases. 
 
Regulation 
15 
of 
this 
provides 
that 
it 
is 
the 
20 
commission who may determine its own procedures.  It is 
what we refer to as the broad discretion that resides within 
the Chairperson. 
 
And again in the Rules that an echo of what is 
provided in the Regulations for example in Rule 3.7 which 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 16 of 294 
 
provides that in accordance to the Regulation 8 sub 3 there 
is no to cross-examine a witness before the commission but 
the 
Chairperson 
may 
permit 
cross-examine 
– 
cross-
examination should he deem it necessary and in the best 
interest of the work of the commission to do so. 
 
Again Rule 7.2 echoes the regulations that a witness 
may be assisted by a legal representative.   
 
In our heads of argument, we have referred to some 
case law.  We have referred to for example State versus 
Staats which sets out the general principles about the 
10 
function 
as 
a 
commission 
and 
procedures 
before 
a 
commission and the fact that it is not bound by rules of 
evidence and pleadings in the same way that a court of law 
is.  We have referred to the case of Pergamon Press which 
was cited with approval of SCA and Du Preez about the 
importance of flexibility of the Commissions of Inquiry when 
they – well when the commissions deal with procedural 
aspects. 
 
The first letter we refer to is a [indistinct 00:23:19] 
case and that specifically a judgment in the High Court in 
20 
which the High Court found and it was – this case concerned 
America of Commission of Inquiry and the right to legal 
representation in a Commission of Inquiry and in fact there 
was important feel between [indistinct 00:23:36] and here of 
course is that that involved the right to legal representation 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 17 of 294 
 
at the expense of the state. 
 
No it is not at all the issue here.  Here it is merely 
the right to legal representation.  And the court found that 
Section 34 of the Constitution applies to Commissions of 
Inquiry.  Justice Nguka says that in the context of that 
application it is of more consequence that the commission is 
not a judicial or part in judicial nature and that in each 
commission regard should be had to context specific factors.  
And he set out the factors.  I will not take the Chair through 
the interest of time they are contained in our heads of 
10 
arguments.  The principle really is that the importance of 
flexibility, that it need not matter, that the commission of 
inquiry is not of a judicial nature, that there is a right of legal 
representation and that the factors that may apply are set 
out in the judgment. 
 
That ? of reports was in due respect Constitutional 
Court in that matter. 
 
We submit that that right – that Section 34 right in 
the context of the Commission of Inquiry for it to be 
meaningful it would require that a witness is able to exercise 
20 
his 
rights 
through 
his 
legal 
representatives 
where 
appropriate. 
 
The penultimate topic then I must address… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The [indistinct 00:25:06] I think you are left 
with about two minutes of the fifteen minutes. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 18 of 294 
 
ADV HASSIM:  I am going to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HASSIM:  Going to speed up Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HASSIM:  The next topic is that the cross-examination 
of witnesses by witness by participants in an inquiry is not 
unprecedented.  Again, these are set out in our heads of 
argument.  I made reference to the Marikana Commission of 
Inquiry.  I do not suggest that this commission ought to 
replicate the procedures that were present in the Marikana 
10 
Commission of Inquiry but their principles that emerged from 
the Marikana Report which we have got in the heads of 
argument they are instructive and how is – in a very 
supporting way I have already set out in [indistinct 00:25:49] 
about the fact that there is not a myth between two people in 
the Commission of Inquiry does not mean that the right is 
[indistinct 00:26:01] the right to legal representation.  I 
meant to give it – the extracts are in the heads of argument. 
 
We feel that that it should be allowed in this case in 
the interest of justice and in the interest of the function of 
20 
the commission. The [indistinct 00:26:20] judgment which is 
– this is again it is the – in order to guard against any errors 
and to protect the integrity of this commission we refer to the 
RSVO Commission Case and that is Corruption Watch versus 
Arms Procurement and others and then I would like to draw 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 19 of 294 
 
to the Chair’s attention is paragraph 53 in particular which 
speaks about the real evidence leaders.  And I think that that 
is important because it does become unclear at ? what the 
role of evidence leaders are in cross-examination and not – 
there is a risk that evidence should not be seen as biased or 
favouring one witness over another and that can be guarded 
against by a [indistinct 00:27:05] in our case we say 
particularly with regard to paragraph 1.8 of the Terms of 
Reference Mr Fuzile with his own allowed to cross-examine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well in that regard one must also bear in 
10 
mind I think it is the Rule 3.2 which says that an evidence 
leader is entitled to ask questions to a witness that seek to 
establish the truth – the truthfulness of the version that the 
witness gives.  Obviously, that must be looking at different 
versions where there is – there are different versions from 
different witnesses. So one has got to bear that in mind that 
whatever the line may be between cross-examination and 
questioning a witness with a view to establishing the truth or 
the truthfulness of his or her version or the version of 
another witness there is that particular point being made in 
20 
the Rules.  So I am saying one has got to factor that into 
account.  So the evidence leaders should not – seems to me 
be afraid to ask difficult questions to a witness just because 
they think the witness or some people out there are going to 
accuse them of going along with a certain version.  Or 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 20 of 294 
 
because they are against a certain witness or certain 
categories of witnesses.  They must have courage.  They 
must seek the truth and they must do so in the best way that 
the rules, the regulations and our system permits.  So where 
the line may – it may that it is the same thing as cross-
examination I am not sure.  But whatever line may be 
probably is a very thin line. 
ADV HASSIM:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so I just – I was just saying in the 
context of all of that one must bear that in mind, I think. 
10 
ADV HASSIM:  Indeed.  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HASSIM:  Indeed, Chair and I appreciate the guidance 
that you have just provided on that particular rule.  And it is 
– it is correct that it is the role of the evidence leaders to 
find the truth and to not – not be afraid to go into lines of 
questioning that are necessary in order to elicit the truth, 
over the aspects of evidence that is not within the evidence 
leader’s ambit because it is more about protecting the rights 
of a particular witness than it is about the practice that are 
20 
being questioned.   
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV HASSIM:  And in this case, what we are also saying is 
that Mr Fuzile is a peculiar witness on this particular 
paragraph.  He is the man with the most direct knowledge of 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 21 of 294 
 
what took place that day.  
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  H’m. 
ADV HASSIM:  And he wishes to assist the Commission.  It 
is not merely to protect his rights but he also wishes to 
assist the Commission in the event that there are... look, no 
need to leave no stone unturned.  That that is what he 
seeks.  Finally, when... in closing, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HASSIM:  I would say that the granting of the 
application would not affect, without compromising(?) the 
10 
...[indistinct] of the Commission’s legal team.  It is not 
intended 
but 
the 
application 
would 
preclude 
the 
Commission’s legal team from questioning Mr van Rooyen. 
 
As 
I 
submitted 
early, 
no 
intention 
to 
supply 
full 
responsibilities of the legal team.  All that their intention of 
this application is, is for Mr Fuzile’s legal representatives to 
be 
provided 
with 
an 
opportunity 
to 
supplement 
the 
questioning where necessary.   
 
This may not be necessary, if after the Commission’s 
legal team has put questions to Mr van Rooyen then there is 
20 
no stone that is been left unturned. 
 
And we submit that it is in the interest of fairness that 
such an opportunity to be afforded even if it may ultimately 
not be exercised.  Those are our submissions Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Mr Mathipa(?). 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 22 of 294 
 
ADV MATHIPA:  Chairperson, this application of Mr Fuzile is 
made in terms of Rule point 3.3.6.  That is much is clear 
from paragraph 7 of his founding affidavit. 
 
Now, it is now common cause that Mr Fuzile is not an 
implicated person.  So that issue is done and dusted.  The 
only 
person 
that 
remains 
is, 
if 
he 
is 
not 
a 
legally 
...[indistinct] person, then in terms of what rule of the 
Commission is then making this application? 
 
In the heads of arguments, my learned friends... Fuzile’s 
legal 
representatives, 
what 
they 
now 
do 
is, 
tell 
this 
10 
Commission in paragraph 7 that Mr Fuzile is no longer 
insisting(?) with his application in terms of Rules 3.3.6 and 
3.4. 
 
They say he is coming before this Commission in terms 
of Rule 8.3.  No, Regulation 8.3 of the Regulations of the 
Commission, read in conjunction with Rule 3.7. 
 
Now, the only problem Chairperson in this issue.  The 
first 
thing 
is 
an 
application 
is 
made 
...[indistinct]...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry. 
20 
ADV MATHIPA:  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Shall we agree that fifteen minutes will be 
enough for you as well? 
ADV MATHIPA:  Yes, definitely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 23 of 294 
 
ADV MATHIPA:  It might be shorter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Chairperson, allow me then ...[indistinct] 
before this Commission in terms of the particular rules of the 
Commission and then in his reference to Regulation 8.3 and 
3.7 merely demonstrate that he has a discretion but now one 
realises that its application is unattainable(?). 
 
In the heads of argument, they now make a U-turn.  
They say, “H’n-‘n, we are not making that application 
anymore in terms of that regulation... those rules.  We are 
10 
now making the application in terms of Regulation 8.3.” 
 
That is not acceptable, I would submit.  No evidence, 
assuming it were acceptable, I suggest we look at Regulation 
8.3.  My submission, first and foremost, is that Regulation 
8.3 is not an application regulation. 
 
It has nothing to do with making an application.  It has 
not ...[indistinct] where the for application for leave to cross-
examine, neither does it deal with the requirements which 
such person must satisfy. 
 
There are only three things that that rule... that 
20 
regulation deals with.  The first thing is.  It says: 
“Any witness appearing before the Commission may 
be cross-examine”. 
 
The second thing is: 
“Cross-examination will only take place if it is 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 24 of 294 
 
permitted by the Chairperson”.   
 
And the third is: 
“The Chairperson may permit cross-examination if he 
deems it necessary and in the best interest of the 
function of the Commission”. 
 
Now if we ought to know who can apply, when they must 
apply, what the requirements the application must meet – 
one needs to visit the Rules of the Commission. 
 
Now the rules are here to govern and ...[indistinct] say 
so, rules governing the conduct of the proceedings of the 
10 
Commission.  There are no rules that are there to be ignored 
and whether you want to and go to the other provisions(?).  
There are rules to be complied with.   
 
There are information to the public that says to the 
public this is how to approach the Commission.  This is the 
procedure you need to follow.  This is the period in which 
you must do it, and this is what you must satisfy in your 
application to be considered. 
 
Now what my learned friends today are suggesting:  “No, 
you can make another(?) application independent with the 
20 
rules and merely approach the Commission in terms of 
Regulation 8.3”. 
 
I submit that argument is not attainable.  It is attainable 
if Mr Fuzile sees that he has not been able to make out his 
application before the Commission in light of the answering 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 25 of 294 
 
affidavit. 
 
There are only two options available to him.  He 
withdraws the application or he admits(?) for the application 
to be dismissed. 
 
And they are not doing that today.  They want to 
proceed(?) with the application.  The interest(?) is with this 
application. 
 
Now, if... or the other thing that emerges today for the 
first time is that now Mr Fuzile ...[indistinct] of the 
Constitution Rights.  He is saying that the ...[indistinct] 
10 
appears in paragraph 21 of their heads.   
 
They say:   
“We submit that the right to a fair hearing in Section 
34 of the Constitution, requires the Commission to 
...[indistinct] cross-examination of Mr van Rooyen by 
Mr Fuzile’s legal representatives in the interest of 
justice and in the best interest of the function of the 
Commission.” 
 
The terms, therefore, is whether such cross-examination 
in the best interest of the Commission.  So there is a 
20 
contradiction in that statement in the first place because if it 
is a requirement of Section 34 of the Constitution that the 
Commission must be ...[indistinct] cross-examination of Mr 
van Rooyen by Mr Fuzile then why.... then what is the 
requirement?   
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 26 of 294 
 
 
So why are they saying they have got a discretion?  It is 
a contradiction there because for saying the requirement of 
Section 34 of the Constitution but it must be... it must be 
proceeded... he must be given permission to cross-examine. 
 
So their requirements of this application are now 
(un)founded in Section 34.  Again, this is different from the 
founding affidavit and the replying affidavit of Mr Fuzile. 
 
Now there is a... we refer in paragraph 34, we refer to a 
judgment of the Constitution Court or in the one in Phumeza 
Mlungwana and Others v the Republic of South Africa. 
10 
 
[Indistinct] 14 which says:   
“Section 34 deals with disputes that can be resolved 
by means of the law.  The Commission’s findings are 
not necessarily to be created(?) with a resolution of 
legal disputes by a common(?) law”. 
 
But... and then the first thing Chairperson here is, what 
is this dispute that Mr Fuzile has with Mr van Rooyen?  But 
he wants to see results even before he only comes to ... he 
dreaded(?) whether or not Section 24 applies to him. 
 
There is no such dispute.  He himself says in his own 
20 
affidavit:   
“When I came to the Commission because I was 
subpoenaed to come and give evidence”.   
 
And he says he read his statement in 2018 and then 
again, another statement in 2019 but has given oral evidence 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 27 of 294 
 
before the Commission. 
 
Now during all that, he then says: 
”I have right(?) to Section 34 for a fair hearing so 
that my dispute can be resolved”. 
 
I am not aware of any dispute and no case has been 
made by any of the papers for any dispute that he has.  And 
I will submit that that argument must be dismissed. 
 
That ...[indistinct] the final argument Chairperson and 
that relates to ...[indistinct] because it seems to me that it 
was accepted that Mr Fuzile ...[indistinct] requirements of 
10 
Regulation 3.3.6.   
 
That... I do not want to labour an argument on that 
aspect because it is clear that it is accepted.  The 
interesting thing is that he has first made the application in 
terms of Rule 3.7.   
 
Now, Rule 3.7 does not stand alone.  It is part as a sub-
regulation, a sub-rule of Rule 3.  That is being ignored. 
 
Now Rule 3 tells us who can apply, who must render(?) 
reply(?), what the requirements are, and then ...[indistinct] 
what kind of leave they can seek from the Commission, to 
20 
give evidence, to cross-examine and to do all that. 
 
So there is no way ...[indistinct]  I can look at Rule 3.7, 
indicating(?) that Rule 3.  There is no way that you can carve 
is out of the rules and then say it is an invalid in the section 
in which apply. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 28 of 294 
 
 
In any case, all the ...[indistinct] is what the right to 
cross-examine... no one has the right to cross-examine if he 
fails to ask the permission.  That is basically the content.  
And it refers back to the Regulation 3.3. 
 
So Chairperson, I submit that this application which in 
your ...[indistinct], is an abuse of the process of the 
Commission.  It is a delay ...[indistinct] of the Commission. 
 
How can Mr Fuzile come to this Commission after have 
been giving a chance twice?  After given written statement, 
oral 
evidence. 
 
How 
can 
he 
then 
come 
before 
the 
10 
Commission and say, “I no longer apply to cross-examine the 
implicated person”? 
 
What interest does he has ...[indistinct] that of being a 
witness ...[indistinct] information.  We hear from the legal 
representative there that they did not have extensive 
consultations with him. 
 
Therefore, 
the 
others... 
it 
looks 
like 
he 
reserves 
information that he does not give the Commission and then 
...[indistinct] his legal representatives.  No, that cannot be 
accepted.   
20 
 
If he has any more information to give, he must come to 
the Commission and give the Commission.  So ...[indistinct] 
made Chairperson that this application is at best to be 
conceived and at worst an abusive of the process of the 
Commission. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 29 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you Mr Mathipa.  Mr Hulley, you 
might have something to say.  I propose to give you no more 
than five minutes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Can I first 
address the question that you asked me about the use of the 
mic of this podium Mr Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  I have just been provided with a part of 
the protocol...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  ...of the Commission which has been 
prepared by the secretary and it says that: 
“Provision 
of 
a 
separate 
mic 
for 
the 
legal 
representatives of the witnesses/implicated person 
must be ...[indistinct]”.  
 
So it is in that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  That has not been approved by me. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  I see.  That is all...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  That has not been approved by me, yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes, I think on that basis that I was 
20 
told(?). 
CHAIRPERSON:  No. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Is...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  It is not approved that... Yes? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Mr Chairperson, just very briefly insofar 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 30 of 294 
 
as this application is concerned that will strengthen the 
answer.  I was trying to listen to see what was the basis of 
the 
application 
or 
the 
application 
has 
...[indistinct] 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  One second.  One second, Mr Hulley.  The 
lighting is not as good as it should be.  I do not know 
whether it is because of this light that I ...[indistinct]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  Ah, Chairperson, I can see myself(?).  
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs]  Well, I think the technicians will 
try and improve the lighting if possible.  Okay, let us 
10 
continue. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you, Mr Chair.  The... at the end of 
the day, the application, it appears, might have been evolved 
over the passing of time between the drafting of the... the 
papers and of course the argument that has now been 
presented. 
 
We would say that on the basis that the application has 
been 
brought 
and 
is 
now 
presented 
before 
you 
Mr 
Chairperson, that we would not... we would not support the 
application. 
20 
 
As I understand it, the application has been divided to 
really an argument about the protection of Mr Fuzile’s 
integrity, certainly insofar as the evidence leaders are 
concerned. 
 
Their primary concern must be to ascertain through the 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 31 of 294 
 
questioning where the truth lies in the versions that have 
been given. 
 
And one would presume that in that process that it will 
be included of a particular witness who happens to be telling 
the truth, would be protected in that process. 
 
And insofar as there has been an argument about 
whether the application ought to be brought as it was 
initially, in terms of Rule 3 or alternatively now, as it has 
been presented to you, Mr Chairperson in terms of rule... 
sorry, in terms of Regulation 8.3. 
10 
 
We would think that is of no ...[indistinct] as long as a 
party has not been prejudiced by that and as long as the 
requirements that have been... the requirements for the 
particular rule or regulation, as the case may be, had been 
satisfied. 
 
There would be no reason why an application which has 
been purport to have been brought in terms of Rule 3 and 
then later on is brought in terms of Regulation 8.3, should 
not be heard under 8.3 provided, as I have said, that there 
has been no unfairness that has been brought to bear upon 
20 
the other party. 
 
We can see the unfairness in the present circumstances.  
Having said that, we do not believe that an application 
brought under Rule 8.3 of the Regulation... sorry, Regulation 
8.3, has been properly made out in this case.  The integrity 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 32 of 294 
 
of Mr Fuzile should be amply protected by the evidence 
leaders. 
 
And we would, if we can, as a matter of... in order to 
assist you Mr Chair, we would say that the application should 
be refused.  We do not think it is properly made out.  As it 
pleases you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Maybe before I go, I give 
counsel for Mr Fuzile the opportunity to respond.  Let me ask 
whether Mr Mathipa has anything to say arising from this so 
that when counsel from Mr Fuzile say something, she is the 
10 
last one from counsel to say something. 
ADV MASUKU:  Chairperson, I was struggling a bit to hear 
Mr Hulley.  Am I correct that he is suggesting that in order 
for the integrity of Mr Fuzile to be protected, they have no 
objection that the application] is granted? 
CHAIRPERSON:  He is saying, as I understand him, he says 
he does not see any problem if... he does not think that 
the... if you have got an application in terms of the rules, you 
have prepared that from bringing it or relying on the 
regulations in other words. 
20 
 
He will not... if I am interpreting him correctly, he is not 
nodding. 
 
So 
...[indistinct] 
I 
am 
not 
interpreting 
him 
incorrectly.  But he... apart from that he has submitted that a 
proper case has not been made out...[intervenes]  
ADV MASUKU:  Okay. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 33 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...for the Commission, for me, to grant 
leave.  That I think because I may have misinterpreted him, I 
am going to allow him to come again ...[indistinct]  
ADV MASUKU:  Yes, Chair  
CHAIRPERSON:  And maybe ...[indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
ADV MASUKU:  [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:  ...take off ...[indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
ADV MASUKU:  [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, so that they can hear. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you, Mr Chairperson.  Sorry.  Yes, 
10 
Chair, you misunderstood what we submit is, that we do not 
support the application that has been brought by Mr Fuzile.  
We would say...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Just raise your voice. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  We do not support the application that 
has been brought by Mr Fuzile.  We say that Mr Fuzile has 
not made out an ample case to be admitted to cross-examine 
Mr van Rooyen.   
 
The... his primary concern appears to be about his... the 
protection of his integrity.  We would submit that his integrity 
20 
would be amply protected by the process that is... that will 
be ...[indistinct], the questions that we will be asked. 
 
And we would hope that the integrity would be... his 
integrity or anybody’s integrity would be protected by the 
process of trying to ascertain the truth. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 34 of 294 
 
 
And we as the evidence leaders are under a mandate 
and a duty to make sure that we ask questions to ascertain 
the truth. 
 
So that should be ample ...[indistinct] of his integrity 
should be amply protected in that process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.  Thank you.  I do not think you 
would have anything to do ...[indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
ADV MASUKU:  In that regard, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
ADV MASUKU:  All I can say, I concur.  I have nothing to 
10 
add. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you.  Counsel for Mr Fuzile. 
ADV HASSIM:  Thank you, Chair.  I must correct the 
characterisation by my colleagues that the application is 
merely to protect Mr Fuzile’s integrity.  That is part of it, no 
doubt but I was ...[indistinct] in my earlier submissions to 
point out that it is also about the ambit of paragraph 1.8 of 
the Terms of Reference and the peculiarity of Mr Fuzile as a 
witness before the Commission in that he is the one with 
direct knowledge of the evidence over those forgery is that 
20 
are at play and particularly the appointment of the two 
advisors. 
 
So it is more than that.  And the point to just say in 
order to leave no stone unturned, he would be of assistance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Shall we agree, I should give you five 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 35 of 294 
 
minutes? 
ADV HASSIM:  I think just two minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV HASSIM:  One minute would be sufficient.  Just in 
relation to the rules.  Of course, the rules govern.... oh, 
sorry, the proceedings, that the rules are not to be implied 
inflexible and not undisputed and appreciate that the rules 
itself, when one has regard to Rule 11 and 12, where there is 
an open-ended rule which says:   
“Anything 
that 
is 
not 
governed 
by 
this... 
any 
10 
application that is not provided for in any of the 
rules, may be brought, as long as it for adequate 
notice”. 
 
So, I just wanted to correct that understanding, that the 
rules are not as inflexible as might be suggested.  And then 
finally, with regard to the other sections recalled.  The whole 
point of the Mlungwana case was to say, “Yes, it is unusual 
because there is no list”.   
 
But that does not mean that it has no application.  It is 
at paragraph 37 of that judgment is the judgment... is the 
20 
paragraph I referred the Commission to.  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.  I am going to 
reserve my decision and the parties will be... not the parties, 
all concerned, will be notified as soon as it is ready to be 
handed down. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 36 of 294 
 
 
So I think what we will have.  I think we will have one 
short matter where counsel need to say something that is 
going to be two, three minutes. 
 
So after that I will adjourn to allow counsel to leave who 
are not involved in the evidence that will be led for the day. 
 
So I think that I am expecting counsel presenting 
mister... Ms Ranjeni who was supposed to appear before the 
Commission yesterday and I postponed that today. 
 
So Mr Hulley might have something to say before 
counsel for Ms Ranjeni say something. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes, thank you, Mr Chairman.  This is the 
matter where Ms Ranjeni Munusami had been granted leave 
to cross-examine a certain witness.  As I understand it, she 
has given an indication to the tribunal...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am wondering whether... because Mr 
Masuku complained that he could not hear.  I wonder 
whether from the duration of what you say you might...  
ADV HULLEY SC:  [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  This, Mr Chairman, was an application 
20 
that you had approved.  It was an application brought by Ms 
Ranjeni Munusami to cross-examine a particular witness who 
had implicated her and I believe it was a Mr Naidoo who had 
implicated her. 
 
And she had written to the Commission purportedly to 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 37 of 294 
 
withdraw her application.  We had made contact with her 
recently to... or through her attorney recently to ascertain 
whether she was going to come to the Commission anyway 
because she had not been released as such, having brought 
that application. 
 
We understand that the attorney has made arrangements 
with the junior counsel to come and address you Mr 
Chairman on the issue.  I understand that it is Advocate 
Duncan Wild who will address you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.  Counsel for Ms Ranjeni. 
10 
ADV WILD:  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV WILD:  Duncan Wild instructed by Webb Wentzel for Ms 
Ranjeni Munusami. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV WILD:  As Mr Hulley said ...[intervenes]   
CHAIRPERSON:  Jut you... you might wish to adjust your 
mic... your mask a bit so that they can hear you in case they 
do not hear you. 
ADV WILD:  Yes, thank you Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV WILD:  Also, I cannot see with this mask on because it 
mists my glasses. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs]  Yes. 
ADV WILD:  A bit of a problem. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 38 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV WILD:  Yes, Chair.  So it concerns three applications 
that Ms Munusami brought regarding the evidence of Mr 
Kobus Roelofse and Coronel Dhanajaya Gangulu Naidoo to 
cross-examine both of those witnesses.   
 
You granted both those applications roundabout the 
3rd of December last year and the other the 25t h of March 
this year.   
 
In the exchange of affidavits that happened after 
3 December, it has become apparent to Ms Munusami that 
10 
those two 
witnesses 
have 
no 
direct evidence of her 
wrongdoing and she has set out her version comprehensively 
in her own affidavits. 
 
However, she remains willing to testify and she will 
make arrangements with the evidence leaders but for those 
reasons and the fact that she has... she does not have the 
financial resources to involve lawyers in preparing for the 
cross-examination, she wishes not to persist with those two 
applications and not to cross-examine anymore but she does 
remain 
willing 
to 
give 
evidence 
if 
required 
by 
the 
20 
Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would it be a correct understanding of her 
position that, from her point of view, she abandons the right 
to cross-examine those witnesses insofar as the Chairperson 
has granted her the right to cross-examine them but if the 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 39 of 294 
 
Commission would like her to come and testify, she is happy 
to come and testify. 
ADV WILD:  That is exactly right, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  No, thank you.  Thank you 
very much.  I think she will hear from the Commission once 
they have reflected on the developments and if there is a 
wish that she should come and testify, she will be contacted. 
ADV WILD:  Thank you very much, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  I will then adjourn for a few 
minutes to enable counsel who need to leave to leave.  And 
10 
then we can resume to continue with the business of the day.  
I am going to take a ten minutes short adjournment.  I will 
come back at ten to eleven.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you ready? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, thank you, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, you will recall that Messrs 
Shaik and Njenje gave evidence in relation to State 
20 
Security matters.  The third witness in that category of 
witnesses is Ambassador Maqetuka and he is here to 
testify.  You have a bundle before you which is EXHIBIT 
PP3 which contains his statement and certain additional 
documents as set out in the index. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 40 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   You have not appeared before the 
Commission for quite some time. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Something that has been happening, and 
it is not cast in stone, and you can make your own 
contribution it, has been an approach that there is - the 
actual exhibit is the statement and the annexures to it and 
that the box, the file, is not the actual exhibit and that it is 
convenient to call it as bundle so and so but when we refer 
to the exhibit we actually refer to the statement or affidavit 
10 
or annexures.  That is not finalised but it is something that 
has been happening. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair, there is a saying 
amongst the legal team that everybody who appears for the 
first time must go through the bundle baptism.  It seems 
that I am going through it too.  I will change the word 
exhibit to bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright.  But, of course, we – 
the bundle would have to have its different – like bundle S 
or whatever and then the exhibit can remain – the affidavit 
20 
can remain as EXHIBIT PP3, so …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Actually, Chair, it is nothing that 
should be made light of because when the record is finally 
prepared 
it 
should 
be 
consistent, 
accessible 
and 
comprehensive. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 41 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And it is not and it is confused it 
create big problems down the line. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no, that is true.  So you can 
later on I think reflect on it but so long I will take EXHIBIT 
PP3 to refer to the actual affidavit and the annexures. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, thank you, Chair, we will fix it 
up and ensure that there is a consistency. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   May the witness…? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, please administer the oath or 
affirmation? 
REGISTRAR:  Please your full names for the record? 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA: 
 
 
I 
am 
Mzuvukile 
Jeff 
Maqetuka. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection in taking the 
prescribed affirmation?   
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   No, I do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly affirm that the evidence 
you will give shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing 
20 
else but the truth?  If so, please raise your right hand and 
say I truly affirm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I fully affirm. 
MZUVUKILE JEFF MAQETUKA:   (Affirms) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much.  The lighting is 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 42 of 294 
 
worse than it was before.  I think there is a light that has 
been switched off which was on earlier but the witness, I 
could see when he was standing, and I am sure when he is 
sitting, it is very dark where he is.  I think they are going 
to switch on that light.  I do not know if it disturbs anything 
or it does not.  Mr Pretorius, I think it is taking longer than 
they thought it would, maybe Stimela is going to tell you 
something to say whether we need to adjourn or not to get 
the matter to… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am told, Chair, that the light 
10 
switches are locked away behind a door and that key needs 
to be obtained and I am told five minutes will do it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Shall we adjourn for five minutes? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   As you please, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or do you think we should continue? 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
I 
am 
happy 
to 
continue.  
Ambassador? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I am fine, Mr Pretorius. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, maybe let us continue.  Once 
they are ready to fix they will tell Reverent Stimela we 
20 
need to adjourn or if they are able to switch it on without 
us adjourning then we will continue.  Okay, let us continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Before 
we 
do 
so. 
 
Ambassador 
Maqetuka, I just want to thank you for coming forward to 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 43 of 294 
 
assist the Commission.  You would be aware, I am sure, 
that since 2018 I have been calling upon past and present 
DGs of different departments and ministers and deputy 
ministers and other officials in government who know 
something that this Commission should be told to please 
come forward and do so.  A number of ministers or past 
ministers and DGs have come forward.  I remain concerned 
that I should have had many more than I have.  I hope that 
there will still be some who will come forward but I really 
want to express the Commission’s appreciation to you that 
10 
you have come forward to assist the Commission with what 
you know.  We really appreciate that very much. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Thank you very much, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  The one thing that you must 
assist me with is whether it is Ambassador Maqetuka or – 
because I am not clued up with some of these titles but I 
know when General Nyanda was here he told me that once 
a general always a general, so…  But I want to use the 
right title.  That is the bottom line. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am told Ambassador, that the title 
20 
remains. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   It is the same with the 
generals. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is the same as the generals. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, Chair. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 44 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you, Ambassador.  Yes, Mr 
Pretorius, you may proceed. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ambassador, 
you were formerly employed as the Director General of the 
State Security Agency, is that correct?   
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   When were you appointed? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I was appointed in 2009, 
October 2009. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you retired from the service 
10 
when? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I retired from the service on 
the 28 January 2012. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You may keep your mic on, Ambassador, 
and if you want to move it so that it is closer to you so you 
do not have to move forward all the time that will be fine.  
Thank you. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Thanks, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   During December 2018 you signed 
20 
a statement which we will refer to as your first statement 
and that is annexed as annexure MM1.  Is that your first 
statement? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Is that the one after the 
affidavit? 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 45 of 294 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, marked MM1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The MM! would be those blue dividers 
that – well, they are blue with mine, I am assuming they 
are blue with your file as well but they might be a different 
colour. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Unfortunately, I only have 
one divider here which is marked 2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, I am sorry, Ambassador, it is 
important that you have exactly the same thing as I have 
and as Mr Pretorius has.  Maybe, Mr Pretorius, I should 
10 
adjourn to get that fixed because it will give us problems 
throughout. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Thank you – no, I have got 
it, Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You have it? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, I have it, Advocate. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, I will refer to page numbers in 
due course and during the short adjournment we can put 
the dividers in, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   My apologies, that should have 
been done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In any event you did sign a 
statement in December 2018, is that correct, Ambassador? 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 46 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, yes, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And if you go to page 24 of the 
bundle now in front of you – it will be page 24 or 25.  Is 
that your signature? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, it is. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you have confirmed by 
affirmation that this is your statement.  Are you satisfied 
that its contents are true and correct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Fully satisfied, Advocate. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If we go to page 2 of your 
10 
statement …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Pretorius, I am just trying to have a 
look here.  Oh okay, now I see what the position is.  I think 
what happened is my staff put the unsigned affidavit that I 
got much earlier in as well but the signed one is there, but 
I was looking at the unsigned one and page 24 of it does 
not have his signature but that is because I have got two 
24s but there is a page 24 which has got his signature, so 
it is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If we can go to page 2 of your 
statement, Ambassador. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, I am there, Advocate. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You will see there set out the nine 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 47 of 294 
 
topics that you will cover in your evidence.  We do not 
need to deal with this list in any detail but in summary I 
understand you will tell the Chair about matters relating 
generally to national security in its constitutional context 
and principles attaching to the practice of national security.  
Do I understand that correctly? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You will also deal with certain 
factual matters that were also dealt with by Messrs Njenje 
and Shaik in relation to Minister Cwele and the former 
10 
President 
in 
relation 
in 
particular 
to 
the 
Gupta 
investigation. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you will also deal with certain 
other matters and we will explain them in due course, the 
Principal 
Agent 
Network 
1 
investigation 
which 
we 
colloquially refer to as the PAN1 investigation and certain 
other matters and ultimately your resignation. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Correct, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Because you are going to tell the 
20 
Chair of your views and opinions arising out of your own 
experience in the field of intelligence, perhaps you would 
tell the Chair very briefly and in summary what your 
background and experience is in the intelligence field.  You 
deal with that on page 3 of your statement. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 48 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, sir.  It is a long story, it 
is a long journey, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   But safe to say that I have 
been a member of the intelligence and security in exile 
1979 up until my retirement in 2012 basically.  But, of 
course, there were other functions in between that I did in 
various years during my tenure.   But safe to say that from 
1979 I had my military training in both Mozambique, 
Angola, where I had my full military six months training as 
10 
a company commander and I graduated at a camp called 
Bungo.  That would be now in 1980, around about July, 
June, July. 
 
From there with three colleagues we went for a 
specialised training in the craft of intelligence in the then 
German Democratic Republic, the GDR, as it was called.  
We had a four months training, intensive training in 
intelligence 
and 
in 
the 
craft 
of 
intelligence 
and 
counterintelligence. 
 
I returned from the GDR around about October, 
20 
November and went back to Angola, transit to Mozambique.  
This now is 1980, Chair.  And immediately after my training 
I was then fully incorporated into the structures of what 
was 
then 
called 
the 
Department 
of 
Intelligence 
and 
Security, popularly known amongst as DIS. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 49 of 294 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   For how long were you working 
with DIS? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   As I say, I can safely say 
from 1979 up until amalgamation of the six South African 
Intelligence Services.  You will recall, Chair, as part of the 
outcome of the negotiations.  South Africa, by then, had 
the six recognised intelligent services.  One was the 
National Intelligence Services of the apartheid regime.  
Then there was the Department of Intelligence and Security 
of the African National Congress.  Then there was the 
10 
Bophuthatswana Intelligence Service which was BIS.  And 
then there was the Venda Intelligence Service, VIS.  And 
then there was the Transkei Intelligence Service, TRIS. 
 
Those five services were the services that were 
recognised as services that would be integrated into a 
future South African Intelligence dispensation.   
 
I can also safely say that later we were joined also 
by the PAC because you would recall that the PAC joined 
the negotiation process slightly later than the rest but 
ultimately they joined and they were integrated into the 
20 
process, therefore that is why today we safely say that 
there were six intelligence services that were integrated in 
what would be called today your National Intelligence 
Agency that is NIA and all the others, which I am sure we 
will deal with it later. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 50 of 294 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You have said that you started your 
training in 1979, did you say in Germany or...? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   The orientation into that 
training actually started at the beginning January 1979 in 
Mozambique. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In Mozambique, yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   But that was not your fully-
fledged training, it was orientation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   The training, the full 
training started in Angola. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   In January 1980, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Now that was obviously not 
training …[intervenes] 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   In intelligence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it not training intelligence? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   No, it was …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   In Angola? 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   It was a military training. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, military training? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Were you undergoing that 
training by reason of being a member of any freedom – or 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 51 of 294 
 
movement or party that was fighting for freedom? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   When I went to exile in 1979 
I joined the African National Congress and the training that 
I will be talking to and that I am talking to, Chair, would be 
under the auspices of the African National Congress and 
the military training within the ANC was under the auspices 
uMkhonto we Sizwe.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, thank you. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Yes 
and 
the 
specialised 
intelligence training you have referred to took place in 
10 
1980. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   1980, the specialised, 
around about June, July.  Actually, I have just been 
working over the past few days, I narrow it to have arrived 
in the GDR at the end of May, beginning of June.  And how 
I managed to narrow that, just as a background, Chair, if 
you do not mind, was that in 1980, 31 May, that is when a 
unit of uMkhonto we Sizwe attacked the SASOL and 
NATREF plant and that was on the 31 May 1980 and 
because why I remember it so vividly now, it is because at 
20 
the time of the attack that was the week or the period when 
we arrived in Berlin and a senior member of the National 
Executive of the ANC happened to have arrived in Berlin 
and he came to our camp to come and brief us about the 
developments inside the country and that SASOL attack.  
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 52 of 294 
 
That is how I managed to remember it.  But it is interesting 
to  - if I tell you, Chair, that if you had asked me this 
question say a year ago, I would not have remembered the 
dates but I have been thinking about these things all the 
time and all the time.  That is why now I am specific and I 
am in a position to focus it to a specific date. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You spoke a moment ago, 
Ambassador, 
of 
the 
amalgamation 
of 
six 
intelligent 
services into a service called the NIA, National Intelligence 
10 
Agency, and the South African Secret Service as well.  
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, again, as a way of 
short background, Chair, in 1994, May, I completed my 
studies in England.  I completed my BA in Communications, 
specialising in photography, film and television studies, 
and I came back in May 1994 which was the time when the 
negotiations were almost at the end and subcommittees 
had already been established. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So when you talk about negotiation, 
means in this context that were about to end, you talk 
20 
about 
negotiations 
aimed 
at 
integrating 
the 
various 
intelligent services? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Not only the intelligence 
services. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And not the entire negotiations for a new 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 53 of 294 
 
constitution? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   It is the entire negotiations 
but the relevance of this, that I am being asked by the 
advocate, is in relation to intelligence within that broad 
negotiations for a new dispensation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I was asking that question because 
the first democratic election was on the 27 April 1994. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And, as I understood what you were 
saying, you were talking about towards end of May or 1994 
10 
or did I misunderstand something? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I came back from my studies 
in May 1994 and by then the negotiations – or let me not 
say – it is not the negotiations per se, the integration of 
these six intelligence services was behind the schedule, 
that is why I joined the integration – the negotiations for 
the integration of these six services in May 1994.  But you 
are correct, Chair, it was after the elections by then. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  I understand, Ambassador, 
20 
that the six organisations were integrated in January 1995. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Correct. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
And 
did 
you 
receive 
an 
appointment 
at 
that 
stage 
in 
the 
NIA, 
the 
National 
Intelligence Agency? 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 54 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Correct.  In 1995 I was then 
appointed as the Deputy Director General of the National 
Intelligence Agency, the old NIA, correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  And what was the 
essential difference between the National Intelligence 
Agency on the one hand and the South African Secret 
Service on the other? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Adv Pretorius, ultimately 
this integration of these six intelligence services were into 
the NIA, that is the National Intelligence Service which was 
10 
a domestic intelligence service.  The South African Secret 
Service, which was the foreign intelligence service.  Then 
there 
was 
the 
South 
Africa 
National 
Academy 
of 
Intelligence which was the training institution.  Then there 
was the National Intelligence Coordinating Committee 
called NICOC.  That is in a nutshell but I am sure we will 
come to it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We will come to that in due course.  
The various communications or interception agencies were 
separate at that stage. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   There were a separate 
structure but not a department but it was a separate 
structure.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Anyway, to the extent necessary, 
as part of your evidence, we can explain that in due 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 55 of 294 
 
course. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, I will. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But as Deputy Director General of 
the NIA in 1995 you then dealt with domestic intelligence? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And in that capacity you served 
until when? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I served as the DDG of NIA 
between 1995 up until 1997. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And after that I understand, if I 
10 
may just lead you on this, I understand that you served in 
various national government departments and finally as an 
Ambassador in Algeria. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   When did you come back to South 
Africa in order to occupy what position? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   In 2007 I was appointed 
South Africa’s ambassador to Algeria, that was 2007 until 
2009 when I was appointed the Director General of the 
South African – SSA, State… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   State Security Agency. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   State Security Agency. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Ja.  Thanks, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It may become relevant later but 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 56 of 294 
 
the circumstances which gave rise to your re-entry into the 
intelligence service in 2010, would you tell the Chair 
briefly how that came about? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes I can.  What had 
happened is that whilst I was on station in Algiers, I 
received a telephone call from the then Director General of 
the then Foreign Affairs, which is called DERCO now, to 
say that I will have to travel back home for consultations.  
There are matters that I am supposed to be engaged with, 
with 
the 
President 
and 
the 
Minister 
for 
Intelligence 
10 
Service. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The Minister then was? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   The Minister that was Dr 
Siyabonga Cwele. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the Director General of the then 
Foreign Affairs was? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   The Director General was Dr 
Ayanda Ntsaluba. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did you then return? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, for the consultations 
20 
and of course nothing was explained over the telephone 
what it was for and he was just told that when you arrive in 
Pretoria then you will get the full briefings and indeed I left 
Algiers, arrived in Pretoria and of course the first place of 
protocol was my department, which was Foreign Affairs 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 57 of 294 
 
then.   I had a short consultation with DG Ntsaluba who 
then briefed me that actually you are needed by your 
former department, that is the Intelligence and that the 
Minister for Intelligence will brief you because I am not 
equipped to give you that briefing, what I am involved in is 
to facilitate because you are still a member of Foreign 
Affairs, it was in that context. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did the Minister Cwele brief you? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes he did.  I met with 
Minister Cwele who welcomed me and then he told me that 
10 
there is a new agency that is being formed and that there 
is going to be a reintegration of the two separate agencies 
that is the National Intelligence Agency and the South 
African 
Secret 
Services 
and 
all 
other 
structures 
of 
intelligence would be integrated into one organisation now 
which became the State Security Agency. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That integration is a matter of 
some controversy in the evidence of Messrs Shaik and 
Njenje and also in your evidence which you will deal with 
in due course. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes I will. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did you then receive an offer from 
the sitting President? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes because the Minister 
then told me that you will have a consultation with the 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 58 of 294 
 
President where now you will get the final details of what it 
is that the President wants and indeed I met President 
Jacob Zuma at his residence in Mashandlovu [?] and the 
President welcomed me and confirmed what Minister Cwele 
had said, that he intends appointing me.  That is the 
language that is used Chair when you are appointed at that 
level.   You are first told that it is an intention, because it 
is always subject to your acceptance or not acceptance. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So by the time you spoke to the 
former President you had made the decision to accept the 
10 
position I understand? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Not at that stage really to 
be honest in my mind, because knowing the processes I 
needed a confirmation that indeed what Minister Cwele had 
briefed me is in tandem with what the President is saying, 
and of course we always, and I knew that the President 
would not expect to get an answer immediately, let alone 
the fact that I was still an ambassador.  I would still need 
to go back to Algiers to be formally released by the 
President of Algeria. That is the protocol again, as an 
20 
Ambassador you don’t just leave your station, I mean that 
is an offence to diplomatic and protocol. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Ultimately, we know, as you say in 
your statement, you accepted the appointment. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Ultimately correct. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 59 of 294 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, and at the same time we have 
heard evidence that Ambassador Sheik accepted a position 
and Minister Njenje too.  What were their positions, would 
you just describe them for the Chair? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   When we were formally 
introduced 
to 
the 
media 
the 
Minister 
held 
a 
press 
conference which is again protocol and before the press 
conference then we were in a holding room, that is when I 
first met Shaik and Njenje, right because at that time I 
didn’t know who else was going to be in this SAA, then I 
10 
met Njenje and Shaik and we greeted each other and then 
it came out that all of us didn’t know what we were going to 
be, you know. 
 
Can I proceed? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes please.   
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Until the actual press 
conference, it was in the actual press conference that 
Minister Cwele then  informed the public about our 
appointments, that I am being appointed, I have been – I 
am being appointed as the Director General of the State 
20 
Security Agency, and I will be deputised by Ambassador 
Shaik, who will herd the foreign component, the foreign 
branch, and Mr Njenje who will herd the domestic branch. 
 
I am deliberately using the words “herd” as I will 
explain later in my evidence Chair. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 60 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you say that you heard for the first 
time at the press conference what your position was going 
to be, when you met Mr President prior to this before you 
went back to Algeria when he expressed his intention to 
appoint you did he not specify the position to which he 
wanted ...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   No the President, the 
President did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   The President did. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it the same position that was 
announced in the press release? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   That was the same position 
that was announced and if my memory even serves me 
well, if I recall back, as we were going to the press 
conference all, I think Minister Cwele did whisper to me 
that the President has decided that you will be the Director 
General but formally and to all of us it was only at the 
press conference that our designations were announced. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You have touched on it already 
Ambassador and you explain in your ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I see it is half past eleven, we normally 
have tea at quarter past but we – today’s programme is not 
going the way it normally goes, I think we must just agree 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 61 of 294 
 
when we will have a tea adjournment or whether we should 
not have. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We are in your hands Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am quite easy, should we have at 
twelve or should ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am happy to accommodate any 
time Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ambassador? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I will be led by you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Perhaps a comfort break for ten 
minutes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, about ten minutes at twelve o’clock?   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   At twelve o’clock. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Ambassador you have touched on 
it already and you will speak a little more about it but at 
the time of your appointment as DG and Accounting Officer 
of the amalgamated intelligent service your mandate was to 
arrange and facilitate that amalgamation I understand it, is 
20 
that correct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   The integration yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, now in the course of doing so 
the mechanics of that are contained in your first statement 
or annexure C to your first statement and we are not going 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 62 of 294 
 
to deal with it here, that is an administrative matter largely, 
but what is important in your statement is the principled 
work that you did and in particular your reference in 
paragraph 25 to the white paper on intelligence.  We are 
going to deal with the contents of that white paper in some 
detail in due course, but what is this white paper on 
intelligence, when was it written and presented and why is 
it – if it is – an important document? 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA: 
 
 
In 
any 
government 
department, but in Intelligence in particular, the white 
10 
paper was developed in 1994 as part of that basket of 
negotiations.  A white paper sets out the philosophy for 
intelligence, the structure of intelligence, the code of 
conduct for intelligence practitioners, or officers as we 
would say. That is the white paper, and the – we usually 
see it as the most important document, even more 
important than the legislation, because the legislation 
becomes more an operational guide. 
 
After the Constitution, let me also be clear on that 
because it is important within the South African Democratic 
20 
dispensation that everything flows from the Constitution, 
that is why I think, if I am not mistaken, you will pardon me 
Chair, I am not a legal expert, I know nothing about legal 
mattes, nor do I but I have been educated by your team 
that there is chapter 198 of the Constitution which really, 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 63 of 294 
 
really sets out matters of National Security so matters – 
and it is broad in the Constitution, it does not necessarily 
zoom into intelligence or military divisions and blah-blah-
blah, 
but 
those 
would 
be 
contained, 
one 
after 
the 
constitution those would be contained in the white paper. 
 
The guidelines even in the white paper and that is 
the relevance and the importance of the white paper. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You touch on that in paragraph 26. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And probably, Mr Pretorius, probably 
they probably didn’t say Chapter 198 they probably said 
10 
Section 198 Ambassador ...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   It is chapter ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
I 
know 
our 
Constitution 
is 
quite 
important but I don’t think it has got so many chapters. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   It should be chapter 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I suspect that they didn’t say chapter 
198 or they may have said Section 198 or Chapter 3. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   It is Chapter 3 Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, okay. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, 198 or 98 yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The context in which the white 
paper was developed Ambassador is important for your 
evidence later.  You touch on that in paragraph 26. What 
was happening at the time of course is that one was 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 64 of 294 
 
moving 
from 
the 
old 
apartheid 
system 
to 
the 
new 
democratic structure set out in the Constitution.  In that 
context what was the importance of the white paper and 
what 
was 
the 
importance 
of 
the 
transformation 
of 
Intelligence?   
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   The salient importance of 
that white paper Chair is that for the first time in the 
history of South Africa the white paper made it very clear 
that the new intelligence dispensation one would be a 
democratic one, and it went further to say the new 
10 
Intelligence Dispensation shall not only concentrate on 
your traditional military security matters, but it will also 
deal with issues of human security, that is the wellbeing of 
its people. 
 
Now that is fundamentally important because it was 
for the first time.  That’s what the white paper stated Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, you quote in paragraph 26 a 
section 
under 
the 
head 
“Philosophy 
of 
Intelligence”, 
perhaps that might be read on the record, paragraph 26, 
page 7 of your statement. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s at page 7 hey? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The red numbers at the top. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Is it the red numbers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, look at the red numbers ja. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Page 7 ...[intervenes]  
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 65 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it 6 or 7 Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Seven, well ... 
CHAIRPERSON:   On mine it is seven. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes it is seven on mine too, thank 
goodness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay he won’t call 007 he will just 
say seven, but that’s the red numbers on the top right-hand 
corner. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, I am there Chair, 
pardon me. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, it may be that a similar lamp should 
be obtained for the area where the witness is, that might 
not be something that can maybe obtained today but going 
forward so that it is much more. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Lighter ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is not very helpful there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That extract in paragraph 26 would 
you read it onto the record please. 
20 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA: 
 
 
Paragraph 
26 
of 
my 
statement, section 1 of the white paper sets out its 
objective namely: 
“to serve as a framework for the understanding of 
the philosophy, mission and role on intelligence in a 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 66 of 294 
 
democratic 
South Africa. 
 
This 
philosophy 
on 
intelligence is dealt with in Section 3 (3)(1) where it 
is 
explained 
that 
reshaping 
and 
transforming 
intelligence in South Africa is not only a matter of 
organisational restructuring, it should start with 
clarifying the philosophy and redefining the mission, 
focus and priorities of intelligence in order to 
establish a new culture of intelligence.” 
That is what is encapsulated in the white paper. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You emphasized a minute ago the 
10 
importance of the reference in the white paper to the new 
intelligence 
structure 
having 
to 
also 
look 
after 
the 
wellbeing of the people.  May I ask whether that is 
something that accords with the international standards or 
in some countries that may be a democratic societies or it 
was just something specific because it came at  time when 
South Africa was being democratised and it was thought 
that it was important that even the intelligence community 
must know that the wellbeing of the people is paramount.    
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   In my response Chair where 
20 
I don’t think we will and we should claim as South Africa 
that we were the only ones, it was informed basically by 
democracies in certain parts of the world, especially recall 
by then the cold war had stopped and this was informed by 
experiences 
from 
countries 
like 
your 
Canada, 
your 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 67 of 294 
 
Australia, your UK who are very, very strong in this field, 
and in this new mindset for intelligence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You touch on this in paragraph 27 
and we will then go to the white paper and look at the 
principles set out there which you have touched on already 
ambassador but when and Messrs Shaik and Njenje were 
appointed was there any clarification in relation to the 
philosophy, mission or intelligence intended for the new to 
be formed SSA provided to you? 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Not at all, there was none 
whatsoever.  That is why if you may allow me advocate, I 
can read from my statement in paragraph 27 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You may do so. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   And I can reconfirm that 
when we were appointed there had been no opportunity for 
us to be re-orientated or to be briefed.  What is this new 
philosophy now that is being ushered in?  
 
Remember we are moving now from a dispensation, 
from 1994 and by 20 – and at that time you didn’t have an 
20 
integrated intelligence, you had your separate intelligent 
services.  Now you are integrating our – okay before I 
move to that – that is now, we believe that we would have, 
they would have had an opportunity to discuss the 
philosophy for the SSA. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 68 of 294 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right and you say in paragraph 27 
that in order to be guided in respect of that philosophy you 
resorted to the white paper and the principles set out 
there? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair would this be a convenient 
time for a ten minute adjournment?   We are going to go to 
the white paper now which is a new topic. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no that’s fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And I want to take this opportunity 
10 
to put the dividers in their places there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay so maybe we should make it 15 
minutes? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   As you please Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Okay, 
we 
will 
take 
the 
short 
adjournment, it is quarter to twelve, we will resume at 
twelve o’clock.   
 
We adjourn. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you Chair. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
20 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  Ambassador would 
you please go to Annexure MM2 they have now been marked 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 69 of 294 
 
in your bundle?  And if you would turn to page 90.  Is that 
the intelligence white paper? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The first paragraph reads: 
“This white paper is intended to provide a framework for the 
understanding 
of 
the 
philosophy, 
mission 
and 
role 
of 
intelligence in a democratic South Africa.” 
The Chair has asked you the question as to whether this 
intelligence white paper was guided by or influenced by 
international democratic practice.  Do you have anything to 
10 
add to your previous comment? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No, no, I do not.  It was 
informed rather than influenced.  It was informed really by – 
ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  And you also explained to the 
Chair that this paper was developed against the background 
of a need for a new democratic dispensation. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Correct Sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Perhaps because it is reflected in the 
language of the constitution the distinction between human 
20 
security on the one hand and state security on the other it is 
a matter you have raised frequently in the past. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Sure. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What is the significance of that? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  To me I do not know whether it 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 70 of 294 
 
is a matter of interpretation because I learnt that in the legal 
field it can be an issue but in my interpretation which I can 
safely 
say 
many 
of 
my 
colleagues 
agree 
with 
the 
interpretation.  People like Njenje and – and Shaik that if you 
look at the pre 2009 new dispensation everything was 
national.  The National Intelligence Agents you know.  And 
we have – we have grown into the believing that this 
institution called Intelligence it is a national rather than a 
state instrument.  Hence, we had a problem and I am still 
having a problem to – to understand or to accept that we 
10 
have moved from national into state.  So the immediate 
question and we are still asking ourselves these questions.  
Did the principles that is the policy makers – did they really 
think through even on those two concepts? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Ambassador some may say well 
it is just a name but perhaps you can explain what is behind 
the distinction? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I – in my understanding again 
and again corroborated by my other colleague one of the 
challenges that we think happened in 2009 it was part of the 
20 
problems that the country was ushered in by 2007.  The 
Polokwane conference and the change of regime.  And that 
the new regime wanted to change everything that were – that 
came from the old.  As I say it is a matter of interpretation 
maybe but they would be the best.  What the Americans 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 71 of 294 
 
called the framers of our dis-intelligence – dispensation that 
decided that it should be state rather national. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On your understanding would on the face 
of it the change from national security to state security in 
any way on the face of it I accept that there might be 
arguments to the contrary – on the face of it would it 
resemble anything compared to what the focus of the 
intelligence under apartheid was or not really? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I – I think Chair we will come 
– we will touch… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  You will deal with that in due course. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I think we will touch with your 
question when we deal with the proclamation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  As an example. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  That is fine.  That is fine. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  But if I do not deal with it 
satisfactorily maybe I could then try and discuss other 
examples but we can try. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  Yes it is just that you – you do 
20 
emphasise and you have done so repeatedly and I must 
assume it is because of the importance of the issue you do 
emphasise the – the change of the language from national to 
state. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  To State. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 72 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And therefore, because I am – I have never 
been in intelligence I want to understand why in your mind 
this distinction is so important.  But I accept that for now you 
might be able to clarify that later. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I just want you to understand why I was 
asking that question. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I understand Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well perhaps very briefly for the 
10 
present it will come up later in the detail in the white paper 
but in developing in the words of the white paper a 
remodelling of the moral codes and organisational culture 
governing the intelligence environment.  The purpose of the 
intelligence community and structures who must they serve? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  The intelligence like any 
structure of government must serve the interest of the 
people primarily.  The state becomes the conduit and the 
oversight over its departments – are they doing the right 
thing?  Oversight bodies.  And again, later I think Advocate 
20 
Pretorius we will deal with this issue of oversight bodies. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes we are coming there now yes.  
The 
paper 
continues 
under 
the 
head 
Philosophy 
of 
Intelligence.  If you talk about the need to establish and this 
is in 1994/1995 the need to establish a new culture of 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 73 of 294 
 
intelligence.  And reference is made to the prior intelligence 
services having been formulated by a minority government 
and it was the aim of the white paper to redirect the 
intelligence community and structures to serving the national 
interest as you say.  In paragraph 4 mention is made of 
institutional checks and balances.  That is an important 
component of this white paper and of your evidence and 
perhaps evidence to come.  What were the institutional 
checks and balances introduced in the new dispensation and 
why were they introduced? 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   
1. There was the joint standing committee on intelligence 
which is a parliamentary body comprised of all the 
political parties represented in parliament.  That was 
one of those institutions. 
2. A new office was created, the office of the Inspector 
General which became or is supposed to be the 
ombudsman 
and 
a 
facilitator 
between 
aggrieved 
members of the service but more than anything public 
and interface on intelligence.  Any member of the 
20 
public, South Africans can report anything that they find 
wanting to the office of the Inspector General because 
as the term of reference of that office are clearly spelt 
out, he has got unfettered access to anything that is 
happening 
in 
a 
particular 
– 
in 
the 
intelligence 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 74 of 294 
 
structures. 
Those – I think those are the two most important oversight 
bodies for the functioning of intelligence that were created 
post 1994. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And Chair I might just place on 
record that the apparent State Security Service have 
expressed their willingness to testify and cooperate with the 
commission and of course what happened in the Intelligence 
Services in the last period covered by the commission’s work 
is something that will test whether these principles contained 
10 
in 
this 
white 
paper 
were 
actually 
carried 
out. 
 And 
importantly whether the oversight bodies performed their 
proper function whether that be the Inspector General’s 
office or the parliamentary committee.  But that is beyond 
your time as I understand it.  You will touch on it with Pan 1. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  The concept of modern 
intelligence.  You discussed it Ambassador briefly this 
morning. The move away from simply protecting the borders 
from foreign invaders and that being the purpose of intent 
20 
intelligence to a more modern concept of intelligence.  It is 
deal with in the last paragraph on page 92.  The forms of 
intelligence, what areas intelligence must cover?   If you 
would refer please to the last paragraph under paragraph 3.2 
on page 92. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 75 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Is that the one starting with 
Intelligence may be gathered? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You can read it if that is more convenient? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes, no I would prefer to read 
it Chair.  It says: 
“Intelligence might be gathered by covert or overt means 
from a range of sources human and non-human, open or 
secret.  In addition, there is a wide variety of intelligence 
10 
forms including political intelligence, economic intelligence, 
technological and scientific intelligence, military intelligence, 
criminal intelligence and counter intelligence.  Each of these 
is characterised by its seeking out and processing a certain 
type of information and may place different emphasis on the 
methods to be used.” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then over the page Ambassador 
the paper touches on the distinction which I believe is 
important in your approach between intelligence on the one 
hand and policy making on the other hand and their need to 
20 
be some independence in relation to policy making on the 
part of the intelligence structures.  Would you explain that 
please to the Chair? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes.  I can – I will try.  The – 
you 
cannot 
separate 
the 
two. 
 
You 
cannot 
separate 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 76 of 294 
 
intelligence from policy makers because one informs the 
other.  We gather intelligence through various means secret 
or open.  We do analysis independent from policy makers 
and then we alert the policy makers of the intelligence that 
we collect.  And this is a general norm there is nothing 
secret about it Chair.  It is a global activity.  All intelligence 
do it.  And that dynamism between the two is very, very 
critical and if there is a disjuncture between the two then 
problems might start for the country.  And I think we will 
come to this … 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Part. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You mention at consultation the duty 
to tell the policy makers what they need to know not what 
they want to know.  Perhaps you could expand on that? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  The principle – there is an 
inherent acceptable principle that you do not tell policy 
makers what they want to hear.  You tell them what you know 
not what they want to know because otherwise if you 
gravitate into that situation then the policy makers are going 
20 
to be dictating terms to you what to collect and what not to 
collect which is dangerous. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  We will – we will get to a 
practical example of that inter-relationship in due course.  
The purpose of intelligence in the white paper is set out at 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 77 of 294 
 
paragraph 3.2.3 and the first bullet – we are still on page 93 
Ambassador. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes I am there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The first bullet.  What does that say? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  It says: 
“One of the purpose of intelligence is to provide the policy 
makers timeous critical and sometimes unique information to 
warn them of potential risks and dangers.” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And are those only military risks and 
dangers? 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Not at all they are not.  Within 
the context of the philosophy of this new dispensation that 
was created you talking of both your traditional that is your 
security military risks but also your human security risks.  
Today if I may just cite an example?  Covid 19 the 
Coronavirus will fall under the ambit of your human security.  
Because it is not your traditional security.  In the past 
intelligence officers would say, no, no, no that is the matter 
for the Health Department but in the new philosophy that was 
created in 1994 those risks Advocate they include human 
20 
security risks.  That is why I am making an example of the 
pandemic that makes us now to wear these masks. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What about risks to the economic 
wellbeing of the country – economic risks? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  That is why we are tasked – 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 78 of 294 
 
we just read we are tasked to look at political, economic, 
and technological.  Look at again if I make an example of 
Covid – Covid is not only a health risk but it is also an 
economic risk.  Global economy is going to shatters because 
of Covid. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now that suggests to me what we say in 
terms of the scope of intelligence.  That suggests to me that 
intelligence or an intelligence structure would need to be 
populated 
by 
personnel 
with 
different 
categories 
of 
expertise.  Because for example I – I take it that the skills 
10 
and expertise that may be required for the Intelligence 
Service to pick up the threat posed by Covid 19 at an early 
stage and warn government would require certain expertise 
which might not necessarily be the same as the expertise 
required to pick up military dangers and so on.  Am I correct 
in thinking that – that is what would be required? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No – yes you are correct yes 
you are absolutely correct Chair but also… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Where those skills are not 
20 
there within intelligence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  There is a scope and again 
the constitution provides for relationships. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 79 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Actually, I do not know again 
but I think in the Constitution there is – there is a chapter 
that deals with the importance of inter-relationship between 
various spheres of government and various departments. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes ja there is. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  You see. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So you – in other words where you 
do not have that particular expertise within intelligence such 
expertise 
may 
be 
accessed 
from 
other 
government 
departments if necessary? 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Because they already have 
the number 1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  But also, they have the budget 
to do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Which intelligence did not 
have. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  At the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If we could go over the page 
Ambassador to the heading Towards a National Security 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 80 of 294 
 
Doctrine, page 94.  Again, we have touched on this earlier 
this part of the Intelligence White Paper deals with the shift 
from the traditional and narrow approach to security to a 
more comprehensive approach to security.  Perhaps you 
could explain or read onto the record the third paragraph 
onwards.  The third, fourth and fifth paragraphs at page 94.  
Do you have page 94 there? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  And if I am there – I am there 
Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And the heading Towards a New 
10 
National Security Doctrine. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes.  It says: 
“In recent years there has been a shift away from a narrow 
and almost exclusive military strategic approach to security.  
Security in the modern idiom should be understood in more 
comprehensive terms to correspond with new realties since 
the end of the bipolar cold war era.  These realities include 
the importance of non-military elements of security.  The 
complex nature of threads to stability and development and 
the reality of international inter-dependence.  This more 
20 
comprehensive approach to security is also endorsed by 
organisations like the UN and the OAU.  This approach is 
inter alia reflected in the Kampala document of the OAU of 
19 May 1991 where a process was set out in motion known 
as the conference on security, stability, development and 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 81 of 294 
 
cooperation in Africa.  CSSDEA this purpose – the purpose 
of this document was providing a comprehensive framework 
for 
Africa’s 
Security 
and 
Stability 
and 
measures 
for 
accelerated 
continental 
economic 
integration 
or 
social 
economic transformation.” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And the last paragraph please? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   
“The inter-mingling and transnational character of modern 
day security issues furthermore indicate that solutions to the 
problems of insecurity are beyond the direct control of any 
10 
single country and cannot be rectified by purely military 
means.  The international security agenda is shifting to the 
full range of political, economic, military, social, religious, 
technological, 
ethnic, 
and 
ethical 
factors 
that 
shapes 
security issues around the world.  The main threat to the 
wellbeing of individuals and the interest of the nations 
across the world do not primarily come from a neighbouring 
army but from other internal and external challenges such as 
economic collapse, over-population, mass migration, ethnic 
slavery, political oppression, terrorism, crime and disease to 
20 
mention but a few.” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes that is ethnic rivalry, I think. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Ethnic rivalry. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Just to clarify what was said 
there.  And then just the last sentence to over the page 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 82 of 294 
 
beginning:  
“Consequently, security is defined less in military terms and 
more in the broader sense of freedom from vulnerability of 
modern society.” 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes.  In other words – in the 
words of an American scholar new thinking on security has 
the following key features which should form an inter – an 
integral part of the philosophical outlook on intelligence. 
1. Security is conceived as a holistic phenomenon and 
incorporates 
political, 
social, 
economic 
and 
10 
environmental issues. 
2. The objectives of security policy go beyond achieving 
an absence of war to encompass the pursuit of 
democracy, sustainable economic development and 
social justice. 
3. Regional 
security 
policies 
seek 
to 
advance 
the 
principles of collective security non-aggression and 
peaceful settlement of disputes.” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  The establishment of the 
intelligence structures in 1994 and 1995 were they intended 
20 
to accord with these principles? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Absolutely.  Absolutely they 
were. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  There on – on page 97 Ambassador a 
certain basic principles of intelligence which you will touch 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 83 of 294 
 
on in your evidence and certainly further evidence may touch 
on these principles are named but not described in any detail 
they describe later in the middle of that page.  What were 
those principles? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  The first principle is an 
integrated national intelligence capability.  Integrated.  It 
always – that word integrated you will always see and hear it 
post 1994.  The principle of departmental capabilities that is 
when we were making the example of intelligence and health 
as an example.  Principle of political neutrality.  Absolutely – 
10 
absolutely critical in a democratic country for a democratic 
intelligence service.  Intelligence officers – Intelligence 
operatives must be political neutrality.  I mean politically 
neutral.  I cannot because I am a member of the ANC use 
that in my day to day function.  Because that might be – 
might be to the detriment of other political parties.  That is 
what that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  And of the people of South Africa? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  And of the people of South 
Africa.  The people of South Africa, the citizens. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Are the main targets for 
intelligence.  That is why Chair it is also important that 
intelligence has moved – must move away from that cloak 
and 
dagger 
thing 
where 
you 
wear 
dark 
glasses 
and 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 84 of 294 
 
overcoats.  Because it does not work anymore.  You are not 
going to get what you want.  Because everything is on your 
cell phone today.  You think you have information only to find 
out there are people who are far better off than you.  There 
are a number of papers that have been written Chair on this 
matter.  New models for intelligence and I promised … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it would be good to get some of 
those. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes we have discussed that Chair 
and we will attempt to put together a bundle. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And perhaps we will be assisted by 
further witnesses. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  In that regard. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But there certainly is valuable 
information there 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Which may inform your findings and 
20 
recommendations particularly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
Given 
the 
important 
role 
of 
intelligence in the democratic society properly manning. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Would it be correct then Ambassador 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 85 of 294 
 
based on what you said a minute ago to say that the 
principle of people first also applies to the Intelligence 
Community? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Absolutely.  Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The interest of the people first. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  It has to be. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  It has to be. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I will deal with it later Chair to 
illustrate my own personal preferences. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  And why I decided to come 
and present myself to this commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I was looking at myself as a 
South African first. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Because you have been 
mandated to look at these issues of allegations of state 
capture, corruption, fraud in the public sector including state 
organs. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 86 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  How could I then say, no this 
does not affect me because I am in intelligence.  Unless you 
do 
not 
understand 
the 
philosophical 
basis 
that 
your 
intelligence has been served up.  Hence some of us and I 
think I will speak on behalf of Njenje and Shaik. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  We responded to the call. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Because we understand our 
duties.  We understand our functions as Intelligence.  And 
10 
we are not apologising to anybody for having being in the 
Intelligence but it is Intelligence that is concerned with the 
wellbeing of the people and the country. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  That is the – that is the ? of it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you.  Yes, no thank you.  I 
think so that is very important.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The next principle, the fourth bullet 
on 
that 
page. 
 
It 
talks 
about 
Legislative 
Sanction, 
Accountability and Parliamentary Control. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  And parliamentary control. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQUETUKA: 
 
That 
is 
one 
of 
those 
oversights mechanisms that were set up.  Legislative 
sanctions.  Hence, we have as a country a Joint Standing 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 87 of 294 
 
Committee on Intelligence.   
 
Accountability and parliamentary oversight.  We can be 
called as Intelligence at any time by the Joint Standing 
Committee on Intelligence on anything.   
 
And we are going... I am going illustrate at the same 
time.  When you are confronted with challenges within your 
own domain, you can resort to them and seek for help.  And 
later we are going to talk of how we try to do that.  Well, as 
to whether it did help. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well...[intervenes]  
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  We were saying during our 
liberations, also with your legal team, what is the use of this 
beautiful constitution that we have, these strong institutions 
of oversight that we have, if it does not help the people of 
South Africa, the people of the region, the people of the 
continent and the world?  What are they of use?   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, I am very happy that you are going to 
deal more with those issues ambassador because, as I have 
said particularly, part of what I believe this Commission must 
look at is, when certain things were happening in the country 
20 
and there are bodies which had been set up to exercise 
oversight, where were they?  What were they doing? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Should they not come up? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 88 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
And 
tell 
the 
nation 
through 
this 
Commission that these were our obligations.  This is what we 
did.  Or if they did not have enough resources or enough 
mechanisms, should they not come and tell us? 
 
Or should they not say, “We have examined our own 
records against what has happened and we are prepared to 
say to the nation, we have fallen short in the following 
respect.” 
 
And we say, in order to make sure that in the future this 
kind of institution or body never falls short in this way, this is 
10 
what we suggest that you put in place. 
 
Because we have got to be truthful.  We have got to be 
honest, and I am hoping that some of the leaders from 
different institutions will not just look at coming to the 
Commission as a place where they must defend this or that 
or defend themselves. 
 
But where they would say, we believe that we are 
accountable.  We believe that, from time to time, that we 
must look at how we have performed.   
 
And in this case, we have looked at how we have 
20 
performed over X number of years.  We are not going to say 
we have done everything properly.   
 
Here is where we have gone wrong and we have 
accepted 
responsibility 
but 
we 
also 
want 
to 
make 
a 
contribution as to what should be done to make sure that this 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 89 of 294 
 
does not happen again. 
 
So I am very happy that from what you have said, I can 
see that you will be dealing with this very important issues.   
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  The other principle is the 
Principle of Balance Between Secrecy and Transparency.  I 
think it speaks for itself that one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Perhaps... well, it is dealt with later 
10 
but perhaps now is the time to deal with it.  The Principle of 
Classification and Declassification.  And why the process of 
declassification should not serve ulterior motives.  Perhaps 
you could touch on that? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  [laughs]  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  As you have told us. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  I thought that Advocate 
Pretorius would be an expert on this now through experience 
of his engagement in the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes.  The question of 
classification and declassification.  There are standard 
norms globally.  They are not the same, but norms where 
periodically what was secret must be declassified so that the 
public can have access. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 90 of 294 
 
 
The same time, and it must be accepted, and the public 
must accept it, the public cannot get everything that the 
Intelligence Services have.  Otherwise, it will jeopardise the 
work of people, operatives on the field. 
 
That must be accepted, but there has to be a balance.  
That is why even in terms of the classification and the 
declassification...  
 
Presently, I am not in a position to comment as to how 
effective is this classification and declassification within the 
Intelligence Services presently. 
10 
 
But perhaps when they come here, they can be in a 
position – and I do not want to blame people and accuse 
people of doing or not doing anything, only to find out that 
there is a lot of work that they are doing.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  I might just point out that in 
your statement you mention that you have certain documents 
which are classified ...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  ...at various levels, from confidential 
to secret. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now that has with the cooperation of 
the department now has been declassified.  So we will 
provide them in due course. 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQUETUKA: 
 
Ja, 
that 
has 
to 
be 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 91 of 294 
 
appreciated.  That has to be appreciated and I am sure key 
to those people would be the Minister of Intelligence 
because I would have expected that she would be the one 
who have had sight of that.   
 
That is encouraging for the work of the Commission but 
also Chair just to move a little bit just a step back just for 
one second.   
 
As I am sure Advocate Erasmus will lead me.  I was... 
there was a sense of comfort in me yesterday when I saw the 
responses of some of the members of the Top 6 of the ruling 
10 
party.  A positive mood where openly they say to you “No, we 
agree with what...  Yes, these colleagues or comrades as we 
call ourselves, they did meet us”.   
 
And, of course, there is also a document, I think in the 
package, where the former Comm as in commissars of 
uMkhonto we Sizwe, constituted themselves and went to the 
Top 6 to address the very issues that are bedevilling the 
country.   
 
And the Top 6, members of the Top 6, all... and I have to 
say, I appreciate that move by them. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, I think it is important.  There is a need 
on all of us, there is a need on leaders in society, leaders in 
the 
country, 
leaders 
of 
different 
institutions 
and 
organisations to seek to deal with these issues in a very 
honest manner and in a manner that is constructive and in a 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 92 of 294 
 
manner that is prepared... that shows preparedness. 
 
That there is no closing of mind to say, “No, we will 
never accept this or that”.  But to engage with you to say, 
“Let us see what happened.  Let us see how it happened.  
Let us see where there might have... things might not have 
happened the way they should have happened”.   
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Then... shall I continue 
advocate? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well, the further principles are 
largely self-explanatory and we will come back to them in 
10 
due course but perhaps you could just mention them for the 
sake of completeness. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes, then there is the 
Principle of the Separation of Intelligence from Policy 
Making. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We have dealt with that, yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Now this is critical and it is 
not just words.  It still needs to be unpacked this principle.  I 
have got my own interpretation of this principle of what it 
means and how it should be implemented and how it was 
20 
supposed to have been implemented. 
 
And we are constantly, as individuals, interacting with 
this principle informed by one element that we always ask 
and I think... not I think, in Ambassador Shaik’s evidence he 
flagged it and he asked:  “Does the country need a ministry 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 93 of 294 
 
for intelligence service?  Does it need a minister?” 
 
Otherwise, at certain points in time and life of the 
government of the country, you are going to find a discord on 
that principle where a policy maker who would want to 
interfere into the work that the Intelligence is supposed to be 
doing independent from him or her.  We will come also to 
that during my...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, I did want to say, at some stage, I do 
want to hear your interpretation.  So... at the right stage, Mr 
Pretorius, I will leave you to do that. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But also, and I do not know if you will deal 
with it in your statement, in your affidavit.  Also, I would be 
happy if you are able to enrich me in terms of internationally.   
 
What is the norm, maybe in democratic societies in 
regard to this Principle of Separating Intelligence from Policy 
Making?  But you can deal with it at the right time. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Thank you.  I will Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  And then there is the 
20 
Principle 
of 
Effective 
Management, 
Organisation 
and 
Administration.  Effective management, organisation and 
administration.  That spins through now the roles of a DG, 
who is the third of the department.  The role of a minister 
who is the third of policy and policy making and the 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 94 of 294 
 
administration. 
 
What systems do you put in place so that there are no 
wrongdoings that can happen within the organisation?  And I 
think Advocate Pretorius, you are going to be dealing with 
that matter. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Because there would be 
examples where we show that there were problems with this 
effective management and administration in the organisation.  
I am thinking of the example would be PAN 1 that I know you 
10 
will be dealing with.   
 
Then 
there 
is 
the 
Principle 
of 
Coordination 
of 
Intelligence and Liaison with Departmental Intelligence 
Structure.  Earlier on, I talked of the structures that were 
formed in 1994.   
 
One 
of 
them 
that 
has 
got 
that 
responsibility 
of 
coordination 
is 
the 
National 
Intelligence 
Coordinating 
Committee what is called NICOC which is administered by a 
coordinator for intelligence but also the coordinator for 
intelligence chair another structure that is called the NICOC 
20 
Principles and co-opted departments into the work of 
Intelligence. 
 
And the principle is a simple one that South Africa’s 
new dispensation, intelligence dispensation, is premised on 
coordinated intelligence.   
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 95 of 294 
 
 
One department... it is dangerous for one department to 
take a product to the president or to cabinet which has not 
been checked by other departments. 
 
Now as what is called Strategic Intelligence.  Now it is 
that coordinated package but the system also allows, of 
course, for operational ones which does not need to be 
coordinated. 
 
Then the Principle of an Ethical Code of Conduct to 
Govern Performance and Activities of Individual Members of 
the Intelligence Service.  That is command and control 
10 
which would lead to accountability based on ethics. 
 
So the first question that should be asked:  Do we 
have... are we ethical?  Do we understand this?  And what 
does it mean?  And not only, what does it mean, but how it 
is implemented?   
 
And that the oversight bodies are supposed to be the 
arbitrators over that control because they should be the 
ones who would say, “No, no, no.  There is no control here.  
These people are law onto themselves.  These people are 
involved in this and this and this and this”. 
20 
 
And if you have unethical people, then you will have an 
unethical intelligence service.  If you have an unethical 
intelligence service, that intelligence service can create a 
president in the country or can cause mayhem.   
 
So it is absolutely important.  I will pause there.  Or 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 96 of 294 
 
should I, advocate? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you.  If we could go to the next 
page where there are three principles set out that under a 
democratic government, those agencies entrusted with the 
task of intelligence work.  Should it read “to execute their 
tasks in the following manner”?  What were those three 
points? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  The first point as the white 
paper says Chair, they should except as primary the 
authority of the democratic institutions of society. 
10 
 
And those constitutional bodies mandated by society to 
participate in and/or monitor the determination of intelligence 
priorities.  One. 
 
They should accept that no changes will be made to the 
doctrines, structures and procedures of the National Security 
framework unless approved of by the people and their 
representative bodies. 
 
They should bind themselves to be contract entered into 
with the electorate through a mutually agreed set of norms 
and code of conduct. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Pause.  Does the fact that the 
Intelligence Community operates, at least to a degree, in a 
confidential or secret framework, affect the need for a strict 
code of conduct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Come again advocate? 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 97 of 294 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The need for a code of conduct, is 
that affected by the fact that intelligence operatives operate 
largely in secret? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  In partly yes and partly no.  I 
am saying no and I think... I like using the phrase... the 
jargon of the Americans when they talk about people who 
drafted these documents.  They call them the “framers”, “our 
framers”.   
 
But the people who drafted these white papers and this 
legislation, one of the other things that they had in mind in 
10 
an informed, of course, by the history of the country. 
 
We know that intelligence and security services during 
apartheid time were a hand unto themselves.  That is why 
the creation of the Vlakplasies, your Koevoet’s, your what, 
what, what.  They were not accountable to anybody. 
 
They had that in mind Chair.  And of course,... that is 
why I am saying yes or no.  Because if everything is locked 
up in vaults, people will not know what is happening and it is 
not necessary for everything to be secret in Intelligence.  
No. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, I am not sure whether my and your 
understanding of Mr Pretorius’ question is the same but I 
understood him to be asking the question whether the fact 
that Intelligence who operates largely in secret, justify the 
proposition that there should be no code of conduct.  That 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 98 of 294 
 
was my understanding.  Was that your understanding as 
well? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  No, it was not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Because there is a code of 
conduct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay Mr Pretorius, I misunderstand. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Oh, perhaps I should put it a little 
more bluntly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laugh] Ja. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If I may? 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That the need for a code of conduct 
is even greater where people operate under a cover of 
secrecy.  That is the proposition I am putting to you. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  The need... come again, 
come again, come again? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The need for a code of conduct 
...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  ...and a strict code of conduct which 
is enforced, is greater where people operate out of the 
public eye.   
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  [No audible reply]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But...[intervenes]  
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 99 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  I...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But that is something we can debate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Well, let him say something because 
maybe... his answer that he gave you earlier on, was not an 
answer I expected from him.  That is why I am following up. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  I...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me tell you what I am hearing. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On my understanding of his question as I 
10 
articulated it, namely, whether the fact that Intelligence 
operates secretly, justifies that there should be no need for a 
code of conduct. 
 
So having understood the question in that may, which 
may have not been correct, but his follow-up seems to 
suggest that may have been correct.   
 
Your answer to say yes or no, I did not understand 
correctly because I would have thought that the need for a 
code of conduct is justified everywhere. 
 
But the actual content of the code of conduct may be 
20 
informed by the nature of the operations involved but that 
there should be a code of conduct should not be in dispute.  
That is my thinking. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Okay.  I agree with the latter 
part. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 100 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  It should not be in dispute 
but also number 2.  It is not everything that is in the domain 
of the intelligence in practice, in day-to-day practice that is 
in secret.  It is not. 
 
Let me make... say an example and... of an activity that 
we got involved roundabout 2003/2004.  Then we were 
developing a National Security Strategy. 
 
That process was... one was an open process.  I was 
leading that process during that time.  We collaborated one 
10 
with business.  We collaborated with the Human Rights 
Committee.  He is an advocate now.  Kollapen, né? 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  H’m. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  When he was a chairman of 
the...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, he is a judge. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  He is a judge. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  H’m. 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQUETUKA: 
 
He 
came 
to 
make 
a 
presentation.  We were... the hearings were not being 
20 
conducted at the farm but they were at CSIR. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  H’m. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  People from the Institute of 
Security Studies... who is the guy there?  He came to make a 
presentation.  NGO’s who... because we were convinced that 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 101 of 294 
 
the development of National Security is not an exclusive 
domain of us.   
 
We cannot develop a National Security alone.  So that is 
why my yes or no.  But it is true that there are those 
activities that are secret and there I will go into a trench and 
say it, if there has to be those.  I cannot just be open, 
everything open. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  H’m. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Otherwise, why do we have 
an Intelligent Organisation? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  H’m.  H’m.  H’m.  Okay.  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  But we can still...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  ...debate this thing outside 
beyond the... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQUETUKA: 
 
The... 
I 
see Advocate 
Pretorius is smiling. [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If we go to page 99, over the page.  
20 
You have told the Chair that in 1994/1995 there were two 
major intelligence structures.  One domestic and one foreign.  
If you could just please look at the second last paragraph on 
page 99 which begins with “the most significant departure 
from the old dispensation...” 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 102 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQUETUKA: 
 
Yes, 
a 
very 
important 
principle and it tends to be forgotten.  It says: 
“The 
most 
significant 
departure 
from 
the 
old 
dispensation, that is the apartheid department, the 
dispensation, is that instead of two centralised 
civilian intelligence organisations...” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, the document says one instead of 
one. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Instead of one...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQUETUKA: 
 
...centralised 
national 
intelligence 
organisation. 
 
Remember 
in 
the 
old 
dispensation, you only had the National Intelligence Service.  
Now this line says, “a departure”  There will be two.  Hence, 
the creation of your National Intelligence Agency and your 
South African Secret Service, right? 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  H’m. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:   
“This arrangement will not only ensure that the new 
intelligence dispensation in South Africa corresponds 
20 
with general international trends but will promote 
greater focussing, effectiveness, professionalism and 
expertise in the specialised fields of Domestic and 
Foreign Intelligence. 
The services will have distinct intelligence mandates 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 103 of 294 
 
and line functional responsibilities and will share 
essential 
support 
services 
to 
avoid 
costly 
and 
unnecessary duplication. 
They will, accordingly, create appropriate liaison 
mechanisms to deal with areas of national interest.” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair, I see it is one o’clock.  I am 
not sure what your intention is with the lunch adjournment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I will take the lunch adjournment but I 
just want to find out whether Ambassador Maquetuka has 
any constraints in case... I do not know if you have a better 
10 
idea in case we have got to go beyond four o’clock to finish? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, we have been dealing with that 
issue and the limitation of flights. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But may I just ask the ambassador... 
need to go...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ambassador, what is your situation? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  No, my situation is fine 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is fine? 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  I do not have any time 
constraints. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, I see. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Even if we go up to twelve. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  [laughs]  No, thank you.  So if we 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 104 of 294 
 
need 
to 
go 
beyond 
four 
o’clock, 
then 
we 
will 
go 
...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because I am available and it is important 
that if we can, we get all of his evidence today. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay we will take the lunch adjournment 
and we will resume at two o’clock.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you ready, Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you.  Ambassador, would 
you look at page 99, we were still dealing with the 
intelligence white paper and the chapter on composition of 
the intelligence community.  You have given much of this 
evidence already but the second last paragraph on page 
99, would you just read that onto the record please or 
explain it in your own words, whichever you prefer. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   The second last…? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, please. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    
“The 
most 
significant 
departure 
from 
the 
old 
dispensation 
that 
instead 
of 
one 
centralised 
National Civilian Intelligence organisation there will 
be two.  This arrangement will not only ensure that 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 105 of 294 
 
the new intelligence dispensation in South Africa 
corresponds with general international trends but 
will 
promote 
greater 
focusing, 
effectiveness, 
professionalism and expertise in the specialised 
fields of domestic and foreign intelligence. The 
services will have distinct intelligence mandates 
and line functional responsibilities and will share 
essential 
support 
services 
to 
avoid 
costly 
an 
unnecessary duplication.  They will accordingly 
create appropriate liaison mechanisms to deal with 
10 
areas of mutual interests.” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I understand from your evidence, 
Ambassador, that that remains your own view of the 
appropriate organisation of intelligence services. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, I still do but I would 
still be persuaded to change my view but presently, that is 
the position that I take. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But Chair will make his own 
findings in due course in relation to what happened in the 
intelligence community particularly after your departure but 
20 
let me put a theoretical or notional question to you.  If 
members 
of 
the 
executive 
wanted 
to 
control 
the 
intelligence services more tightly, would that be easier or 
more difficult if they were amalgamated into a single 
structure? 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 106 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I would be easier because 
they will only have to deal with one Director General 
instead of having to deal with two Directors General. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   According to the post ’94. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And there would have been two 
separate structures as opposed to a single structure. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   There has always been two 
separate structures distinct in terms of their mandate, 
distinct in terms of their field of expertise.  SASS, the 
10 
foreign 
intelligence 
service 
did 
not 
do 
anything 
domestically.  If there is a domestic intrusion – I mean, a 
foreign intrusion into the domestic, they will then liaise 
with the domestic NIA.  Hence, they will create liaison 
mechanism. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, thank you.  But let us go over 
the page where the white paper deals with the control and 
coordination of intelligence.  Again, you have dealt with 
some of these matters and the Chair is certainly interested 
in obtaining as much evidence in this field of your 
20 
expertise as possible.  What this – a portion of the paper 
refers to is a mechanism for parliamentary oversight, 
budgetary control and external auditing and, importantly, 
an independent Inspector General for Intelligence.  What 
was put in place in the legislation that followed 1994/1995?  
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 107 of 294 
 
They are listed there.  If you would just tell the Chair 
please of the control and oversight institutions that the 
legislation ultimately provided for. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   It is true that a joint 
standing committee for parliament, which is called the Joint 
Standing Committee on Intelligence, was created quite 
early and if my memory serves me quite well, the first 
Chairperson in 1994 of that was the now Minister Lindiwe 
Sisulu.  Two Inspectors General now.  A decision – I know, 
a decision was subsequently taken that we need not have 
10 
two Inspectors General because one Inspectors General 
can do the work for both organisations, you see?  That was 
number one.  But also, it became a cost-saving mechanism 
because we had to be – not me, the policy makers were 
aware 
of 
that 
cost-saving 
mechanism. 
 
Those 
two 
institutions indeed were created right at the beginning. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let me ask, to whom does the Joint 
Standing Committee for Parliament report? 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA: 
 
 
They, 
like 
any 
other 
parliamentary committee – okay, let me first say, in its 
20 
functional design the JSCI is different from the rest of the 
parliamentary committees in that, number one, all members 
of the JSCI for issues that the committee sits for, they are 
not supposed to report to their political parties, the 
framework forbids them. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 108 of 294 
 
 
Number two, I think they go through a security 
clearance and the rationale is that they would be privy to 
classified information.  So that is the second one. 
 
Number three, Advocate, media is not allowed in the 
meetings of the JSCI.  It is in closed doors.  And no 
member of parliament, no matter even if he or she is a 
secretary, can go and sit in meetings of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Intelligence.  So that is the distinction. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Presumably they would prepare 
reports like other standing committees? 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Like any other standing 
committee 
they 
prepare 
annual 
reports 
because 
the 
intelligence on an annual – on an ongoing basis they can 
be called at any time on any issue that crops up that might 
have security intelligence implication.  They can be 
summoned to Cape Town. 
 
Number two, on an annual basis intelligence reports 
annually to the JSCI.  It is a formal process, a formal 
report on all issues.  Let me say that report is supposed to 
be on all issues that have been taking place during that 
20 
particular year. 
 
Now the only thing that I am not sure of, I am not 
certain of, to whom does that report goes to but I will 
expect – I do not know, but I will expect the Speaker of 
Parliament will have access to that report.  I expect, I do 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 109 of 294 
 
not know, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I would expect also that there should be 
somebody in parliament to whom such a report should go 
because the committee, despite the differences that it may 
have compared to other committees, as you have said, it 
remains a committee of parliament. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And if, for argument’s sake, it does not 
do 
its 
job 
properly, 
that 
might 
attract 
negativity 
to 
parliament.  So while its report might not necessarily be 
10 
accessible to all members of parliament, there must be one 
or a few within parliament who – particularly the leadership 
to whom it should be should be accessible. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I would expect so also, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   As I say, I am no au fait with 
the nuts and bolts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Are you able to comment, 
20 
Ambassador, on the role of the Inspectors General and how 
the 
Inspectors 
General 
operates, 
whether 
it 
is 
an 
independent office, whether it is part of the intelligence 
service or what is the position? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   You know, these institutions 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 110 of 294 
 
again, unfortunately, but I think like any institution in any 
country, institutions are run by people.  The effectiveness 
of 
or 
not 
depend 
on 
that 
individual, 
so 
is 
that 
independence.  If there is one thing that I can put my neck 
on the block, the present Inspector General of Intelligence 
exercises independence and the independence of his 
office.  He carry no favours, he is not influenced by 
anybody, he – now that is one thing that I can say about 
that office. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What is the function of the office? 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   The function of the office is 
if Advocate Paul Pretorius has got an issue, he picks up, 
he suspects that his telephone is being tapped by the 
Intelligence – I am making a practical example, Chair – 
Adv Pretorius goes straight to the office of the Inspector 
General and lodge his complaint formally and the Inspector 
General would set up a process then to investigate that 
and interact with Adv Pretorius.  That is the way it – it is 
not only individuals, groups of people can do that, it is an 
oversight, 
it 
is 
a 
crosschecking 
mechanism 
over 
20 
Intelligence and a very vital office, I must say.  The country 
will still need it for a foreseeable time.   
 
And by the way, again, we are not the only ones 
who have such an office since I can safely say it is a 
global trend, most countries have Inspectors General. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 111 of 294 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The white paper refers to the 
functions as including reviewing the activities of the 
Intelligence Services and monitoring their compliance with 
policy 
guidelines. 
 
Does 
that 
accord 
with 
own 
understanding and experience? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, through its annual 
report and based on the cases that they would have been 
dealing.  There is one thing about that office, I can never 
say there was any time when they reacted on rumours.  It 
is a very, very professional office.  Maybe I do not know, 
10 
Chair, is it because it has always – not always really, but 
predominantly it is legal people.  I think the present one is 
an advocate, I think, Adv Dintwe. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is it part of the dispensation that 
the Inspector General should have unhindered access to 
classified information? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   For a very long time my 
interpretation of this unfettered access, it was only when I 
was interacting with the office for the first time after a very 
long time in 2018 that I discovered that the unfetteredness 
20 
- I do not know what it means.  Perhaps, Chair, you can 
educate to me on legally what does it mean.  I used to 
think that there is nobody who can stop them from getting 
any type of information there.  That is how I knew it but I 
was cautioned by some of the slim people there that no, 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 112 of 294 
 
Ambassador, it is not like that, we have got to ask our – I 
do not know, maybe that is some of the things that we need 
or the Commission need to be educated in by… 
CHAIRPERSON:   By the current incumbent and by others 
who are operate in this environment. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Intelligence environment. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And who might understand it better. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, save for one comment, that 
you might wish yourself to comment on, Ambassador, if the 
body being investigated can withhold information from the 
investigating body, would that not cause a problem? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Of course it will cause a 
serious problem and as it has already started in our 
situation.  I think you know better, that both Mo Shaik and 
Njenje, came to the Commission without certain documents 
that they wanted declassified.  But at least I am told, with 
20 
me now, the documents have been declassified. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am informed some of them have, 
actually. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   You see?  So that in itself is 
a problem.  That in itself is a problem because again I was 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 113 of 294 
 
assured in no uncertain terms that we have been instructed 
to cooperate with the Commission and we shall cooperate 
and we will get the documents. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  I understand your answer in a 
different context, Ambassador, but particularly in the 
context of the Inspector General whose duty it is to review 
and monitor compliance.  Is it not logical to expect at least 
a high degree of access to documentation? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   As I say, during the whole 
time of my involvement there since 1995, I thought that he 
10 
had unfettered access and I was happy with that and I 
would still be happy with the Inspector General having that 
access. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then finally in relation to control 
and coordination of intelligence, in paragraph 6.2 on page 
100 there is mention made of the National Intelligence 
Coordinating Committee.  Briefly, what is its function and 
how does it rely to the cabinet Committee on Security and 
Intelligence and to the Joint Standing Committee? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Luckily, Chair, I can answer 
20 
that 
question 
without 
making 
any 
reference 
to 
any 
document.  I was appointed the Coordinator for Intelligence 
and I served my whole four term between 2004, if I am not 
mistaken – no, no, no, 2002 until 2004 I was the 
Coordinator for Intelligence.  That office is – as I see, it is 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 114 of 294 
 
divided into two in terms of operation.   
One, you have a NICOC staff which used to be plus 
minus 20, 25, highly effective, highly skilled analysts.  Of 
course, there were administrators for logistics and liaison 
people.  It is responsible, it is the NICOC staff that reports 
to the coordinator and then there is the NICOC committee 
which comprises of all the herds of the Intelligence 
Services from Crime Intelligence, Military Intelligence, 
Defence Intelligence, as it is called, NIA and SASS, that is 
the foreign and the domestic branch.  But also, the 
10 
Director General in the presidency is a co-opted member 
together with the Director General of Foreign Affairs is 
there, so that is the composition of the structure.  It is to 
generate the national strategic intelligence product that 
goes to cabinet and in between there would be other 
products depending on the situation.   
I would expect, for example now, continuously they 
would or should be briefing cabinet on Covid-19 from an 
intelligence perspective not from – necessarily from the 
Command Council, it is a separate.  That is the function of 
20 
the coordination.  As I said – as we are – we said earlier 
coordination 
of 
intelligence 
is 
critical 
in 
the 
new 
dispensation. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If I may ask you please to then just 
mention 
the 
cabinet 
Committee 
on 
Security 
and 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 115 of 294 
 
intelligence.  That is something different from NICOC, the 
National Intelligence Coordinating Committee? 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA: 
 
 
Yes, 
it 
is 
a 
cabinet 
committee, it consists of ministers. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Ministers of the security 
cluster. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right and it receives reports from 
NICOC, I understand? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   It receives reports from 
10 
NICOC.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If I may take you please to page 
102.  Various measures are listed there under the heading: 
“Transforming Intelligence Methodology” 
7.3, what does it say?  You have touched on this now in 
relation to secrecy and declassification.   
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   It says: 
“The development of a more open intelligence 
community will go a long way towards demystifying 
and 
building 
trust 
in 
the 
National 
Intelligence 
20 
Community…” 
Trust in the National Intelligence Community and this trust, 
it is from the citizens. 
“…where legal limits on secrecy including criteria 
and 
timeframes 
for 
classification 
and 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 116 of 294 
 
declassification 
are 
clearly 
understood 
and 
accepted by society, the dangers of intelligence 
system becoming a self-serving are averted. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  Is there any comment that 
you have?  It seems it appears self-explanatory. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Safely – and let me 
recognise and say that the process of declassification has 
taken a long time to mature and, as I say, I can safely say, 
without any fear or favour here, Chair, by the time I left in 
2012 the area of declassification had not then matured.  I 
10 
do not know what the status quo is now as we speak.  I do 
not know but it took a long time. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Was it an oversight on our 
part?  I cannot really give reasons. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Can I take you to 7.4 please, that 
is covert action. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Firstly, what does it say and what 
is the purpose of…? 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   7.4, covert …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That principle. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Sorry, Advocate. 
“Measures  designed to deliberately interfere with 
the normal political processes in other counties, for 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 117 of 294 
 
example your coups or your destabilization and with 
the internal workings of parties...” 
And this would refer political parties and predominantly it 
would be opposition parties, for example, by the governing 
party that is ruling at the time who have got better access 
to intelligence than members of the opposition parties.  I 
think that is the framework. 
“…and organisations engaged in lawful activity 
within South Africa must be expressly forbidden.  
Intelligence agencies and those within them guilty 
10 
of 
such 
breaches 
must 
be 
disciplined 
in 
the 
severest term.” 
And in terms of – if you look at the Act subsequently, it is 
illegal for Intelligence Service in South Africa to engage in 
those activities. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So, for example, to put a narrative 
in the public domain which was false but seeks to influence 
political action, is that within the province – legitimate 
province of an Intelligence Agency? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Absolutely.  Absolutely 
20 
because …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Absolutely? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I am saying absolutely. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Absolutely or absolutely not? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I would be treason for them 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 118 of 294 
 
to do that, interfere with those activities of those political 
parties, that disinformation that is intended to destabilize 
another party.  That would be treason. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If you go then – there is a related 
principle on page 109, paragraph 5.3.  Again, that refers 
expressly to the concept of disinformation.  Would you 
place that on record please and if you have a comment, 
please make it. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Is that 5.3? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    
“A National Intelligence organisation is a national 
asset.” 
See what I was saying earlier on.  Not the state asset, it is 
a national asset and shall therefore be politically non-
partisan.  Non-partisan, that is the principle. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the next paragraph? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    
“No 
Intelligence, 
Security, 
Service 
organisation 
shall be allowed to carry out any operations or 
20 
activities that are intended to undermine, promote 
or influence any South African political party or 
organisation at the expense of another by means of 
any acts, e.g. active or covert measures or by 
means of disinformation.” 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 119 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Should it disqualify me or not to be in – 
to serve in the intelligence service if my plan is that while I 
am in the intelligence service, I will engage in assisting a 
political party or individuals within that party to achieve 
their party political objectives? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   You can be charged. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   You can be charged under 
the various intelligence Acts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, it is a no-go area. 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   No, it is a no-go area Chair 
and be charged. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The remaining pages of the White 
Paper are largely self explanatory and they set a high ideal 
of improving the quality of life of ordinary South Africans 
and that being the goal to which an Intelligence Service 
should be erected.  Perhaps we could just refer to one 
such paragraph on page 105 it refers there to the RDP, that 
has 
since 
been 
replaced 
in 
policy 
by 
other 
policy 
20 
documents but the underlying sentiment is the same.  The 
chapter on conclusion, chapter 9 on page 105, perhaps you 
could place that on record by way of summary. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   That is the conclusion. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 120 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Thanks Chair.  Our country 
is poised on the brink of tremendous opportunity in which 
the human potential of our people can be harnessed to 
make South Africa a beacon of hope and success for the 
world. 
 
Intelligence 
has 
a 
critical 
world 
to 
play 
in 
identifying 
threats, 
potential 
threats, 
as 
well 
as 
opportunities for the democratic dispensation in South 
Africa.  The transformation of the Intelligence community is 
a process already underway and must be encouraged, so 
as to allow the Intelligence community to play its rightful 
10 
role in meeting our National goals, particularly those set 
out in the RDP.  Ultimately it is through the approach to 
security outlined in the RDP the meeting of the basic needs 
of the people through development, sustained economic 
growth and mass participation in the building of a new 
South Africa, that the cherished goals of peace and 
stability will be reached. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   As you said, Ambassador, this 
White Paper was developed in 1995/1996…[intervenes]. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   1994. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   1994, is it still relevant today? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   You know by the day, 
whenever I read this White Paper, this White Paper is still 
relevant up till today but like any other policy document, no 
matter how good it was in 1994 the dynamism that it 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 121 of 294 
 
operates in our case, Nationally, Regionally, continentally 
and global, the only thing that I can – again I am going to – 
I’m not going to apologise to anybody, but state that, 
unfortunately there had been no other White Paper that I 
have seen, since 1994 and if you look at the potentials for 
economic development, the threats that are facing the 
global 
world 
have 
changed 
and 
you 
can 
actually 
categorise, 1) 911, 2) the rise of international terrorism, 
the emergence of your Bin Laden’s and what have you, I 
mean you can literally, in the development field, President 
10 
Mbeki ushered in African renaissance which was aimed, 
basically, at reviving Africa and it was championed by 
South Africa, joined by Nigeria, joined by Algeria, joined by 
Senegal and it became a document, a strategy for Africa’s 
development, now that was marvellous.  There was a time 
Chair, when, in any forum in the world, when a South 
African delegation comes – South African delegation would 
be a flavour of the day.  The foreign policy of South Africa 
was understood, championed by President Mbeki supported 
by Minister Zuma – Dlamini Zuma, your Aziz Bahar ’s at 
20 
foreign affairs, your Willy Nhlapo…[? 35.32], it was a team 
that was driving this process and we were beginning to see 
South African being looked at now, like this beacon of hope 
that this document talks about and some of us were very 
excited and say, now we are beginning to reach Denmark.  
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 122 of 294 
 
You know the saying, when shall we reach Denmark, refers 
to, when will we reach that excellence level as a county.  
Can you say the same thing now that’s another subject, 
perhaps for another discussion? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it at a time when – or did that 
environment make you feel that South Africa was taking its 
rightful place in the family of nations? 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA: 
 
 
It 
was 
in 
a 
big 
way…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I’m sure it felt good to be a South 
10 
African. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   It was good to be a South 
African. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   It was good to be a South 
African. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I detect a view, correct me if I’m 
wrong Ambassador, but it might be time for a new White 
Paper embodying democratic principles, such as those set 
20 
out in the original White Paper? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I might simply say it needs 
to be amended but the philosophical base, the thrust of it 
might not need to be.  I’m not saying there should be a 
new White Paper, you don’t have to reinvent the wheel but 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 123 of 294 
 
it will need to be tweaked, definitely, sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well are you – and this may be 
something that you are still going to address and Mr 
Pretorius might be dealing with it in due course.  I sensed 
from what you were saying when you were saying you have 
not seen any other White Paper since this one and of 
course we are 26 years into democracy, so it’s more than 
25 years old.  I sense that you may be suggesting that, if 
there was to be any departure from, maybe, some of its 
principles, there ought – such changes, such departure 
10 
should have been preceded by another White Paper 
showing how, the thinking, how it had been though through 
and why it may have been necessary or deemed necessary 
to depart from some of the features of this White Paper. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   That’s exactly what I’m 
saying and that is why – that was amongst our concerns in 
2009 that we have not defined a new philosophy for this 
new animal called the State Security Agency.  Is it a 
change, you needed to go through that process, look at the 
White Paper and we will also deal with another part of it 
20 
when you look through that, when we deal with, again, your 
proclamation? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, I’m going to come to that now 
Ambassador but I do understand you to say that the 
principles – well let me not put words in your mouth, what 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 124 of 294 
 
do you say about the basic underlying principles contained 
in the White Paper? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   They are still relevant, I 
would contend unless I can be proven otherwise. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If we can go then, to page 7 of 
your statement please Ambassador.  You deal with an issue 
that was covered…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry what page? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 7 Chair, you deal with an 
issue there that was covered by Messrs. Njenje & Shaik 
10 
and you deal with it too and that is the question of whether 
it was legal or appropriate to restructure the SSA by 
proclamation as was done.  Now we know the proclamation 
was followed up some years later by an act of Parliament 
but what was your concern in summary with the fact that, 
firstly, there was an amalgamation and secondly that it was 
done through proclamation? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Shall I read verbatim what 
I’m saying in my statement in answering that question? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You can read if it’s convenient to do so. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   The same page, paragraph 
28, am I correct? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   It says, 
“Ambassador Shaik and I shared a concern about 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 125 of 294 
 
the amalgamation of the SSA through proclamation 
rather than National legislation as required by 
Section 209 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic 
of South Africa, Act 108 of 1996, that is the 
Constitution.  Indeed, I raise my concern about the 
proclamation with my colleague, Ambassador Shaik 
and Mr Njenje, on the day of the announcement of 
our appointment, during October 2009”. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Maybe you can go on to paragraph 
30, you established an Executive Committee, you say, in 
10 
paragraph 29 and paragraph 30 then. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Should I jump to paragraph 
30 now? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes please. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   It goes further to say, 
 
“During the beginning of 2010, remember, Chair, 
just to remind you, we are appointed in 2010 – I mean 
2009, October, the Executive Committee, in consultation 
with – Executive Committee now will mean the three of us 
– yes that’s the Executive – in consultation with legal 
20 
services discussed the proclamation and the, then, draft 
State Security Bill”. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just before you proceed, Ambassador, 
I’m sure I can find it somewhere else, when was the 
proclamation gazetted, I don’t need the date, I just want 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 126 of 294 
 
the month I’m sure it was 2009 or? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Advocate Pretorius can you 
because there’s a copy of the proclamation…[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The proclamation itself is annexed 
it was in 2009 I understand. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
If 
you 
tell 
me 
it’s 
early 
in 
2009…[intervenes]. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Okay it’s marked as MM13 
according…[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, the date is 11 September 
10 
2009. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay, so you appointed the month 
after it was promulgated? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay I interrupted you while you wanted 
to comment or to continue. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  “During 2010 the Executive  
Committee, in consultation with legal services, 
discussed the proclamation and the then draft State 
Security Bill.  Our aim was to bring to the attention 
20 
of the Minister, that is Minister Siyabonga Cwele, 
issues 
that 
could 
be 
corrected 
in, 
both, 
the 
proclamation and the Bill, which we felt fell foul of 
the Constitution as well as other matters which had 
been directed by the Minister which were in conflict 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 127 of 294 
 
with the proclamation and the Bill.  These concerns 
were embodied in a document submitted to the 
Minister on the 28 t h of April 2010, entitled, State 
Security Agency Legislative blah, blah, blah”, 
 
I’m going to pause there because they are going to 
inform you or us the correct citation of that Bill, am I right? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, when this was drafted there 
was uncertainty in everybody’s mind, the legal team, and in 
your 
mind, 
I 
understand, 
Ambassador, 
as 
to 
which 
particular document you were referring to.  We have two 
10 
documents under the tab MM6, the first is at page 131 
which is in very small print, MM6, that is Ambassador 
Shaik’s document as I understand it and then the second 
one, which is now being declassified is your document, 
that’s at page 134.1, am I correct, 134.1? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   You confused me now and 
when I thought I was getting educated by reference to MM 
and what have you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright do you have MM6? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, I have MM6 sir. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now that document – let’s ignore 
what the text of the affidavit says, we’ll correct that, if you 
go to MM6, that document there is not your document, 
that’s the document penned, I understand, and authored by 
Ambassador Shaik, am I correct? 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 128 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   That’s correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now if you go on three pages, 
you’ll see the – another document. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yebo. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That’s your document, as I 
understand it, am I correct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   This is my document I can 
confirm more so because it’s on my signature and that 
there is no doubt that it is indeed my signature, I can verify 
it. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, yes, and that’s the document 
dated April 2010 at page 134.1 in which you set out your 
concerns in relation to the proclamation and the, then draft 
State Security Bill, am I correct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   That’s correct and also can 
I 
just 
say 
– 
be 
allowed 
to 
say 
really, 
really, 
the 
declassification of this document has helped me also to be 
precise as to what are we referring to because number 
one, I was not clear what this is, I really thought that this 
one that was drafted by Ambassador Shaik – and I would 
20 
want to believe now that the document that Ambassador 
Shaik drafted might have been his input when we were 
discussing these issues.  I suspect but be it as it may, 
there’s no contradiction whatsoever, this is the formal one. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, I don’t want to gloss over 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 129 of 294 
 
this because it is part of your evidence and what you want 
to say to the Chair, but is it possible for you to, briefly, 
summarise what your concerns were about.  Were they 
organisational and administrative, did they go further than 
that?  Perhaps you can refer to paragraph 31 of your 
statement. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well one, Mr Pretorius he could begin by 
– because obviously he has – well I’m saying obviously,  
maybe I shouldn’t  say, he has read the contents of this 
10 
document before now, if he can confirm that they are 
correct because it’s been quite some time and then he can 
deal with the main features of the document. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, thank you Chair for 
helping me on that one because I haven’t seen this 
document since 2010. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, is that so okay. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   You see that’s number one 
but be it as it may I will try and summarise what were the 
issues really. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   And the issues, one, as 
explained to us by the legal team, the issues amongst 
others were legal. Our legal team agreed with us that 
proclamation was not the route that was supposed to have 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 130 of 294 
 
been taken and they cited issues that we dealt with this 
morning. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And we’ve referred to the White 
Paper which there should be no changes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No changes and the changes 
Intelligence, says the White Paper in one paragraph, are 
not a cut and paste issue you see, that was one.  I recall, 
also the other issue was the question of the mandate that 
is given to us in the restructuring. Now these are the other 
issues that I’m referring to in that paragraph and I can 
10 
remember now, it refers to the role of NICOC, the Minister 
gives an instruction through that process of the Bill to 
include NICOC and to make NICOC as part of my 
performance and I said, no it can’t be.  You see NICOC is 
not a division of NEA or SAS.  NICOC is not a division of 
the SSA as it is now.  NICOC is created by its own Act of 
Parliament and its modus operandi is different completely 
so I cannot, that was my position. That was one of the 
problems I don’t know – I should be dealing with it in this 
report.  The other issue, I remember quite well, I see it 
20 
here, that was quite a contentious issue…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry Ambassador, you may have left 
something that – you probably mention in the letter, I 
haven’t 
read 
this 
particular 
letter 
as 
well 
but 
you 
mentioned in your affidavit that, part of the problem with 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 131 of 294 
 
using the proclamation route was that, as you understand 
it, the Constitution required National Legislation, so that 
was another point you made earlier so I don’t know 
whether you may have included that point here but that 
was part of your issues. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   You are correct, you are 
correct Chair and I still maintain even today, unless I can 
be proven otherwise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   The other problem in 
10 
relation to that, I can see it flagged here, you see there is 
a structure that we have in the Intelligence, and again 
here, this structure is a very critical structure for the 
functioning of intelligence.  It’s a structure called the 
National Communication Centre, a very sensitive structure 
but I deal with it because nonetheless the document is 
declassified now.  Paragraph 2 of that M6 it is my 
understand that – okay first let me start from paragraph 1, 
Advocate are we together? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   It says, I would respect – 
now this is the letter I am addressing to the Minister, 
“I would respectfully like to make the Minister aware 
of certain abnormalities that arise from the present 
legislative framework governing the State Security 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 132 of 294 
 
Agency and its components at the present time.  In 
this regard, specific attention will be paid to the 
transformation 
of 
COMSEC, 
that 
is 
now 
the 
Communication Security which is a division of the 
National Communication Centre, into a Government 
component 
and 
the 
envisaged 
National 
Communication Branch.  It is the understanding that 
the 
NC, 
that 
is 
National 
Communication, 
will 
comprise of COMSEC, the National Communication 
Centre and the office of the Interception Centre.  
10 
The fact that COMSEC is currently a Government 
component, I will explain what this means, and the 
NC 
is 
not 
accommodated 
within 
that 
legal 
framework 
creates 
various 
practical 
problems 
especially in regard to reporting lines.  The current 
situation also has a very negative effect in the 
development of the Ministerial Payment Directive, 
the MPD in terms of the delegation of powers of 
COMSEC and not the NC has to be dealt with as a 
component of the same level as NEA and SARS”. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If I could ask you to pause there.  
The 
problems 
raised 
or 
the 
issues 
raised 
in 
your 
communication to the Minister, Dr Cwele at that time, 
appeared to be largely, organisational and in a sense deal 
with the structures that the new dispensation sought to 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 133 of 294 
 
bring about and whether those structures were appropriate 
for the efficient functioning of the Intelligence Community, 
am I correct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   You’re absolutely correct 
and thank you for assisting me in that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, as a matter of principle, 
however, 
you 
deal 
with 
it 
from 
a 
slightly 
different 
perspective in paragraph 31, of course I don’t want to stop 
you, if there’s anything in addition to that, that you wish to 
add you…[intervenes]. 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   In addition to what is in 
paragraph 31? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, of your statement on page 8. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Well there is nothing else to 
add to that paragraph and I still stick to it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  The correctness of it.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That in your mind, the new 
dispensation in 1994 envisaged a restructuring which 
involved two separate organisations…[intervenes]. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   As opposed to a single centralised 
Intelligence Organisation? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, absolutely. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I don’t want to stop your evidence 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 134 of 294 
 
in that regard but you have said, in paragraph 33 that 
you’ve read Ambassador Shaik’s evidence in regard to the 
proposals contained in the proclamation and the Bill and 
that you agree with his views. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA: Yebo.   
CHAIRPERSON:   You’re back in his affidavit now, Mr 
Pretorius, 
Mr 
Pretorius 
are 
you 
referring 
to 
paragraph…[intervenes]. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Paragraph 
33 
on 
page 
9…[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of his affidavit? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, of his affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right and you also raised – and 
it’s a matter of record, certain issues in a letter of 
resignation which you addressed to the former President 
and that’s MM2A and that’s on page 113.  I just want to 
place that on record, as reflecting your views, is that a 
document authored by yourself dated November 2011. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   MM2A, just a second. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 113. 
CHAIRPERSON:   1-1-3? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Absolutely, it is.  
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 135 of 294 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, you recognise that document. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I recognise it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It’s a document authored by you in 
which various views are expressed and they are a matter of 
record and unless there’s anything you’d wish to point out, 
I’d like us to move on if we can. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   No there’s nothing for me to 
add. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Fine. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Except to say that I’ve also 
10 
worked backwards to establish.  Because if you notice on 
this letter it’s not dated, I’ve established that it was 
actually written on the 14 t h of November 2011. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay.  I think – I think there is 
something you say in paragraph 34 that you say is Mr 
Pretorius in paragraph 34 that might be important.  You – 
you had raised a number of difficulties with regard to – to 
the Minister as I understand it with regard to certain issues 
20 
in the Department some of which I think are covered in the 
letter that we have looked at a minute ago.  What was your 
understanding of what the Minister ’s attitude was generally 
speaking to – to the concerns that you had raised? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I – I can safely say by and 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 136 of 294 
 
large.  I can safely say by and large he became dismissive 
of a number of issues.  You know one person reminds me 
that amongst his dismissiveness on the proclamation matter 
for example was but this proclamation has already been 
gazetted.  Why do you want me to change it?  That was 
amongst other things.  Then the other one was that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I would have thought that if something 
was pointed out as being fundamentally wrong including 
using a proclamation instead of national legislation one 
would be interested in assessing the soundness of that 
10 
proposition so that it could be corrected if then there was a 
need for legislation rather than proclamation could be 
corrected.  He did not seem to – to think along those lines? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No.  We did not seem to think 
along those lines.  But the question can ever be – can even 
be further expanded and ask the question – what was the 
role of the JFCI on this?  Because this matter would have 
been discussed with them.  That is number 1.  What was 
their response to it?  And – and other structures.  We 
seemed to have been at the time the only people who were 
20 
concerned about this and mind you by and large on the 
proclamation theme we were advised by the legal division 
which had I do not know how many advocates quite 
experienced people who were running that legal division 
experience as practising lawyers.  They are the ones 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 137 of 294 
 
actually because I said to them, look the three of us are not 
legal people, are not experts on these things.  Let us be 
guided by the legal department and this letter – that MM 
what, what was drafted with the assistance of the legal.  
Because you can see some of those issues are very 
legalistic or – for a rough act person like me.  You know.  
But – no, no, no it was – it was dismissed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was one of your – was one of your 
concerns about this idea of the use of a proclamation as 
opposed to national legislation in establishing this agency 
10 
that national legislation would get to be debated openly. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  In parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In parliament and even society would be 
able to make an input whereas maybe and I do not put 
higher than that maybe if it is proclamation there is no such 
process?  Was that part of your concern? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  The unfortunately I do not 
know 
what 
the 
process 
is 
for 
proclamation 
but 
my 
understanding of proclamation that it is like a presidential 
decree. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  You know it does not go 
through parliamentary committees and what have you.  
Maybe they are informed they do not take part in – it would 
be interesting to know from experts in that field. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 138 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  What is the process? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  That is – that was precisely 
our problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  But what is this rush? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Now in simple terms and 
somewhere in my – in my statement Advocate Pretorius I 
10 
say maybe one of the problems was the honeymoon of – of 
2007.  The new regime wanted to change everything.  I 
mean it is like for example later which is not really much 
about this up to today I do not understand why the 
Department 
of 
Foreign Affairs 
was 
changed 
into 
the 
Department of International Relations and – I mean such 
[indistinct 
00:06:09]. 
 
I 
remember 
we 
used 
to 
have 
headaches with that name as Ambassadors.  Because they 
used to call this Foreign Affairs. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Now I am not sure whether it 
was that – that wave but they would better explain it to the 
people who engineered this whole thing. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
Perhaps 
the 
history 
of 
the 
Intelligence Service after your departure might give a clue 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 139 of 294 
 
to the purpose of the centralisation in relation to issues of 
control and the like that that evidence is not before the 
Chair at the moment.  I would like to just make one point 
and then ask a question.  You will remember when you went 
through the white paper Ambassador the point made by the 
Chair now is dealt with very clearly there that there should 
be no changes to the doctrine, structures and procedures of 
the National Security framework unless approved of by the 
people and their representative bodies.  It would seem to 
me that that statement is consistent with the notion of a 
10 
democratised Intelligence Service. 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA: 
 
And 
who 
are 
those 
representatives of the people?  It is parliament. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Exactly presented by … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The second question one would 
expect in this process parliament which has its own 
responsibilities 
to 
have 
said 
very 
clearly 
this 
is 
unacceptable, this is our territory.  Did you hear anything of 
that? 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No.  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well maybe to – to link with Mr Pretorius’ 
question.  Did you at every time raise the same concern 
with the parliamentary committee to say, well we operate – 
we have been established by way of a proclamation we have 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 140 of 294 
 
concerns about this we continue to operate but we have 
raised our concerns and we are mentioning them to you for 
what it is worth or something like that? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Chair I am going to be very 
honest on this one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I do not remember really me 
raising it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Or at least raising. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Because the other reason is 
that and I think I mentioned this in my statement Advocate 
Pretorius.  We then took a decision that let us get along 
with this integration. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Because we are not being 
listened to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  You see. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But of course there is no way the 
relevant parliamentary committee would not have been 
aware that the State Security Agency had been established 
by way of a proclamation. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  On the contrary Chair I do not 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 141 of 294 
 
think that they were not aware.  How could it have been? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes that is what – that is what I am saying 
that… 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I cannot – I do not think that they would 
not have been aware. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Absolutely I agree to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They must have been aware. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And whether they found that unacceptable 
10 
or not is another matter but they must have been aware and 
– and of course maybe we will hear from – from somebody 
form them who will enlighten us as to what the position was 
and what they did about it.  If they also took the view that it 
was not the – the constitutional way of establishing the 
agency.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  If I may just take you to the 
next section Ambassador of your statement on pages 9 and 
10 where you deal with the constitutional role of the 
President and the Minister in providing director over the 
20 
Intelligence Services. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The relevant sections as you have 
pointed out are sections 198 and 209 they are annexed in 
this document 
Chair and they have 
been 
dealt with 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 142 of 294 
 
extensively by Ambassador Shaik.  But just one point that 
you make in paragraphs 38 and 39.  You make two points. 
1.  You raise the issue of whether there should be an 
executive 
member 
of 
cabinet 
responsible 
for 
Intelligence Services as opposed to the President.  
That delegation issue and the secondly: 
2. You relate that to the need for there to be a separation 
of intelligence from policy making and a carefully 
structured relationship between the two. 
And we will come to that interaction in relation to the facts 
10 
later.  And in paragraphs 38 and 39 you express a view 
regarding the need for a Minister to deal with Intelligence 
Services.  What was your view? 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA: 
 
Yes 
paragraph 
38 
Chairperson – Chairman.  I think I would also seek 
indulgence that I read it verbatim. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes that is fine. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   
“Before 
the 
appointment 
of 
a 
designated 
Minister 
of 
Intelligence the President had retained his role to guide the 
20 
Intelligence Services.” 
And I think that is a constitutional prerogative of the 
President. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.   
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Only – only in this case only 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 143 of 294 
 
delegating the administration of Intelligence Services to an 
executant Minister.  Traditional the Minister – okay – so 
sorry I was reading a little bit wrong. 
“Before 
the 
appointment 
of 
a 
delegated 
Minister 
of 
Intelligence the President had retained his role to guide the 
Intelligence Services.  Only delegating the administration of 
the 
Intelligence 
Services 
to 
an 
executant 
Minister 
traditionally the Minister of Justice.” 
What I am saying is that pre 1994 and the first part of 1994 
I think up to 1996 the second constitution – the formal 
10 
constitution was adopted in 1996 I think. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  There was no Minister for 
Intelligence Services.  There was only a delegated Deputy 
Minister.  No, no sorry.  The Minister responsible for 
administration was the Minister of Justice Dullah Omar.  
And there was a Deputy Minister for Intelligence Service in 
the name of Joe Nhlahla who was reporting the factor to 
Dullah Omar that was the – this is what that paragraph is 
saying.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I – well you clarify now.  I was about 
to ask you because I thought – I was under the impression 
that Minister – I was under the impression that Mr Joe 
Nhlanhla was Minister of Intelligence immediate after 1994. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 144 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is not correct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No it is not correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He was Deputy Minister of Justice. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He was Deputy Chief Minister of Justice 
but given specific responsibilities that relate to Intelligence 
but not as Minister. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No. Not that.  He was Deputy 
Minister for Intelligence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Right from 1994. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Right.  Now as Deputy 
Minister 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA: 
 
He 
was 
reporting 
administratively to Minister of Justice who was Dullah Omar. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  That is the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh so it is a little interesting. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Joe only became Minister in 
1999. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But – but when he became Minister 
did he become Minister of Intelligence or not? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes Minister of Intelligence. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 145 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, I think that is where – so – but before 
1999 – so he was Deputy Minister of Intelligence even 
though there was no Minister of Intelligence? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yebo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yebo 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Now I go further to say I am 
of the view that the constitution did not contemplate that the 
President 
would 
delegate 
his 
duties 
to 
guide 
the 
10 
Intelligence Services to another Minister.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now may I just ask you to pause 
there Ambassador because you make a distinction between 
the administrative function and the guidance or policy 
function is that the point you making here – you are making 
here? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I will further to say I agree 
with Ambassador Shaik that there is and there was no need 
for there to be a Minister for – of Intelligence.  Furthermore, 
it is my view that the concept of having a Minister of 
20 
Intelligence is a direct conflict with the basic principles of 
intelligence set out in the white paper.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Why do you say that? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I think it is because we had 
just read the white paper which talks about the separation 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 146 of 294 
 
between Intelligence and Policy maker.  Now when you have 
this animal called Minister of Intelligence for me it is a 
contradiction to – to the – what the white paper envisaged 
that there would be that separation.  That was the program.  
I do not know whether it explains that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But go once – I think you need to deal 
with the matter a little more than that namely what if 
somebody says what the white paper said in 1994 on that 
point may have reflected the thinking then but ex number of 
years later maybe 1999 the thinking changed that is why 
10 
there was then a Minister of Intelligence and in principle 
leaving out the white paper what is your objection to the 
concept of a Minister of Intelligence? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  In my recollection Chair I do 
not remember an engagement or an explanation from any of 
the policy makers to the effect that we have considered 
what is in the white paper.  But we are of the opinion now 
that there is a need for us to shift from that position.  
Because what we articulating I am – my – my position would 
have been perhaps different if it had been articulated in the 
20 
manner in which you are articulating it now.  I would have 
said, oh okay.  The policy makers have decided otherwise. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because of course the – the – a lot of 
things may have been seen in a certain way in 1994 or in 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 147 of 294 
 
the years leading to 1994 and certain legislative frameworks 
were put in place but as our country progressed then they 
have – there may be certain areas where the experiences 
suggested that what was thought would work had not 
worked and new ways had to be considered and maybe that 
is why in 1999 as you say it might have been thought there 
should be a Minister of Intelligence just like there is a 
Minister of every other thing.  
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I agree with you Chair and 
perhaps I do not know whether am I the right person to say 
10 
perhaps when the governing party comes and makes its 
presentation perhaps, they should reflect on the manner in 
which you are articulating.  This is because for me – and I 
know to both myself and Ambassador Shaik it is still an 
issue to us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So – so it may be that – it may be 
that your objections are more process related rather than 
principled, is that right? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Possible. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Possibly okay. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  It is possible I would not 
disagree with you Chair on that one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well if I may just take you to your 
own statement Ambassador in paragraph 39. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 148 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You raise the fundamental question 
how do you separate the Intelligence Service itself from the 
executive when the Minister of Intelligence is a member of 
the Executive?  And you say that in the context of the need 
for separation of intelligence from policy making.  Now as I 
understand what you have said already Ambassador it is the 
duty of Intelligence to raise red flags to speak to the 
executive at an arm’s length as it were to warn them to tell 
them what is happening or might happen in the country and 
10 
abroad which might affect their policy decisions.  Do I 
understand you correctly?  And I think the point you raise 
here in paragraph 39 and please correct me if I am wrong if 
the very person to whom or very member of the executive to 
whom you must speak is also the person who is in control in 
a sense of the Intelligence Service does that not create a 
problem? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  It – I agree that it does.  It 
does. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Perhaps you could expand on that to 
20 
the Chair? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  It creates a serious problem.  
Let us take an example.  A Minister for Intelligence would 
be coming from the governing party. 
1. Any Minister takes his line of duty command and 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 149 of 294 
 
control from his or her political party not so?  Or it is 
supposed to be like that.  Right 
Now if the ruling party says, no, no, no, you cannot do this 
in Intelligence you have got to follow party line.  What is the 
– what is the poor soul going to do?  The poor soul will 
definitely compromise her or his role as Intelligence and will 
prefer to follow the party line.  That one I am – I will have to 
be convinced otherwise.   Yes I was just – as I am talking I 
was trying to think of an example of this [indistinct 00:3:59]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We have an example to come in your 
10 
evidence? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Sorry? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We have an example to come. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Let me see that.  Ja thanks 
for assisting me on that.  We have got an example to come 
and [indistinct 00:24:09]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Well let me ask this question. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The problem you raise which you have 
just articulated with regard to an arrangement in terms of 
20 
which there is a Minister of Intelligence where his party or 
her party may say well this is the line you are supposed to 
take because we as a party this is what we think is right.  
Why does the same problem not arise if you do not have a 
Minister of Intelligence but you must still go and speak to 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 150 of 294 
 
the President of the country who is a President of the ruling 
party? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  It is a little bit different now.  
The question that we should ask Chair is who will be that 
person?  That person will be a non-partisan person in the 
name of a DG who is just not supposed to take instructions 
from any politician.  That is the principle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  That is the difference. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay well you must help me understand.  
10 
I – I thought at least in part what you were saying is we 
cannot or we should not be reporting to a Minister because 
he is subject to his party control but we should report to the 
President or Head of State.  So that is the context in which 
I ask the question.  But from your – what you have just said 
is my understanding misplaced?  It has got nothing to do 
with reporting or does it? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  It has to do with it – it has to 
do with reporting also Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes because you as the Director General 
20 
of Intelligence if there is a Minister and the arrangement is 
that you report to the Minister then the concern which you 
have articulated about the Minister in a way being subject 
to the control of the ruling party is there but I was then 
saying even if the Minister of Intelligence is not there you – 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 151 of 294 
 
you would still be reporting to somebody and I guess that 
that would be the President.  And why is that concern not 
there if you are reporting to the President because he too 
would be subject to the control of the party or would he not 
be? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Well it is expected – it is 
expected that as I was saying earlier Chair when it comes 
to Intelligence matters it is not what the President wants to 
hear.  It is what the Intelligence is telling him or her which 
would have – or it will – it should have nothing to do with 
10 
the politics or the political arrangement.  Let me make an 
example partly.  Now I have got an example which of course 
it is not in my report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is not becoming one it is the present 
one. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No, no that is a different one 
that is in my report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  But perhaps it will illustrate 
this much.  Because it was in the public domain. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  It went to court and what 
have you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  The conflict between Director 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 152 of 294 
 
General of the National Intelligence Agency Billy Masetlha 
versus 
Ronnie 
Kasrils 
Minister of Intelligence.  Billy 
Masetlha undertook an operation to survey certain member I 
think at that time the member was and ANC NEC member I 
think.  Ronnie Kasrils instructed – oh this politician picked 
up the surveillance something like that and went to report to 
the Minister for Intelligence Services that your people are 
surveilling me.  Billie Masetlha says, yes we are surveilling 
him because we had information.  Minister said stop this 
investigation.  Masetlha says I am not going to stop it.  That 
10 
was I think when Billie Masetlha was – it was in the courts 
that thing for years – two years I think I am sure you can 
get it from the records. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja there was litigation. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  It was litigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I do not know if it emanated to 
anything between him and Mr Ronnie Kasrils. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He was, of course, at some stage 
dismissed by the president. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the issue of the dismissal, I think, 
went up to the Constitutional Court.   
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There is a reported judgment on the issue.  
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 153 of 294 
 
What I do not know whether it emanated from what you are 
talking about or whether it was said ...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Partly did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Because there was that 
conflict.  Because remember, the argument Chair, [coughing] 
said was that:  “I have got a mandate.  I run the operations.  
And you cannot interfere in those of...”  
 
Now, that was a conflict.  I say it as an example.  And I 
again, without fear of favour, I supported Vusi Mavimbela’s 
10 
position.   
 
Of course, I was out of the Intelligence but I supported 
Vusi... and I said I would have done the same thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  I thought I must engage you 
on the point because I do not know how evidence will unfold 
but it might be something quite important to look at the issue 
of the Minister of Intelligence and so on. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, Chair.  Well, your views 
ambassador, are on paragraphs 38 and 39.  And as I read 
20 
your view in paragraph 39, it is quite expressly that: 
“If the Intelligence Service’s duty is to address the 
executive, it should not be controlled by a member of 
that executive but rather by the president.” 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  H’m. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 154 of 294 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And we know it is a crude analysis 
Chair and we may address you later on that in terms of the 
constitution the president performs two capacities or exists 
in two capacities constitutionally. 
 
The one is as Head of State with certain duties and the 
other is at the Head of the Executive.  And perhaps that was 
the intention underlining the extension. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But let us not have a debate about 
that now.  Can I take you through to paragraph 41 where you 
10 
say that in relation to the issues that you have spoken to the 
Chair about today and difficulties in communication with your 
minister, the relationship between yourself and the minister, 
ultimately, began to deteriorate and finally broke down? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  [No audible reply]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In paragraph 42 to paragraph 46, you 
express an opinion.  Now given your experience at the time 
and given your total emersion in the events of the day and 
your ability now to look back, but the Chair will decide what 
weight to place on your opinion. 
20 
 
Of course, he is not bound by this.  He would be in 
relation to factual matters which he accepts that are correct 
coming from you, but if I may just place on record Chair with 
your leave, the opinion expressed in paragraphs 44 and 45?   
CHAIRPERSON:  [No audible reply]  
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 155 of 294 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  With the benefit of hindsight, how do 
you now understand that restructuring process that you have 
just testified to? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Thanks, advocate.  Chair, I 
still stand with my assertion in those paragraphs.  I still 
stand by that.  And... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Will you just articulate them briefly, so 
somebody who does not have the benefit of your affidavit, 
like me and Mr Pretorius, who is listening can understand 
what your opinion was or your view was. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What do you say, in other words, in 
paragraphs 44 and 45.  What is your opinion? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  I still stick to this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What if you want to read it? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  I can read it.  I can read it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  It says... paragraph 44 says: 
“It was my view that the reason for the restructuring 
of Intelligence Service was that post Polokwane ANC 
Elections, the fraction in support of the former 
20 
president, the Zuma Fraction, wanted to accept their 
control and make their mark by affecting change to 
the existing Intelligence Service. 
I did not believe that they applied their minds to the 
rational for doing so”.   
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 156 of 294 
 
 
That is for the creation of the SSA, as we had 
discussed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:   
“However, in retrospect and having regard to the 
events that followed after our departure from the 
Intelligence Service and in particular, the parallel 
covet Intelligence Operations conducted by Arthur 
Fraser, it may be that more sinister objectives were 
at play in the restructuring.” 
10 
 
Now, what I... in simple terms...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Sorry, Mr Ambassador.  Would you 
just add paragraph 46, please? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  46. 
“It may just be that, why has the former president 
believed that we would all serve his broader agenda 
to perhaps capture the Intelligence Service when it 
was apparent that we were not as compliant as 
expected?  We were replaced so that we could 
pursue his agenda unhindered.” 
20 
 
Chair, can I explain my ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  You want to elaborate? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes, I want to elaborate on 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 157 of 294 
 
this.  Chair, I am convinced even more now.  I am not saying, 
it is in my statement that our leaving... and I am talking 
about myself, Njenje and Shaik.   
 
Our 
leaving 
the 
organisation 
is 
tantamount 
to 
constructive dismiss... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Dismissal. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Dismissal.  If you follow the 
events. And what I am saying here in this paragraph.  There 
must have been a rational for that.  Number one... rational 
number one, I am convinced...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Please do not forget your 
point.  I just want to say because we are both, Mr Pretorius 
and I have mentioned to you constructive dismissal because 
we had the communication that is what you wanted to say 
but other people might not know what that is. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Constructive dismissal in the context of 
Labour Law is when your employer makes it unbearable for 
you to continue in your job and you end up resigning and you 
are leaving.   
20 
 
That is what... I am just mentioning it for the benefit of 
those who might not know what kind of animal constructive 
dismissal is. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Well, also... it helps me also. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 158 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  It helps me if that the... it 
comes from, not the Chair of the Commission...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  ...but from Deputy Chief 
Justice.  That is how I understood it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs]  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  And when you look at our 
statements and our appearance in this, it follows the same 
trend.  There was a necessity to push these people.  They 
are a stumbling block these people.  “Take them out!”   
10 
 
Now in paragraph 43, I also mentioned some three other 
individuals who also were dismissed from their senior 
positions in almost a similar way, a very crude way, from 
their offices. 
 
At least one individual who is an ambassador now, Vusi 
Mavimbela, explains it is in his book.  I have not read the 
book but he explains it in his book because he says... 
 
No, let me just go back.  At the time 2009, I am 
ambassador in Algeria when I was recalled.  Vuzima Windela 
was a Senior Executive in Mvelaphanda.  He was already out 
20 
of government.  He was brought back into government and 
be made the Director General in the Presidency.   
 
Ambassador Nhlapo, Welile Nhlapo, the same period he 
is the ambassador in the US.  A very senior post.  A very 
senior embassy.  He is brought back and he is made National 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 159 of 294 
 
Security Advisor, right?   
 
Then Shaik.  I think in his affidavit, he was already in 
business.  Also, he is running his family businesses.  Njenje 
was in business.  Now all of us are brought into government 
by President Zuma, right?   
 
Now, then I analyses this development and when I hear 
Windela 
and 
his 
challenges 
and 
his 
problem 
in 
the 
presidency and ultimately what led him to leave the 
presidency and join the diplomatic core. 
 
Mavimbela’s book... no, not in his book.  In one of his 
10 
interviews, on the release of his book, he says:  “I asked... I 
had a meeting with the president and I asked the president, 
what is it that I have done that I am being treated in this 
manner?”   
 
The president said to him [speaking vernacular]:  
[Translation]: 
“There are some of my people that do not want you 
because they say you are a plant in the president.  
You represent interests of Tokyo Sexwale”.   
 
That is not me.  That is Mavimbela who says that.  Okay 
20 
but all of us, Nhlapo, Nhlapo de facto.  I think he was there 
about three years.  Nhlapo gave up and he says, “No, I am 
leaving this thing because this thing is not jelling.  I am not 
getting any guidance as to what I am supposed to do”. 
 
Then you had these three, right?  In the Intelligence.  
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 160 of 294 
 
They are appointed.  But let me also say to be fair, also to 
former President Zuma.  
 
There is something in me that says, at the time when he 
decided to bring us in, he had a genuine...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  He was genuine about it...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  I...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  ...what he wanted? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Because all of us have got a 
similar background. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  All of us have got a similar 
background in terms of involvement in government since 
1994, in terms of age, in terms of the involvement... our 
involvement in the ANC and we all knew him. 
 
We have... all of us knew President Zuma from exile.  
Let me also cite one other individual because if you... with 
also bringing her into this narrative of mine, who came to the 
Commission.  That is Phumla Williams. 
 
I had the opportunity of meeting Phumla, I think three 
weeks before the... before she appeared in the Commission, 
20 
in the funeral of Zondeni Veronica Sobukwe in Graaff Reinet.  
She was representing GCIS.   
 
And 
we 
discussed 
about 
her 
coming 
before 
the 
Commission and she resolute that: “Bhuti, I am going to the 
Commission because I want to tell my story.  What I am 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 161 of 294 
 
going 
through 
in 
that 
department 
called 
GCIS 
is 
unbelievable”. 
 
I recall when she appeared in front of you Chair, what 
she said.  “I still want the President Zuma to tell me what it 
is wrong that I have done?”   
 
We all now know that Phumla was only confirmed DG at 
GCIS this year.   
CHAIRPERSON:  After acting for many years? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  I do not know.  I think 
Phumla would have acted more than six years but I am sure 
10 
it can be checked. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  H’m. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Unbelievable.  But coming 
back to our situation, I strongly believe that it was 
constructive dismissal to pave way for pliable people. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  H’m.  So having analysed the events, 
as you say, your view is that President Zuma would have 
genuinely brought you back into government but somewhere 
somehow you were found not to do what he may have 
expected?  Maybe we should take an adjournment, Mr 
20 
Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think let us take an adjournment. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no.  It is fine, ambassador.  Sometimes 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 162 of 294 
 
I am ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair, we have a way to go.  I am 
quite happy to stay as long as necessary. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But it will take a while and I do not 
think it is ideal to cut...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, no, no.  I...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  We can continue, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, I think let us give you about ten 
minutes and we will continue.  We will adjourn for ten 
10 
minutes.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us proceed. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Ambassador, 
you were telling the Chair just before the adjournment that, 
as you say in paragraph 44, at the time you were appointed 
you had a certain view of what was happening particularly 
in regard to the restructuring and then in paragraph 45 you 
were telling the Chair that with the benefit of hindsight and 
20 
in retrospect you developed a certain opinion which you 
have given to the Chair that more sinister motives might 
have been at play in relation to the constructive dismissals 
or the removal of officials with regard to the restructuring 
and the like and in paragraph 46 you have placed on 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 163 of 294 
 
record what views were.  In other words that there was an 
agenda that was required to be pursued in relation to 
intelligence services and that you were a stumbling block.  
You and others might have been stumbling blocks in that 
regard.   
Of course, whether your opinion that has been 
placed on record here is correct or not, may be proved or 
disproved by what happened in the security services after 
your departure and you are going to tell the Chair of some 
factual 
incidents 
that 
you 
say 
in 
paragraph 
47 
are 
10 
testimony to this and so, Chair, the further evidence of the 
Ambassador and hopefully other evidence too, will test that 
opinion that was formed in retrospect. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine, I was about to say that 
it is going to be quite important for the Ambassador to at 
some stage substantiate his opinion and say the basis for 
this opinion is a, b, c, d in terms of facts. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.   
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Thanks, Chair.  Yes, in 
paragraph 47 to substantiate on my opinion on what the 
20 
intention was and the broader agenda was, I am saying our 
experience when raising the national security risk posed by 
the activities of the Guptas – I think we are still going to 
deal 
with 
that 
– 
and 
the 
parallel 
security 
structure 
established by Arthur Fraser in PAN1 helped with by me 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 164 of 294 
 
below are testimony to this. 
 
Now the PAN1 project precedes my being appointed 
into the intelligence service in the SSA.  And number two, 
the PAN1 project I found it already on when I joined the 
SSA.  Actually, when both myself and Shaik joined the SAA 
the PAN project was already on.  But the findings of the 
PAN project were towards the end, they were to be 
concluded, and I participated in executive meetings where 
the investigators were reporting. 
 
So to a very large extent I have got a very clear 
10 
picture of what happened before.  And later in my 
testimony I am going to link this paragraph 47 to further 
give examples to show my position in paragraph 7. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   But I am also aware, Chair, 
that there would be other people who had dealt with this 
thing more detailed than me that you are still going to hear 
their evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, that is fine but I do not want you, 
if at all possible – but Mr Pretorius will be in a better 
20 
position because he may already be in possession of 
statements or affidavits of other witnesses – I would not 
like you to not share with me evidence that is relevant to 
what we are talking about if you have personal knowledge 
of it on the basis that somebody else will come because 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 165 of 294 
 
what if they do not come.  So I just put that qualification.   
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I must say Mr Pretorius may well, as 
the head of the legal team, may well be aware of people 
who have supplied statements and are coming but if you 
have personal knowledge of matters and they are relevant 
to what you are talking about, there would be no reason 
why you cannot share that with me. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Then I would safely say – 
thanks, Chair, I would safely say we will come to the 
10 
relevant information. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, I think the Chair ’s invitation 
goes a little wider than that.  There is a question that has 
arisen, you have given an answer and the Chair needs to 
test that answer by relation to – or by examining factual 
incidents that might prove or disprove the validity of your 
opinion because he sits as an objective inquirer into fact.  
So the invitation is, you have placed a thesis, an answer to 
the question what happened in the security services 
particularly shortly after you left and would this confirm an 
20 
attempt 
to 
manipulate 
and 
abuse 
the 
state 
security 
services for illegitimate gain. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Ja.  No, thank you very 
much, Advocate, and thanks for leading me into that.  Oh 
yes, I can safely say when we left, by the time we left the 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 166 of 294 
 
intelligence we could see that it was dying and we were 
concerned and so are we up till today.  That is number one. 
 
But number two, I am record, Chair, at the farm and 
I am going to use a term which might sound derogatory but 
in isiXhosa it is used, but pardon me.  Once or twice I was 
addressing the whole membership there, briefing them on 
the challenges that I am having as a DG. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Membership being membership of the 
National Intelligence? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Of the SSA. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   SSA, okay. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes.  Addressing and 
briefing them on the challenges that we are having and 
that we are having problems with this integration because 
of stumbling blocks and these are some of the issues that I 
raise in my letter to the President, former President, but I 
used the term usenkaki.  Now the same, same term – I am 
not sure if I capture it in my statement, we had a two day 
meeting with the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence 
– sorry, pardon me, Advocate, if I did not deal with that in 
20 
my statement but I am sure you would find it in one of the 
statements even if it is the 2018 one, there was a decision 
that 
was 
taken 
by 
the 
Chairperson 
of 
the 
standing 
committee because I have been interacting with him on 
these issues, these challenges and he then said to me I am 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 167 of 294 
 
going to convene a meeting, we will all fly to Pretoria.  And 
we prepared ourselves for that meeting.  My whole team, 
senior managers, including Ambassador Shaik and Njenje, 
two day engagement with the Joint Standing Committee on 
Intelligence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who was the Chair of the committee at 
the time? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Cecil Burgess. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Two days intensive and I 
10 
was 
leading 
that 
presentation 
over 
those 
two 
days.  
Unfortunately, Chair, I cannot remember the actual dates 
but it would be in 2011.  I repeated to them - and literally 
all political parties represented, they were in that meeting - 
and we briefed them in detail.  I was doing the talking 
mostly because we decided okay, no, no, no, no more.  
They say proceed, you know the issues.  But they would 
add there and there.  Two day intensive. 
 
I again used the same term to them and I said 
Honourable Members, usenkaki .  One of the members 
20 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you probably will be able to put it 
– I think there is an English version for it but I do not 
know. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I know there is an Afrikaans 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 168 of 294 
 
actually but it is even cruder in Afrikaans but if you do not 
mind, I will use it.  Let me …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay or you might just give an 
explanation:  You are in trouble. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, you are in trouble. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It meant you are in trouble.  
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   You are in trouble but, you 
know… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I get the point. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   But you know, it does not 
10 
really gel the way it is in Xhosa and in Afrikaans you 
know? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Deep trouble. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Deep, deep trouble. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   And one of the MPs then 
who is a Minister now, Stella Ndabeni, asked me, DG, 
hayobani, that we are in and I said to her, yethu sonke, all 
of us who are here, it is our problem that we are in here.  
20 
But let me just add and say presently as we speak today, I 
can share with you in private, Chair, or Adv Pretorius, this 
morning somebody sent a message saying that we are 
swimming in a sewerage.  This morning somebody sent me 
an SMS.   
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 169 of 294 
 
 
So after we left I can safely say – okay, let me 
again say, as you would know and everybody knows, there 
was the panel review on intelligence that the previous 
minister set up to look at the problems confronting 
intelligence, but nine years after we had already left, eight 
years after we left – I left in 2012, I am nine years out of 
that system now as we talk.  A review is being made and 
we all know what the recommendations of the review was 
because obviously the system was not getting better but 
you look then at what happened after we left.  Who took 
10 
over?  That is the big question to me.  Who took over as a 
DG after we left? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not want you to forget the points 
you want to make but I want to conclude that meeting of 
two days that you had, what was the outcome of that 
meeting with the Portfolio Committee.  You told them all 
the problems, all the challenges, what was the outcome of 
that meeting?  Were there any undertakings made and if 
so, were they implemented? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   The outcome was we will go 
20 
back to Cape Town where we discuss the issues.  That was 
the closing remarks of the Chairperson, Mr Burgess, and 
we will get in touch with you, DG, on this situation.  That 
was the – and that was the last. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That was the …[intervenes] 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 170 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   That was the last. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There was no follow-up? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   There was no follow-up. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   No follow-up to everything. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, I interrupted you while you 
were wanting to look at who followed as DG after you had 
left. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes.  Now we resigned, we 
decide no, no, no, there is no point in continuing with this 
10 
thing.  We are not wanted here.  It is obvious, nobody is 
listening to us.  We left 2012. 
 
In no space of time, I do not know which year it 
was, guess who is appointed as DG?  Of course, there was 
an Acting DG, the now Ambassador Dlomo.  Hennie 
Sinkose(?), we will deal with him later.  He acted for some 
time and then Arthur Fraser took over.  The very same 
person was heading the PAN project.  At the time he was 
DDG.   
I asked myself the question, did I know what was 
20 
going on there because it is just inconceivable with the 
report – with the report, but again a report as more 
substantiated in the book of Jacques Pauw, the what, I do 
not… 
CHAIRPERSON:   The President’s Keepers. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 171 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA: 
 
 
President’s 
Keepers.  
Detailed.  I read the book from page 1 to zero and spot on 
to what I knew about then based on the briefings and what 
have you.  Unbelievable.  I said no, maybe there is also 
something bigger that we did not know or I did not know.   
 
How many DGs were there then after us in 2004?  
There is an Acting one now for the second year now but 
from what I hear from the grapevine, it is not factual, but 
what I hear from the grapevine, as this SMS was saying, 
they are in a sewerage, things are not getting better. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the Portfolio Committee had all the 
challenges you told them about said they would go back 
and consider the matters and went back but until you left – 
by the time you left they had not come back to you to say 
what they were going to do about it? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Nothing, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA: 
 
 
Since 
those 
two 
day 
meetings, nothing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Before we get 
to 
the 
factual 
part 
of 
your 
evidence 
there 
is 
one 
preliminary issue that we need to deal with and that 
appears at page 12, paragraph 48 to 51 of your statement.  
The question is simply this, it may be put to you 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 172 of 294 
 
particularly in relation to the evidence you are about to 
give in relation to the Gupta investigation that corruption 
allegations – and I stress allegations because the Chair 
has made no findings yet of State Capture.  You have 
heard the evidence given before this Commission, have got 
nothing to do with national intelligence.  It is not a matter 
of national intelligence.  What is your answer to that? 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA:   I 
would 
disagree, 
Chairperson, because as I state in paragraph 48 national 
security in the context of the white paper is defined as the 
10 
maintenance 
and 
promotion 
of 
peace, 
stability, 
development and progress.  Development and progress, 
and 
this 
should 
be 
the 
primary 
objective 
of 
any 
government.   
Now what is this development and progress if it is 
not, amongst others, the economic development of the 
country that would lead to the wellbeing of its citizens from 
poverty, from hunger and from want?   
Now if you are going to say what the Commission is 
looking at corruption, allegations of corruption, and you 
20 
come to me and say that should not be a matter of concern 
for intelligence, I will have a problem.   
Unless, of course, unless – and I think many a time 
people still see this intelligence in the old paradigm, 
military security type intelligence.  I think that is where 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 173 of 294 
 
perhaps people miss the point at times.  Well, of course, 
also 
I 
will 
not 
discard 
the 
detractors 
of 
what 
the 
Commission intends to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, it must be so that anyone 
who wants to capture the state would very much want to 
capture 
the 
intelligence 
community, 
the 
intelligence 
structure as well.  I am just thinking, I am not – I have no 
experience of intelligence, I am just saying if you seek to 
capture the state it does seem to me that, you know, 
captors would wish to make sure that they do not – the 
10 
state does not have an intelligence that would work against 
them. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   You know, I am pleased, 
Chair, that that position comes from you and it does not 
come from me because other people would have said he is 
blowing 
his 
own 
trumpet 
because 
he 
comes 
from 
intelligence.   
Of course, when you want to destabilise a country 
or when you want to destabilise a people, destroy those 
institutions that might be a stumbling block to your efforts 
20 
and of course intelligence would be one of those.  It would 
be one of those. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Particularly, I presume from your 
evidence, Ambassador, 
where 
it 
is 
the 
duty 
of 
the 
intelligence structures to warn against threats to the 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 174 of 294 
 
economy and the well-being of it. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I do not know of any 
structure of any government that would do that – that 
would not do that because intelligence would be the 
primary institution that would warn any government on 
those threats.  I do not know which other.  Can Health do it 
on threats on the security of the country?  Can Treasury do 
it when there is corruption that is starting?  That DG 
Maqetuka has got a relationship with a known criminal.  
Treasury would not know that.  It is the Intelligence that 
10 
would pick it up first.   
It was not accidental as we will come later to show 
how we were alerted on this relationship between President 
Zuma and the Gupta family.  We will come to that later.  I 
think to illustrate that as an example. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  We are about to come to 
now, Ambassador.  You were going to deal with the 
outcome of the preliminary investigations initiated by 
yourself, Messrs Njenje and Shaik in relation to the Gupta 
family.  You deal with that at the bottom of page 12 and on 
20 
page 13 of your statement.  Why was that investigation 
initiated? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   In my paragraph 52 and also 
as both my former colleagues have testified before you, 
Chair, initially the Gupta family were of interest to the SAA 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 175 of 294 
 
as they had been flagged by the Americans who were 
concerned about the Guptas’ interest in the Shiva Uranium 
Mine which the Americans believed was financed by Iran.  
This was dealt with in the evidence of Ambassador Shaik 
before this Commission and I recall you engaged with 
Ambassador Shaik quite in detail and I discovered also you 
had even more insight into that deal coming from your role 
as a judge. You had insights into it.   
But also, I should say – I should say with honesty 
that I had really forgotten even how this thing started.  I 
10 
had really, really forgotten how this thing started, what 
actually sparked that investigation.  But I agree, Advocate, 
this is how – this is what sparked that investigation. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then there was the incident 
referred to in paragraph 53 involving Minister Mbalula. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, 2011, Mbalula.  And 
also, let us recall also by then the media was starting to 
send red flags about this family.  This family, this family.   
 
But also let me share with you, Chair, up till today, 
if you can bring the two brothers in here, I will not be in a 
20 
position to tell you that this is Abdul, this is AJ.  I just do 
not – because, number one, I have never met them.  No, I 
have never and I had no interest in meeting them 
whatsoever.   
So when you are talking about the Gupta family and you 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 176 of 294 
 
ask me, by the way, which one was it who was implicated, I 
will not be in a position to tell you, but to me same 
difference ...[indistinct].   Yes the incident of Mbalula in the 
ANC but we will deal with another part that for the first 
time came to my attention yesterday when we received the 
DA, the affidavit.  Something else popped up when I was 
reading those affidavits, and I say oh even this one but we 
will come with it when we deal with the affidavits which are 
part of the agenda. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, the responses to your 
10 
statement. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    Yebo. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That we have in your file that we 
will deal with in due course, from the ANC leadership, but 
for the present you say in paragraph 54, and perhaps we 
can cut this short by way of introduction, that yourself, 
Ambassador Shaik and Mr Njenje discussed the matter of 
the Guptas in two contexts; one, the fact that Minister 
Mbalula informed the NEC that he had been informed by 
one of the Gupta Brothers that he was about to be 
20 
appointed as a Minister, the other, the interest in the 
Uranium Mine which concerned the Americans and that you 
came to an agreement in that regard, and you have heard 
the evidence of Messrs Shaik and Njenje and generally do 
you agree with that evidence. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 177 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    Sorry Chair I agree with it 
Chair and it is important also, it is also important 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well maybe just that agreement, the 
agreement was to do what? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    The agreement was to – it 
was actually instructions from Njenje. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    Based on what he had 
verbally told us, reported to ask that we put it that way.  
10 
We then say Njenje the domestic branch must deal with 
this matter.  Dealing with this matter meant do a further 
investigation on this matter, because of those two reasons, 
why – one, the issue of Mbalula we considered it a very 
serious national security risk. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Namely that he had said he was told in 
advance ...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    He was told by an outsider 
that he was going to be appointed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As Minister. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    We said no, the second one 
which at times is not being emphasized was to protect 
President Zuma, because when we said it will tarnish his 
relationship with his people, it will tarnish his name, and 
mind you at that time we didn’t have the gaps of this 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 178 of 294 
 
relationship and these activities, but today, 2020, we can 
look back and say we were right, that is why I am saying 
we were right in having a alerted him, and we were right to 
have said that it will tarnish his name. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You deal with that in paragraph 54 
of your statement, that what you have just related to the 
Chair.   Paragraph 55 you talk of the agreement or 
instruction that Mr Njenje should investigate the matter 
further, where was this discussed? 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    It was discussed at the 
headquarters of the intelligence at what is called the farm 
in Pretoria, Delmas Estate. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  In my office.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Was it discussed at any routine 
meeting? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    Yes we had Monday 
meetings, first thing on Monday meeting the top three, that 
is myself, Mr Njenje and Shaik, we would meet and then 
20 
they would report to me new developments as a procedure 
and highlight that there is this and this and this, there is 
this and this.  It was in this context and through that 
mechanism because then from there we would go then to a 
broader senior management meeting.  I think it used to 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 179 of 294 
 
start immediately after hours, that is the top three, then we 
would meet where the various branches now fall under Mr 
Njenje and Mr Shaik would then give their reports, their 
situational, most situational reports, development, and 
what have you, happening in the foreign sphere and 
happening in the domestic, that’s what would happen in 
those meetings, and that’s what happened in that meeting 
that I am referring, the routine Monday meeting Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Having decided Ambassador that 
the investigation should be dealt with by Mr Njenje the next 
10 
development in your statement is that you received a 
summons to attend a meeting in Cape Town. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Would you tell the Chair about that 
please. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    At paragraph 56 whilst we 
were waiting on Njenje to give a feedback, of course there 
was no time, it was going to be an investigation then he 
would see it himself based on what he would have scoped.   
I received in my office a message through my secretary 
20 
that the Minister, who was on that particular day in Cape 
Town, I remember it was on a Wednesday, but I would not 
remember that date, I almost said even the year, it would 
have been 2010 – no I think these things, most of these 
things happened during 2011, but the point is we were 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 180 of 294 
 
summoned to a meeting by the Minister and we did not 
know what the meeting was all about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is now the three of you? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yourself, Mo Shaik ...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    Myself, Shaik and Njenje. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    The top three.  So – shall I 
proceed? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes please. 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   We proceeded to Cape Town 
in the office of the Minister holding room had snags like 
the Minister was busy with other matters.  Later we then 
went into the boardroom of the Minister.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Who was there? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    Now at the boardroom first 
it was the three of us, we are waiting mos for the Minister 
and his delegation.  The Minister arrived with his staff, that 
is Mr Kaho Mabungu, he is actually Doctor, who was then 
the herd of Ministerial services, together with Mr Dennis 
20 
Nkozi. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But we now have another name. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    Who is now Ambassador 
Dennis Ndlomo, he changed the surname.  At that time, he 
was using the name, the surname Nkozi. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 181 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   You say he is now ...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA: 
 
 
 
Ambassador 
Dennis 
Ndlomo. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ndlomo. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    Ndlomo. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    He is from – okay that’s not 
here, who had – he had just returned from a posting in 
Addis Ababa where he had been the herd of the committee 
for intelligence and security services of Africa, which is an 
10 
African Union structure.   
 
Earlier our dispensation talked of the intelligence in 
the 
country, 
the 
intelligence 
in 
the 
region 
and 
the 
intelligence in the Continent and we spoke earlier about 
the African relations and the thrust thereof.   Now within 
the intelligence there were also these developments and by 
the way South African Intelligent Services were one of the 
prime movers for the creation of this SESA and one of the 
strongest supporters of this initiative.  That is why we 
seconded Dennis to be – I don’t know what designation 
20 
there, but he was – he is the herd, I think he is the 
Director of that Continental body, and subsequently later, I 
don’t know whether I was still there or after I had left, a 
lady, Dr Phinla Udit, also a South African, became the 
herd. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 182 of 294 
 
 
So South Africa had chaired that structure, so the 
type of influence that we had also in a small way within the 
Intelligence. 
 
Then the Minister comes into the Boardroom with 
these two gentlemen and then Minister opened the meeting 
and then he called us that he had called this meeting 
because he had been told that Mr Njenje is conducting an 
investigation into the relationship between the Gupta 
Family and President Zuma.  That was the brief, which he 
believed it was irregular, investigating is irregular. 
10 
 
He paused there and looked around at us to I 
believe gauge our reaction.  At that stage I came in and 
when I was granted, first I objected on two things, the 
primary work I objected to the presence of Mr Mabungu in 
that meeting.  He is an administrator, he is not supposed to 
be involved in operational things and if the Minister had 
called this meeting of an investigation, which we knew that 
it was an operational thing, he has no room, and there was 
a to and fro, to and fro, to and fro, I think basically we 
were sparring [speaking in vernacular] and the – after 
20 
much debate it was finally agreed the Minister conceded 
that Kaho Mabungu should – then – but we agreed on 
Dennis that he could stay you know, and my rationale for 
agreeing with Dennis it was because I knew that he would 
be the one taking notes, can inform the Minister or in case 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 183 of 294 
 
the Minister you know – so we compromised on that one, 
that he should participate. 
 
So then paragraph 60, yes paragraph 60, Minister 
Cwele started, stated that he objected to the Gupta 
investigation because in his view it was not being pursued 
bona fide, but was rather being pursued by Mr Njenje in 
order to protect his own business interest. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Can we just stop there for a 
moment, because the circumstance might illustrate a point 
you were making earlier.  When the Intelligence structure 
10 
or Intelligence personnel, senior Intelligence personnel, 
alert the Executive to a circumstance which they believe is 
significant, a red flag in other words, what in your view 
should the executive do? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    The executive should listen 
to what his officers is going to report, that is number one.   
And normally, that is why I said earlier, even in the case of 
Billy Masetla versus Ronnie Kasrils, there is no Minister, 
he does not determine what the operations should be.   
The operations start as a result of information and 
20 
intelligence that we collect, that alone in this case there 
was this intelligence or info – intelligence that was liaised 
to us because we have got agreements globally. 
 
So it was not accidental that the Americans came to 
us, we co collaborate. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 184 of 294 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In any event I interrupted you, I am 
sorry Ambassador you were saying, or telling the Chair 
about Minister Cwele’s interjection or objection.    
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What was he saying? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    He was saying – where 
were we, this paragraph? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Paragraph 60. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    Oh paragraph 60, Minister 
Cwele stated that he objected to the Gupta investigation 
10 
because in his view, that is his view, it was not being 
pursued bona fide but was rather being pursued by Mr 
Njenje in order to protect his own business interests, which 
were in conflict with those of the Guptas. 
 
I objected to this accusation against Mr Njenje, 
making it plain that the investigation had not been initiated 
by Mr Njenje, but that he had been tasked with the 
investigation by us, as it was the domestic investigation 
and he was the herd of the domestic branch.  I further 
challenged 
the 
Minister 
then 
to 
substantiate 
on 
his 
20 
allegation about Mr Njenje’s motives for pressing the 
investigation but he failed to do so. 
 
I told the Minister that if he could provide me with 
evidence in substantiating of his allegations then Mr Njenje 
could be – I will take Mr Njenje off the investigation.  This 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 185 of 294 
 
however I explained was not a reason to stop the 
investigation 
which 
I 
insisted 
was 
a 
legitimate 
and 
perfectly justified official SSA investigation. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Just as a matter of practice if one 
of the operatives in an intelligence operation has conflicted 
interest or even if there is an alleged conflict of interest 
what 
is 
the 
solution, 
is 
the 
solution 
to 
stop 
the 
investigation. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    No, no, not only an 
operative, if there is information that shows that the DG 
10 
has a misdemeanour, number one, the Intelligence people 
will not bring that information to me immediately, but they 
will continue investigating.  At times at a correct time then 
I would be informed that there is this going on and we have 
not been informing you because you are implicated, that is 
number one.  Number two what happens also is that as I 
have said in this case Minister give me the information on 
Njenje, I will take him off this investigation.  It is normal 
you see, but up till today he did not do it, he continued 
with this view and I believe and I said I am not going to – 
20 
we are not going to, I am not going to stop this 
investigation based on your views and what have you. 
 
That alone is not telling me that I have got 
information. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well before the Minister told you at this 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 186 of 294 
 
meeting that he was objecting to this investigation had he 
spoken to either you or Mr Njenje or Ambassador Shaik to 
find out more officially what the investigation, what had 
given rise to the investigation and so on or had he in the 
meeting started by asking the question I hear that there is 
an investigation that you are conducting relating to the 
relationship between the President and the Guptas, tell me 
more about this because I have some concerns but I want 
to know what is it about, what is going on, and then after 
that indicate that he has an objection.  Had he done that or 
10 
...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    No he didn’t do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He didn’t do that. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    And had he perhaps done 
that, perhaps he would have gotten more – he would have 
been more rational in his approach had he done that, 
because I would have explained to him that no you are 
wrong, this is the sequence of this, but I thought the Chair 
was going to ask me as to how did he know about the 
investigation. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am going to ask you that in a 
moment. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    Oh, you are going to, I am 
sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well somehow it is connected because I 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 187 of 294 
 
am – he comes, there’s a meeting. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he says he is objecting to an 
investigation. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But he has not asked you to confirm 
whether there is an investigation, what motivated it and 
other information about it, Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, well let’s just follow up on the 
question that the Chair raised.  At the meeting the Minister 
10 
as I understand your evidence Ambassador expressed 
certain views, whether preliminary or otherwise in regard to 
the 
subject 
matter 
of 
the 
investigation. 
 
 
Prior 
to 
expressing 
those 
views 
did 
he 
seek 
to 
get 
an 
understanding of your reasons for the investigation? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    No he didn’t. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did he at any stage during that 
meeting seek to do so? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    No he didn’t. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.   And then the other 
20 
question that has arisen, do you know where the Minister 
would have received his information firstly that there was 
an inquiry and secondly that there was an allegation about 
the conflict of interest at the hands of Mr Njenje?  Do you 
know where he got this information from? 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 188 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    Interesting enough Chair 
since 2011 I have heard rumours where the Minister could 
have gotten the – this information about this investigation, 
but it was only this year during the appearance of Mr 
Njenje.  In Mr Njenje’s transcripts Mr Njenje says a 
member of my team is the one who told the Minister about 
this investigation. 
 
Now I said wow, but I was expecting that the 
Commission is going to ask Mr Njenje who is that member 
of your team, but unfortunately as far as I can recall 
10 
neither did Advocate Pretorius nor the Chair of the 
Commission ask that question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I can tell you the investigations of the 
Commission are ongoing. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    But Mr Njenje said it in 
confidence, he knows who the person is and knowing 
Njenje, the person he is, I am sure a letter that can be sent 
to him for clarifying that accompanied by an affidavit, I 
don’t think it would be a problem for Njenje.   Now I am 
also cognisant of the fact that you are pressurised with 
20 
time as a Commission, resources I don’t want, I don’t 
know, but I am sure it can be done in a letter form or will it 
be an affidavit for him to say who that – but Njenje knows, 
because if I tell you who that person is it would be hearsay 
to me, that is the caveat Chair. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 189 of 294 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well let me put it this way to you, 
because I think this is the point really Ambassador, the 
ordinary channel of communication to the Minister, given 
your position at the time what would that be, who would it 
be 
that 
would 
ordinarily 
inform 
the 
Minister 
at 
an 
appropriate time of investigations? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    You know on this matter it 
would only have been me. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, and did you inform him prior 
to that? 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    No I did not, because 
remember at this stage we had not even received a scrap 
of paper from Njenje to say since that Monday meeting 
there are developments, no we had not. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So ...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    And the protocol is no one 
could have reported that thing to the Minister, otherwise 
that would be a violation of the rules of engagement. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, I think that might be the point 
because the implication – well not the implication but 
20 
consequence of that is that the Minister had spoken to 
someone in your team without speaking to you. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    Yes, and you see the 
damage that it has done, the Minister as the Chair was 
asking, had the Minister asked for clarification first from 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 190 of 294 
 
me I would have given him a full briefing on what we 
already know, even in that meeting had he asked for 
clarification.  No he doesn’t. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   How long did that meeting last, can 
you recall, including the ...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    Including the snag and 
what have you.  In my recollection we would have a night 
in Cape Town, five o’clock, half past four, five o’clock, six 
o’clock flight and from the airport we went straight to the 
18 t h floor, that is where the offices of the Minister are.  My 
10 
recollection is this meeting started late afternoon, my 
recollection, because it was not dark when the meeting 
started, but of course offices being offices lights would 
have been on.   
 
I estimate that that meeting would have started 
roundabout half past six, seven and it went on close to 
about three hours.  I know I was listening to both the 
colleagues because the same question was asked to them.   
None of us could be spot on and say it started from this 
and ended on this time.   Unfortunately, I cannot. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What is important in relation to 
that meeting is what you concluded about the Minister ’s 
attitude to the investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe before that Mr Pretorius I don’t 
remember him covering this particular aspect.  In that 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 191 of 294 
 
meeting I would assume that you did have the opportunity 
to 
explain 
to 
the 
Minister 
what 
gave 
rise 
to 
the 
investigation and what relevant information about the 
investigation in the three hours or so before you concluded.  
Did you get that opportunity? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Fruit of the matter Chair is 
that there was no opportunity for that.  We were wrangling 
for a very long time about this so called conflict of interest.  
That was number 1.  It took hours and hours.  Then it would 
be him coming in on why is this investigation must stop.  He 
10 
even went further to say this investigation – the other 
problem that he is having this investigation is about the 
investigation on President Zuma.  That was another thing 
but there was no opportunity to actually – to go into the – 
into the meat of the problem that he wants no. That is why 
in paragraph I said I realise that we are going nowhere with 
this meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay Mr Pretorius had just asked you how 
that meeting was concluded.  Do you want to tell me how 
the meeting concluded? 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  When I saw that we are not 
being civil about this matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Making progress. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Then I said to the Minister, 
we will discuss this matter with the President. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 192 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  You see.  So now we are 
appealing now – we are going to appeal now to a higher 
authority. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  You know.  And at that time 
and as I am saying in my report, I was very clear that I am 
not going to get instructions from the Minister on this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  On this investigation. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  We will deal with it with the 
President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  We will report this matter to 
the President. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Was any direct instruction given to 
you by the Minister to stop the investigation?  Did he say so 
in so many words? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  You know I have always 
20 
maintained since 2018 I do not recall him saying stop it but 
his utterance, his challenges, his interaction was that this 
thing must stop.  And I think okay let me not talk about what 
the other colleagues said.  I really do not recall concretely 
him saying it must stop.  But I go further to say even if he 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 193 of 294 
 
had said so I would not have stopped the investigation.  
Because nonetheless at that time we had not even gotten 
something tangible from Njenje except for that indication in 
that first meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are not able to say he said the 
investigation must be stopped because you do not recall 
him saying that.  But you say something about what he said 
– what you made of it and as I understand it and I just want 
you 
to 
confirm 
whether 
I 
understand 
your 
evidence 
correctly.  Namely that in your mind it was clear that he was 
10 
opposed to the investigation.  In your mind was that the 
position? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes that is my position. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  But he stated – but he stated 
categorically that… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  This investigation is an 
agenda of Njenje safeguarding his business interest. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Against the Gupta’s. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  That is what I am – that is 
what I … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes that is what you are saying ja. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 194 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  He made it very clear. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.   
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  He made it very clear.  But to 
say stop this investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not recall that? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No I do not recall it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now over this long period of the meeting 
did he never articulate what business interests of Mr Njenje 
he was talking about? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I am still curious to hear what 
10 
this business interest up until today.  Up until today as I 
have asked Njenje what are these business interests?  
Njenje says, I really do not know what this guy is talking 
about.  And up until Njenje resigned and I retired and I think 
also Moshepe I do not think we ever knew.  That is why I 
thought maybe it is when the day the Minister come here 
maybe he would be in a position to explain himself on this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The statement continues to talk of a 
subsequent meeting with the former President.  How did 
20 
that arise? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Ambassador Shaik through 
his office was instructed to communicate and to arrange a 
meeting that we need a meeting with the President to 
discuss a burning issue.  And we did get a response through 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 195 of 294 
 
my office that the President will be meeting us.  Now 
paragraph 64 I am saying there the only difference between 
myself and Mo – Mo strongly believes that the meeting with 
the President took place in Cape Town.  I still maintain up 
until today that the meeting took place in Mahlamba Ndlopfu 
in Pretoria. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What about Mr Njenje?  What does he 
say?  Mr Pretorius do you remember what he – what he has 
to say? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Njenje? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  In terms of … 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I have a note I do not think he was 
pressed on that issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where the meeting with the President took 
place.  Or maybe he was not asked.  But in the end, it 
would not make any difference whether it took place in 
Cape Town or Pretoria what is more important is the 
content. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  The content of it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of the discussion. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Your statement in paragraph 64 
again I do not want to put words in your mouth gives a 
place in relation to the meeting with the former President. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 196 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  He has said that but… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well not the residence though. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.   
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I say here I firmly believe that 
it took place the day after our meeting with Minister Cwele 
on a Thursday.  On the 18 t h Floor.  Now it is a matter of 
construction here Chair it might confuse this sentence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Which meeting are you – am I 
talking about?  Am I talking about the meeting with the 
10 
Minister or am I talking the meeting with the President?  
And I thought that here in this paragraph I am dealing with 
the meeting with the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh – ja probably – probably you are – well 
the office is on the 18 t h Floor I am sure are offices of the 
Minister not the President. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No not the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  But because the offices at the 
18 t h Floor are the offices of the Intelligence and of the 
20 
Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In Pretoria? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  In Cape Town. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well on this page… 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 197 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the sentence might… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is a confusing drafting error. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  It is a drafting error where I 
will put it really. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja so – but that can be corrected by a 
supplementary affidavit.   We – what is more important is 
the content of that discussion at that meeting with the 
President.  Do you want to tell us about that? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Then the meeting started with 
the President and as protocol is expected I would lead this.  
10 
Then I would do the introduction and in this case, I gave the 
President highlights on why we asked for this meeting.  I 
briefed the President about our meeting with the Minister 
what had taken place in Cape Town.  How the meeting 
ended hence we are coming to explain ourselves to him.  
Right?  And I went on to say to the President the details of 
this that we are going to be telling you about Mr President 
would be done by Mr Njenje.  Because he is the one 
heading the operation you see.  But again my – by that time 
he had not given us a feedback but I know that they were 
20 
continuing developing that scoping into the report.  And Mr 
Njenje took the President through this investigation and the 
– the Americans and the Mbalula thing and all those things 
our meetings and – but we decided why we decided to 
undertake this investigation.  Twofold 1. Based on the 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 198 of 294 
 
intelligence that was liaised to us by the Americans but 
number 2 our concern about his relationship – his – his 
image being tarnished by this relationship.  Then as Mo – 
no let me say then the President went into detail about this 
relationship.  How it started.  It was a long, long, long – but 
I was not – I must say that part was only pricked to me in 
the evidence of Mo Shaik.  Because what you might not 
know Chair and I was telling the investigator – your legal 
team up until the day when they came to make their – when 
they 
appeared 
in 
the 
commission, 
we 
have 
never 
10 
communicated on what the reports are all about.  Perhaps 
that is also the reason why you see these seemingly.  We 
never communicated but Mo explained in more detail how 
the President explain this relationship with the – with the 
Gupta family.  And I agreed because it said oh ja Mo is right 
I remember.  But as I say as Njenje was making the 
presentation briefing the President and as I say I have 
worked with the President Zuma for a very long time.  I 
know him.  I know his body language.  When he does not 
like something you can see.  The President was quiet.  Not 
20 
listening – was listening.  I remember the President asking 
me DG can I get a copy of that report.  I am not sure if I 
capture that part here. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You do say that in paragraph 66. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  And I said Mr President 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 199 of 294 
 
unfortunately not – you cannot.  And he did not argue with 
me.  And the reasons why I said that it was not out of 
disrespect.  He is implicated in the report.  Now how can I 
give him the report?  But perhaps through you advocate this 
is another area that might have to be looked in your report 
if you might allow me?  It is that as this part of our report 
shows when we did not find joy with the President where 
else could we have appealed to?   
1. Our laws I tried to check, look at the Intelligence – 
Intelligence Legislations it is quiet.  Now is that not 
10 
dangerous? 
There has to be – there has to be a guideline because 
conflicts amongst human beings will always arise and you 
would need an arbitrator but in this case, there was no 
arbitrator that we could re – appeal to.  It went on and on 
amongst ourselves.  Now after this meeting discussing 
whether to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before – before you discuss you tell me 
about what happened after – after the meeting.  Having you 
exhausted what you want to tell me about the discussion 
20 
during the meeting with the President?  He told you – you 
said he told you about the history of the relationship 
between himself and the Gupta family.  You told me that he 
asked whether he could get the report that was being used 
and you said no and you did not mean any disrespect and 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 200 of 294 
 
he did not argue with you when you said no. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No he did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Other than that, what was discussed and 
what is your recollection of how long this meeting took 
place?  Again, that is just for the completeness otherwise… 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  That meeting would have 
taken more than two hours to be honest.  It would have 
taken – the President was very relaxed and whenever we 
are going to make a presentation to him, he would always 
be – he would always be kind. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  He will give you time.  He will give you 
time. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No, no, no I would never 
blame the President when he comes with us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He would not rush you. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  He would not rush us, he 
would not shout. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No, no.  It would have gone 
more than two hours that meeting. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well have a look at your statement 
you give a different version there.  Paragraph 66.   
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  66.  Although the meeting 
was a long one and lasted between one to two hours the 
President said virtually nothing during our briefing. After the 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 201 of 294 
 
briefing the former President was very defensive. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright you have – you do not need 
to go on.  It is just in relation to the duration. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And who spoke in the meeting. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is that correct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  It is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Did the President during the meeting 
mention the alleged conflict of interest? 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  At the hands of Nhlanhla? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No.  The President raised 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I take it that when you were briefing him 
about how your meeting with the Minister had gone the 
previous day you told him that the Minister had said there 
was a conflict in terms of business? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Absolutely.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but he did not say anything about 
20 
that? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  He did not and to respond to 
you Advocate the President did not raise the matter of the 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 202 of 294 
 
conflict of interest by Njenje. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The Chair asked you about the 
content of the meeting.  Is there anything that you wish to 
add about what was said or what was not said at the 
meeting? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No there would not be 
anything Advocate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did the President express a view either 
way on whether – on whether the investigation should stop 
or should be pursued or did he express a view either way? 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No he did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He did not express a view. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Except from just explaining 
this long explanation about the relationship how it started 
and bla, bla, bla all those things.  No he did not. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That report that Mr Njenje referred 
to during the course of that meeting what was the nature of 
the report?  Was it a final report or was it an intelligence 
20 
report? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What was it? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No.  And as I – as I keep on 
saying if I recall quite well it was even notes.  It was not our 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 203 of 294 
 
standard high reports.  He was reading from notes that we 
had – he had. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Did you ever see a report? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No I have never seen this – 
these scoping reports up until the time I left in 2012. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What was a scoping report? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  A scoping report is a process 
where 
investigators 
they 
would 
scan 
a 
particular 
environment based on a number of factors.  Factor number 
1 might be it is based on intelligence that we have from 
10 
sources.  2 it is information or intelligence that we have – 
that has been liaised with us by other services.  3 it is what 
we call open source right.  Hence, I was saying earlier the 
intelligence that we collect is not necessarily all secret.  
Open source we would scan an environment and they would 
come up with a scoping report that would say based on this 
information that we have here we believe that there might 
be danger.  And it goes stages by stages – stages by stages 
and this one is a similar one Advocate. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Did you draw any conclusion 
20 
at the end of that meeting as to the former President’s 
attitude to the investigation? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Ja.  The conclusion that I 
draw – that I drew there it is my opinion again it is not 
factual was that: 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 204 of 294 
 
1. The President had already been briefed by Minister 
Cwele and 
2. The President had bought the story coming from Cwele 
but and again there and I must respect him for that, 
his smartness he did not say, stop this. No he did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why do you say – why did you conclude 
that – and the President bought the story from Minister 
Cwele because you said the President did not say anything 
about the conflict of interest relating to Mr Njenje? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Reason is that after that 
10 
meeting it became very difficult for us to get an appointment 
with the President.  That is number 1.  Number 2 the issue 
of that report not for once did the President ask me or ask 
us as to whether how far have, we gone with that report? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let us start with when you say you 
concluded that he had bought this story from Minister 
Cwele.  What are you talking about?  And I am asking that 
because my question was based on thinking that you were 
saying that he had bought the story about conflict of 
interest but not. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That – it looks like that is not what you 
talk about? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No, no I am not talking about 
it. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 205 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is the story that you say he – you 
thought he bought from Mr Cwele? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  From Mr Cwele.  The story 
that this investigation is irregular.  That number 2 the 
inference by Mr Cwele that this investigation must stop.  
And the President not asking us of course he did not have 
to ask us are you continuing or are you not continuing with 
this investigation?  [African language] which actually when 
you think of it based on your question Chair it actually 
served exactly what Minister Cwele wanted. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well certainly… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you put in a little bit of Isi-Xhosa 
there.  Do you want to just say the gist of the Isi-Xhosa part 
that you – that you put in Ambassador? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Did I use Ambassador? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Did I use President? 
CHAIRPERSON:  You said [African language] 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Oh I am sorry, I am sorry.  Oh 
gosh.  It ended there.  Between us and the President on 
20 
that investigation.  And actually, Chair I can safely say that 
investigation ended there in terms of its formality whether 
should we continue or what?  Because after that meeting 
with the President then that we started engaging ourselves 
as individuals and that this thing of us being here is not 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 206 of 294 
 
working.  And by the way the first person to indicate clearly 
that no you know I am tired of this thing I cannot stand it 
anymore, I am going to leave this institution is Gibson 
Njenje.  Now what – I do not know whether I deal with it in 
my report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I am sorry again.  I know you want to 
deal with a certain point but I would like us to finish with the 
meeting.  Now we have finished with the meeting but I am 
looking at the conclusion that you drew from the meeting.  
Now just to make sure I understand your evidence correctly.  
10 
So when you say the President or you concluded that the 
President had bought Minister Cwele’s story you – did you 
say you meant that the President was going along with the 
idea that the investigation was irregular?  You will have to 
say yes, ja so that is it ja. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes, yes Chair.  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now – now my difficulty with that with you 
making that conclusion is that you say he did not ask you 
anything about the conflict of interest whereas as I 
understand what you – your evidence the basis or Minister 
20 
Cwele to say the investigation was irregular was that in his 
view Minister Njenje was pursuing his business interest, 
there was a conflict of interest? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So if the President did not ask anything 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 207 of 294 
 
about this conflict of interest how do you say he bought this 
story that this investigation was irregular? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Did not want – he did not 
want to implicate himself lest he be accused later that he 
interfered with an investigation.  He was smart in doing 
that.  Not to ask for it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it may – maybe your use of the – 
your reference to him having bought the story is what is 
confusing me. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  What you said quite clearly was that 
Minister Cwele was opposed to this investigation. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you able to say the same thing about 
the President or are not able to say the same thing? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No it is the same that one.  I 
can 
say 
that 
the 
President 
was 
opposed 
to 
that 
investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did he ever say it at that meeting? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No he did not. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not want this investigation. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No he did not say. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So what is your basis for saying he was 
opposed? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  My basis Chair that he never 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 208 of 294 
 
had interest to even ask us or ask me about that – that 
investigation anymore.  It ended up there. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Well 
what 
would 
you 
say 
to 
the 
proposition or the possibility that he might not have wanted 
to 
ask 
you 
after 
the 
meeting 
anything 
about 
the 
investigation because he was being investigated?  He was – 
he was the subject of the investigation insofar as what was 
being investigated was the relationship between himself and 
the Gupta – the Gupta’s? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Correctly I would agree with 
10 
you on that one also. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I would agree also with you 
on that one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But if you agree with that then you – 
it seems to me you cannot, at the same time, say the fact 
that he did not ask you is a basis to say he did not want this 
investigation.  It seems to me that you cannot have 
both...have both.  
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Well, Chair.  I am not going 
20 
to debate that or say I disagree with you and that or 
anything.  No, no...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Just probably guess, yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  No, I understand fully. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 209 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  I understand your point fully, 
fully Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  I will not disagree with you 
on that one because he is implicated.  He might have also 
taken a decision that: “No, because I am implicated on this 
thing, let me not ask these fellows...” 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  H’m.  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  No, I am not going to 
disagree with you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Ambassador, you clearly, according 
to your statement at least, drew certain conclusions.  The 
question is whether the Chair is in the same position to draw 
the same conclusion.   
 
And that is why he asked you on what grounds did you 
draw 
the 
conclusion 
that 
you 
did 
about 
the 
former 
president’s attitude towards the investigation into the Gupta 
relationship, right? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  [No audible reply]  
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And it seems that all you can say is, 
you drew that conclusion by what happened after that 
meeting.  In other words, he never spoke to you about it 
again.  And that has been clarified to you that that is 
perhaps not a solid ground for that conclusion. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 210 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Well, I would concede to 
that.  I will not challenge that position. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  The question remains, was 
there anything that happened in the meeting that allowed you 
to draw that conclusion? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Not that I can recall. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What happened to the investigation? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  This now...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, I am sorry Mr Pretorius.  I interrupted 
you at the time when you were saying, after the meeting the 
10 
three of you started talking to one another about... I think 
you were saying you were being wanted or whatever or 
whatever. 
 
I just want to make sure that Mr Pretorius remembers 
that you were... you had a point that you wanted to make 
there.  Either he can let you deal with it now or later. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  It would actually be a 
continuation ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Of the answer to that?  Okay. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Of the answer that was 
20 
posed by the Advocate Pretorius. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, that is fine.  Yes, okay.  Continue 
with your answer to his question. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Can you just please repeat 
the question, advocate? 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 211 of 294 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What happened to the investigation 
after this meeting? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  After this meeting? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  [No audible reply]  
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  No, after this meeting, as far 
as I recall, this investigation was never discussed even 
amongst ourselves.  Why not?  One, we agreed, the three of 
us, we concluded that it looks like we are not wanted in this 
institution.   
 
If a president, who is the prime target of our product, 
10 
does not help us in relation to this investigation, there is no 
way we will go with this investigation.  That is... 
 
We discussed that amongst ourselves, me and Njenje.  
Njenje and Shaik.  Shaik... the three of us, and it was then it 
became clear to us that “No, we are not wanted in this 
organisation”.  Now... and then... if I may proceed? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   [No audible reply]  
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  During this period now, 
everything was in the media about the relationship between 
the minister and his Top 3.  That is all over.  And it was 
20 
during that time that both two colleagues, Njenje first, is 
offered an outside posting as an ambassador.   
 
Now Njenje reports to me about this but I was called by 
the minister and the minister wants to post me as an 
ambassador. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 212 of 294 
 
 
And I said to the minister:  “No, I am not an ambassador 
type”.  And I think he repeated it in his... Mo Shaik, the same 
thing and more dealt in detail with his situation, where he 
was even called by the president and offered the post of 
going... 
 
So 
we 
are 
briefing 
one 
another 
about 
these 
developments.  Until now it was... it was October 2011 when 
Njenje decided:  “No, I am residing now”.  And Njenje then 
left, 2011, October if I am correct in terms of the date. 
 
But... now this is a problem now.  So we discuss the... 
10 
and we agree amongst ourselves that:  “Gentleman...”  I said 
to them:  “Gentlemen, really, really if Njenje wants to leave, I 
cannot stop him.  If Mo wants to leave, I cannot stop him”. 
 
That is the position that we took amongst ourselves, that 
each and every individual see how he resolved his own 
position.  
 
Now on my part Chair, we are talking of 2011, October.  
Now this is the period where I also said to myself:  “No, this 
thing is not working for me”.   
 
That is when... in November, I started to say no... Okay, 
20 
let me say two things.  One, January 2012, I was going to 
reach retirement age because I was turning 60.  That is one. 
 
The contract that I had as a DG was going to expire in 
October... no, no.  It would have been in September, the 
month in which I was appointed, right. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 213 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  September 2012? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  September 2012. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQUETUKA: 
 
January 
would 
be 
my 
retirement age and I said I am not proceeding with this thing 
beyond my retirement age.  I will be leaving government.  
That is number one. 
 
But what I am going to do, I am going to write... I am 
going to be fair to the system.  I am going to write a report 
that would go to the president and explain myself the 
10 
reasons why I intend to resign. 
 
That was the culmination of this report that is in the 
pack.  And now I gave the president 14-days.  Now again, 
you might ask myself... ask me, why 14-days?   
 
It is practice Chair in the public service for DG’s and 
senior people with responsibilities to give the policy makers 
time to consider. That is why, if you read my letter to the 
president in that report, it is an intention to resign and I am 
asking the president to look at the issues that I am raising. 
 
But after 14-days if I am not getting any response, I will 
20 
be resigning.  That is what I said in the letter.  But it went 
further.  It went further.  In an engagement with the 
minister... I cannot recall now... no, no, no. 
 
He received a copy of that report.  I copied him a copy 
of that report.  Now whether he discussed it with the 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 214 of 294 
 
president or blah-blah-blah, I do not know. 
 
But the response now, I remember now, it came from the 
minister to say, “I got into discussions with the president 
about your resignation and the president is willing to release 
you”. 
 
And then we agreed with the minister.  And I said to him 
I still want to be fair on the process.  I would still want to 
continue up to my retirement time which is January.  And I 
am prepared to take a December leave whilst you are 
deciding on replacement and what have you, because I do 
10 
not want to be seen to be abandoning the ship. 
 
I could have done.  And it was agreed, right?  But it is 
interesting if you look media cuttings, how the media by then 
was reporting on this thing, that Njenje has resigned. 
 
The next person is going to be Mo Shaik and then 
ultimately it is going to be the DG.  There is a cutting here 
that actually says that he will be allowed to leave, to take a 
long-term leave, so that by the time his retirement age time, 
he is not back into the system. 
 
Now where could that information have come from?  
20 
Where would the media have gotten that?  It is just that I do 
not want to waste your time and go into that particularly.  
There is a big picture.  I think it was the...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  City Press? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  City Press. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 215 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  And I was wearing the same 
tie, by the way...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  ... in that picture.  I am not 
sure about the shirt.  It is possible it was the same shirt.  It 
is possible it was the same suit.   
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  H’m. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Front picture.   
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  H’m. 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  But of course, by then I 
got... it was agreed, I am on leave and whatever.  I knew 
come January, I will just go there to pack my things and to 
say goodbye to the Intelligence Service. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Ambassador, can I take you through a 
sequence, please of propositions? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  [No audible reply]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The evidence of Messrs Njenje and 
Shaik and indeed what you say in your statement, it certainly 
creates the impression that it was your view that there was 
20 
interference 
either 
from 
the 
former 
president 
in 
the 
investigation.   And I think in fairness to the president, former 
president, it needs to be tested.   
 
The first point is that you said in your evidence in 
relation to the meeting with the minister that regardless of 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 216 of 294 
 
his view in relation to the conflict of interest, that you had 
been ordered to stop the investigation, you would have 
disregarded that and continue with the investigation. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  No, no.  No, not as a result 
of the conflict of... on the conflict of interest, I made it 
categorically clear and I say it in the report.  I said to the 
minister he needs the information. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, but there was nothing in that 
meeting 
that 
would 
have 
persuaded 
you 
to 
stop 
the 
investigation? 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  No. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  For whatever reason. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  No. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The meeting with the president, as 
we know understand, nothing was said during that meeting 
that led you to conclude that he was opposed, that is the 
former president, to the investigation? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  [No audible reply]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The fact that the former president did 
not speak to you afterwards, we have seem to have agreed 
20 
that that is not a relevant consideration to conclude that the 
former president wanted the investigation to stop or had any 
particular attitude towards the investigation.   
 
So the question that then arises is, why after the 
invention of Minister Cele, the investigation appear not to 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 217 of 294 
 
have continued.   
 
Is the reason for that not really that your relationship 
and the relationship of Mr Njenje and Shaik had broken down 
with the minister, you left and there was no one to continue 
the investigation or had any interest in the investigation? 
 
Is that not the real explanation for the investigation 
having come to a halt? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  The... as I say, after that 
meeting with the president, we all realised and concluded 
that this thing of us being there is not working.   
10 
 
And you are correct advocate, the relationship and trust 
with the minister had broken, completely broken, but our 
concern outside the investigation now...  
 
Because remember, the reasons for my resignation, as I 
put it very clear and in detail in this report Chair, was not 
only because of that investigation.  I have categorised 
issues. 
 
For example, there was no common understanding 
between myself and the minister in terms of how we should 
proceed with the integration of the service. 
20 
 
And I have given number of correspondence, emails, 
letters that I am writing to the minister on this and this, this 
and this. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But I will certainly be correct by the 
team behind me, ambassador that as I read the letter of 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 218 of 294 
 
resignation, that November letter, it said nothing about any 
alleged interference with any investigation. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  As I say... no, no.  That is 
correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And that the reasons for your 
resignation...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  No, that is correct.  That is 
correct advocate. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  That is why I am saying, the 
10 
reason... 
the 
investigation 
was 
not 
the 
only 
issue 
...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But it was not mentioned in your 
resignation letter at all.   One might have expected that had 
a certain president told you to stop an investigation by 
implication, that would have been mentioned in your letter. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  We had... it would have been 
a waste of time for me to have mentioned it in that letter 
because, number one, the president knew the facts about 
that and my position on it.  I was dealing with the broader 
20 
issues that he may not have understood. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  That is why I would find... 
Look, 
but 
that 
is 
really 
saying 
that 
the 
matter 
of 
interpretation now as to whether is it really, really important 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 219 of 294 
 
that I should have mentioned it in the email? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No, I am not saying what you should 
have done.  Certainly, ambassador, I would not do that.  I am 
just saying it was not said.  That is all. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But the proposition I am putting to 
you is somewhat different.  The reason for the investigation 
and it appears from our investigations, at least, that the 
investigation did not continue into the Guptas and the 
Guptas’ relationship with the former president. 
10 
 
The reason for that may well have been that the 
relationship between yourself and Mr Njenje and Shaik had 
broken down.  There was a constructive dismissal.   
 
You were moved out and others were put in and the 
investigation did not continue for whatever reason, and 
inferences can be drawn in relation to that from other 
evidence.  So what do you say about that ambassador? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  I agree fully with you 
advocate on that one. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am not saying that the evidence of 
20 
Mr 
Njenje 
and 
Shaik, 
which 
now 
differs 
from 
yours 
substantially, is incorrect.  That is for the Chair to make up 
his mind.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, you... are the matters that broke the 
trust between yourselves and the minister, are those matters 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 220 of 294 
 
covered in your letter to the president? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  They are fully covered. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  They are.   
CHAIRPERSON:  It looks like Mr Pretorius wants to say 
something. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  H’m.  [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, not really. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No, I think to say afterwards. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair, I was just wondering about 
the... our plans. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, if... I certainly would like to finish 
him.  Are there challenges?  And you know better how far we 
are. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No, no.  All I am saying Chair is that 
if it was just a matter of the statement, we could finish at a 
reasonable hour. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But what is necessary after that, is to 
put to the ambassador the various affidavits that have been 
received in response to his statement from implicated 
parties, principle and officials. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 221 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And to allow him to respond to that.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And that will take some time as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So if we were to continue now, I 
would say at least another three hours. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Two to three hours. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Chair, may...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I am listening. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Ask for your indulgence? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  I want to go to the gents, 
please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay.  Okay.  Shall we take that 
adjournment and talk afterwards or do you... should we 
...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No, I am happy to continue Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, let us take the adjournment for a 
20 
couple of minutes and when we come back we can talk about 
the way forward. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn for ten minutes.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS: 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 222 of 294 
 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Pretorius, the Ambassador said he is 
having no time constraints, we can move on he said earlier 
on.  I certainly can continue as well.  I think just before we 
adjourned you were saying from your side you can continue 
as well? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let us continue and see how far we 
are at about eight. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Fine. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then take it from there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Good. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Ambassador, can we go to your 
statement at paragraph 70? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now that reads: 
“I was not aware that the investigation into the 
Guptas was pursued thereafter.  Notwithstanding 
the clear indications that both the Minister and the 
20 
former President had given that they wished us not 
to pursue our investigations, a final report was 
ultimately prepared.” 
Now there are number of issues that arise.  I think you 
have given evidence or you have given evidence that as far 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 223 of 294 
 
as you were concerned the investigation did not continue.  
Do I understand your evidence correctly? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  I may be that the 
consultations and drafting created the wrong impression 
but as far as the investigators are concerned, we had no 
evidence of any report into the Gupta’s relationship with 
the 
former 
President 
ever 
having 
been 
prepared 
or 
finalised after this meeting.  Is that in accordance with 
your evidence? 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   In our consultation that is 
what I think ultimately yesterday we agreed on. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So insofar as this paragraph needs 
to be recast, it is another correction that must be brought 
to this affidavit, do I understand correctly? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, I understand that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But it is clear that as far as you 
are concerned, at least your evidence, is that you had no 
knowledge of any report having been prepared or finalised 
after the meeting with the former President. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   No, I do not. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And we have explored the other 
statement that you make here that you concluded as far as 
paragraph 70 is concerned that the former President gave 
you the impression that he, together with the Minister, did 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 224 of 294 
 
not wish you to pursue your investigation.  That must now 
be qualified by your later evidence.  Do I understand 
correctly? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   When you saw …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before you leave that paragraph, Mr 
Pretorius, because I think I see you are leaving it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In that paragraph, Ambassador, it seems 
to me that one of the things you are saying is that the 
10 
President and the Minister had given indications that they 
wished that you should not pursue the investigation.  Now, 
as far as the Minister is concerned, I am clear that that is 
what you have said.  I am not sure that in your response to  
some of my questions that is what you said about the 
President but I may have I misunderstood.  I just want to 
make sure I am not confused about what you say.   
The paragraph, as I understand it, includes the 
President in saying he had given clear indications that he 
did not wish the investigation to be pursued.  Is that what 
20 
you are saying or you had an error with that? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Thanks, Chair.  I think it 
would be fair of me to say, now that you are posing this 
question, this line. in relation to the President, former 
President, might not apply but also the word “clear 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 225 of 294 
 
indication” even on the part of the Minister, might be 
problematic. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you might want to say indications 
without saying clear. 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA: 
 
 
Yes, 
you 
can 
say 
“indications” but not “clear” because, as I was saying, I 
still do not recall him saying stop this but there were 
indications in our – in his interaction with us on that report 
he wants us to stop. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I do not know whether I am 
answering you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, you are.  So if that is the 
position it might be necessary for a supplementary affidavit 
to …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, you would also have to clarify 
your statement in paragraph 68 about the body language 
and the demeanour of the former President.  But that is a 
clarificatory affidavit that you can give some thought to 
because you did say that the former President was 
20 
deliberately silent as well in your evidence. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes I agree also on that 
one, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I just want to follow that 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 226 of 294 
 
paragraph 68.  Is your position that there was anything in 
the body language and demeanour of the former President 
in that meeting that suggested to you whether he did not 
want you to continue with the investigation?  Was there 
anything in his body language and demeanour that made 
you or makes you think along those lines or not? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Except to say that his 
muteness, his quiet, it is unlike him when you interact.  He 
smiles, he laughs and he would joke but he was just stern 
on this.  I think this is what I wanted to convey by 
10 
demeanour and body language, it was unlike him.   
 
Now as to whether it would be acceptable or correct 
therefore to say it made it abundantly clear to us… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  So maybe to put it differently.  Are 
you able to say, as you sit there, that his body language 
and demeanour gave you an indication that he did not want 
the investigation to be pursued? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Without using precise 
words, that would be correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   But the impression when I 
looked at his body language, you know? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   It was that of not a happy 
person in relation to what we were discussing with him. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 227 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   How, I do not know, a draft 
does not show with the... 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, I understand.  You say that is 
the impression you got. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   It is the impression. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you say you cannot put it higher 
than that. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   No, I cannot. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but with the Minister it is a different 
10 
story. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   No, we know with the 
Minister it is a different one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What is clear from your evidence, 
however, is the statement in paragraph 66 that the former 
President sought to explain his relationship with the Gupta 
family. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did you conclude that he was 
20 
seeking to justify it? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   You see, on that one, the 
way he explained it, the time that he took in explaining 
this, it was like he is conditioning us, you know, how they 
helped his son, Duduzane who, although he had these 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 228 of 294 
 
skills, he could not be employed.  And I think – not I think, 
in the Commission, when he appeared, he raised this issue 
of that …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, he did, ja. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   He did, quite in detail. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   That is when he said I 
decided that he should got to Ethekwini where he will get 
employment, you know?  So but in relation to this one, he 
was quite detailed on that one and really, really serious 
10 
about it and – I do not know whether I have answered that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, that at least is concrete 
evidence that you have given as to what was actually said 
at the meeting rather than inference from body language 
and the like and inference from what was not said or what 
did not happen thereafter.  So let us just go to that 
evidence in relation to what the President said at the 
meeting and then we will move on. 
 
The statements made to you about his relationship 
20 
with the Gupta family – and I am trying to find a way of not 
putting words in your mouth, so bear with me, Ambassador. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Sure, sure, sure. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did they seek to look at the 
relationship objectively from an investigative point of view 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 229 of 294 
 
and ask questions about the relationship or were they 
definitive statements about the fact that this was a 
defensible and justifiable relationship?  Do you understand 
what I am saying? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   That is the former President 
now? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The former President, yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   No, no, he was very clear 
and that there was nothing wrong with his relationship with 
the people. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  Let us go on then to 
paragraph 71.  We have dealt with the fact that as far as 
you are concerned, no further action was taken, certainly 
in the intelligence structures in relation to the relationship 
between the former President and the Gupta family but you 
do say in paragraph 71 that had proper action been taken 
in investigations there might have been a particular 
outcome.  Would you explain what you are saying please in 
paragraph 71?  Because this is dealt with by Ms Duarte in 
her statement but we will come to that later.  You draw a 
20 
conclusion in paragraph 71.  Why do you draw that 
conclusion? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   What I am saying is that had 
that investigation or had the President have listened to 
that investigation perhaps it would have helped him if he 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 230 of 294 
 
had stopped his relationship with the Guptas.  And I can 
further go on to say when you look at it now in retrospect 
after that 2011 report, would he have been in the situation 
that he is in now?  Because he is dead into the mud 
because of that relationship.  I think in essence that is 
what I am saying in that paragraph, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  You see, Ambassador, that meeting 
with the President and that meeting with the Minister and, 
of course, events that may have happened after these 
meetings - and it may well be that there were events that 
10 
happened 
before 
these 
meetings, 
insofar 
as 
the 
investigation is concerned, it may be quite important for 
the point that you just articulated.   
If this Commission ultimately – if it were to 
ultimately find that to a certain extent the relationship that 
the 
former 
President 
had 
with 
the 
Gupta 
family 
is 
responsible for maybe some of the things that are alleged 
to have happened in the country, the question of whether 
people who tried to draw attention to him or other people 
who might have had influence, like the NEC of the ruling 
20 
party, to say something is not right here, there must be an 
intervention.  Or in the case of that investigation that Mr 
Njenje, 
Mr 
Njenje’s 
branch 
was 
conducing, 
if 
the 
investigation had continued, it may – we do not know what 
outcome it would have reached but assume that it may 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 231 of 294 
 
have reached the outcome that said this is danger, this is 
going to cause problems.  It may be that if one looks at 
that where one may say well, the President was  - should 
have allowed the investigation to happen and so on, but he 
is going to say to you – and this is what I want you to 
address, what if he says to you but I never interfered with 
your investigation, you yourself have said I did not say 
stop the investigation, you were the DG, you were all 
senior officials, you knew your obligations, you knew your 
job, I did not say you must stop it. I did not say anything to 
10 
discourage you from proceeding, so how do you blame me 
for 
the 
fact 
that 
you 
did 
not 
continue 
with 
the 
investigation?  What do you say to that? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Good question, Chair.  
Again,  am going to answer that question honestly now that 
you have posed that question to me.  I never thought of it 
that far, I admit, Advocate, I never thought of it that far.  
No, let me not cloud the question with other events, I think 
it would be wrong.  Let me just respond to it in relation to 
the investigation.  I would have no leg to stand if he 
20 
responds, if he asks that question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, thank you.  Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   On the 18 March 2016 a 
memorandum was prepared and ultimately presented to the 
representatives, as you put it, of the top six.  Who 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 232 of 294 
 
prepared the memorandum? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   The …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Pretorius, it looks like – it 
appears to me that that topic has been located wrongly 
because that is a 2016 matter and yet later on, we must 
talk about his resignation, which was in 2012. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, I do not think it is wrong, it is 
just not in chronological order, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, I am saying it is located in a 
wrong place because that happened in 2016. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But we must still hear about what 
happened in 2012 when he left, is it not? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, that …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   In terms of the affidavit. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It says at page 23: 
“My resignation as the head of the Intelligence 
Services.” 
And this topic is at page 17. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  What he deals with now is a 
number of particular incidents and then at the end of his 
affidavit he deals with his resignation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I prefer that to be – let us finish 
…[intervenes] 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 233 of 294 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    If you prefer to change the order, I 
am happy that that be done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If it is fine with you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, no problem, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I will prefer that we finish with what 
happened in the years before. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, all I am saying in defence of 
the drafter here is that there is a logic, perhaps not a time 
sequence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But let us not argue that, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Go to paragraph 95, page 23.  In 
this 
section 
of 
your 
statement 
you 
talk 
about 
your 
resignation as the head of the Intelligence Services, is that 
correct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Why – well, secondly, MM2A is a 
document authored by yourself dated November 2011 
addressed to the former President.  Do you see that? 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is not in its terms a letter of 
resignation, it was merely an address to the former 
President setting out a number of issues that you required 
or wanted to be addressed and you said at the end of that 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 234 of 294 
 
letter please address these within 14 days.  Do you recall 
that? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Come again, Advocate? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Go to page 113.8 please.  
This is what you term a resignation letter but it is not 
actually a letter announcing your resignation, it is a letter 
addressed to the former President setting out a number of 
concerns you have in relation to State Security and its 
structures. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Are you at page 113? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, I am there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If you go to page 113.8, the end of 
the letter, there is your signature. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The conclusion of this letter is not 
a statement saying you are going to resign, it is a 
statement which reads: 
“Mr President, some of the issues raised herein 
might not be new to you because I have raised them 
20 
with your personally.  I humbly request that within a 
reasonable time of 14 days of receipt of this 
document you respond on how you wish to address 
them.” 
Do you see that? 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 235 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So this letter, did it precede your 
resignation? 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA: 
 
 
Yes, 
it 
preceded 
my 
resignation because my resignation came into effect on the 
28 January 2012. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   When I turned 60. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay, so was it the sequence of 
events that you raised certain concerns with the former 
10 
President, they are set out in this letter, they are 
organisational concerns in the main in the manner in which 
the Intelligence Service is organised and run.  I am not 
sure that we need to go through them all, it is a matter of 
record there.  But what gave rise to your resignation in 
January 2012? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   It is a situation that we 
found ourselves in.  As I explained before the short break, 
amongst other things Njenje, by the time I wrote this letter, 
Njenje had already left.  Right?  And there was this whole 
20 
flurry of reports which some of them one would not know 
whether was this information deliberately leaked from 
inside.  
 
For example, I made the example earlier, on the 
arrangement that we had with the Minister for me to take 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 236 of 294 
 
this long leave in December during holiday which we 
agreed on. That appeared in the City Press, you know, 
because between the two of us, we knew about that 
arrangement.  Okay, it might be that somebody – he 
discussed 
it 
with 
somebody 
else 
within 
his 
office, 
somebody else leaked it, but it is not up to me to say that.  
But the point is, when I read that City Press article – there 
are others in this – in some of these paper clippings but at 
that time it was already clear that as we – as I had 
indicated there, Advocate, that the relationships were 
10 
broken. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Would you go to 
paragraph 96 and there you set it out. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Paragraph? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Reasonably clearly.  You refer to 
one particular incident that disturbed you. 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA: 
 
 
Paragraph 
96 
of 
my 
statement? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, page 23.  And you refer to a 
general course of events that influenced your decision. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes.  Can I read it? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Please do. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    
“One of the reasons for the breakdown in our 
relationship with Minister Cwele arose after I took 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 237 of 294 
 
the Minister to task about is abuse of the resources 
of the SSA to provide protection services for his 
wife when attending court on charges that she had 
been involved in drug smuggling.  Soon after this 
Minister Cwele began undermining my role and 
duties as head of the Intelligence Services.  He 
gave direct instructions to members below me and 
excluded me from properly performing my duties 
under my performance agreement.  This is set out 
fully in my letter of resignation but again we have 
10 
agreed on the letter addressed to the former 
President annexed hereto as MM2A.” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, now there are a number of 
annexures to that letter.  Most of which are classified in 
one form or another.  Some of them have been declassified 
but they deal with performance agreements and the like 
and unless you wish to refer to them, it is not necessary 
from our point of view that you deal with them, they deal 
with 
performance 
matters 
and 
the 
point 
about 
your 
evidence in relation to what concerns the legal team is that 
20 
there was a breakdown in the relationship. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I agree with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Pretorius, you will have to raise your 
voice a bit, it was going down. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, I apologise. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 238 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  But let me say this.  You see, the 
investigation that you conducted or that was conducted 
under Mr Njenje, that we have talked about, and other 
matters that you may be saying drove you to resign or 
leave the Intelligence are quite important if the idea is to 
say here was a very important investigation that we had 
good grounds to pursue, we wanted to pursue and had we 
been allowed to pursue, certain things might not have 
happened.  So it becomes important to articulate quite 
clearly what those things are.  You remember earlier on in 
10 
your evidence you talked about constructive dismissal and 
I gave an explanation on my own understanding of what 
that is.   
 
So if there is any way of saying is the minister ’s 
conduct in this and that and that that brought about the 
decision to stop the investigation or the decision to leave 
the service or it is the President’s conduct in this and that 
and that – all of that must be articulated quite clearly so 
that also the basis for saying so can be looked at properly, 
so I am just saying that although it that it is quite important 
20 
that it be articulate, these things be articulated properly if 
that is the position. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Let’s put…[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If I may, what is the necessary 
content of a relationship between a DG as you were and 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 239 of 294 
 
the Minister, is it necessary for that to be a good, 
supportive relationship for it to work? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   It’s absolutely critical and 
absolutely important.  If you read those Annexures and the 
reasons why I put those performance agreements, those 
performance agreements, basically, it’s a contract between 
me and the Minister in relation to my performance, that’s 
number one and when you read all of them, all of them, 
they were signed by both of us, the Minister – for example 
let me give the first one, one of my first KPA’s, Key 
10 
Performance Area was to marshal the integration of these 
two services, we agreed on that one.  Now, then you would 
see that there are certain things that I needed to do and 
there are certain things that the Minister needed to do.  
One of them is, the Minister will create a conducive 
environment within the agency for me to fulfil my duties, 
right.  Which is, if you look at – that was the significance 
of me bringing those performance agreements, that’s 
number one but now with the Performance Management 
System, that we have, it’s right across Government, there 
20 
are annual performance evaluations, right, where now we 
look at, have I done this and this and this, this KPA this, 
this and this and I am 100%, completely, I can stand on top 
of the mountain and say, I did what I was asked to do and 
the evidence is in the performance agreements, because 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 240 of 294 
 
the Minister signed them off during times of evaluation, he 
signed them off, all of them and I think these performance 
agreements, they should be, what, three/four but I can 
share with the Commission, I can share with – the 
bitterness that I have with Cwele is that up till today, my 
last performance evaluation, which I passed it is here, up 
to today, Chair, the State Security Agency has not paid me 
for that up to today but…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You say they have not paid you? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   They never paid me, I have 
10 
been discussing this thing, even with the present Minister 
and first the former Inspector General, I think it must have 
been around about 2015/2016 I lodged a complaint and she 
investigated it and she came with the conclusion that the 
Agency must pay me, it hasn’t happened, up till today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   How much are we talking about here, if 
you are able to say? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Look I cannot quantify it 
because they do the calculations. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  You know.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   But …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But whatever amount it is…[intervenes]. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Look between the two of us 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 241 of 294 
 
it won’t be less than R20 000. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hmm, now, am I right to assume that, 
that payment that you would have got or that you would be 
entitled to, if your performance – if the assessment of your 
performance indicated that you had performed very well, is 
that correct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   You’re correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, your last performance indicated that 
you were doing well in your job? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Absolutely. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the previous ones, did they indicate 
the same thing? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   All of them and all of the, 
they were signed between the Minister and myself but what 
I was trying to stress, that relationship is very, very 
important between the two DG’s, I mean between the 
Minister and – this one of the monies is just by way of 
example which is one of the things that made this break in 
relationship. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, are you saying to me that your 
20 
performance as DG was assessed and, on each occasion, 
you were found to have performed very well? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   That’s what I’m saying 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s what you are saying? 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 242 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   And there’s evidence here, 
it’s not hearsay, there’s evidence here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then the question arises as to why 
the relationship between yourself and the Minister did not 
meet the standards of trust and confidence that you said it 
should meet, why did the relationship break down?  You 
deal with this in paragraph 96. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes, I was waiting for the 
reference to that paragraph, to explain.  One of the 
10 
problems amongst the multitude of other problems.  You 
will recall, Chair, the case of the wife of the Minister, 
former Minister, I think she’s serving 15 years now, ja, it’s 
15 years for drug trafficking.  Now, during that period of 
the trial what had happened, there was a payment – huge 
payment, I don’t recall the amount that had to be signed by 
Njenje because it was an expenditure that was done under 
the Domestic Intelligence, basically what had happened, 
members of the Intelligence Service using cars of the 
service were transporting the Minister ’s wife from home to 
20 
the Court, right.  Now, for accountability, the unit that was 
responsible 
for 
that 
needed 
a 
signature 
for 
their 
expenditure.  Now, a string of Managers in this unit up to 
Njenje, when those payments came from Njenje, Njenje 
refused to sign them, he said, no, no, no this activities is 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 243 of 294 
 
not an SSA activity, that’s when it was brought to my 
attention by Njenje.  So, I asked Njenje, Njenje says, no 
I’m not going to – it’s irregular I’m not going to sign it.  
Now, the Minister got to know about that right, how, 
because the service now for the transportation of the wife 
had to be stopped because Njenje instructed the unit there 
in KZN that it cut this thing, it’s irregular that’s when it was 
brought to the attention of the Minister and we dealt with it 
with the Minister and I said to the Minister, look, this thing 
really, to be honest, I mean it’s not even come to me, but 
10 
now that Njenje has reported it to me, it’s under the 
mandate, this expenditure in terms of authorisation falls 
within the authorisation of Njenje it doesn’t need to come 
to me but I am aware of it and I agree with Njenje, that it is 
irregular, this activity.  You know, that is another reason for 
this break of relationship under paragraph 96. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You go on to say that soon after 
this, that is the incident…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before – after when you raised this 
issue with Minister Cwele, what was his reaction, did he 
20 
dispute your view that it was irregular expenditure, was 
there a disagreement between the two of you on the issue 
or did he concede that, yes it was, what happened I want 
to hear about that? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Let me first say, Minister 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 244 of 294 
 
Cwele is a very funny person. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just repeat that? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  He’s a very funny person and 
some of us have categorised – characterised him as a 
narcissist, he’s got narcissistic tendencies. One, he can be 
dismissive, he can laugh for the most serious thing. For 
example, on this one, he says no but DG this is nothing I 
don’t understand what your problem is here, that was his 
response. Now, on many occasions- I’m just trying to give 
you the character of the person not just one and secondly, 
10 
look, quite a number of Ministers are not aware of the 
operational matters in terms of expenditures and the 
details and of course, it is understandable because it’s far 
from them.  So, he might have thought that, but it’s up to 
him to say, he might have thought that, that activity there 
was nothing wrong with it.  That was his response and I 
said to him, Minister I am out of this thing because 
nonetheless I was just informing you so that you know I am 
aware of this activity and Njenje is going to stop it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, you say he might have thought there 
20 
was nothing wrong with it, in which case I take it he might 
have thought that you people were wrong to stop it? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Of course, I agree with you 
on that, he might it’s only him really who can explain 
himself Chair. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 245 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Are you saying that the Minister – 
a Minister who uses State resources for private purposes, 
might have thought it was legitimate, is that what you’re 
saying? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes, there’s…[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It’s very generous, I must 
say…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well he might have thought so but are 
you quite clear that he would have been wrong to think so 
10 
or…[intervenes]. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Not even wrong. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Not even wrong it would 
have been as it was, it was irregular and if he could have 
been taken to Court by the Agency he would have, even to 
have been found to have agreed on an illegal activity, 
that’s how serious – in terms of the PFMA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hmm, one would have thought that if the 
DG came to the Minister – to a Minister and said, you know 
20 
that activity is actually going to land us in trouble it’s going 
to be irregular expenditure, one would think that the 
Minister would take that issue seriously and if he thought 
the DG was wrong he would ask the question, why do you 
say this, show me where it says it’s not allowed, isn’t it? 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 246 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Absolutely you are right but 
unfortunately, again, we are not living in a vacuum we are 
not living in wonderland.  The reality of the matter, these 
are some of the things that happen in Government. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m going back to the issue of whether 
he may have legitimately thought there was nothing wrong 
with this because if the DG – one, the evidence makes it 
clear that you told him that Mr Njenje had already refused 
to sign.  That on its own should have told him Mr Njenje 
used this matter in a serious light.  You said you agreed 
10 
with Mr Njenje, you were the DG of the Department. Now, 
he ought to have thought – one would expect that he would 
think, no this is serious if I have a different view let’s sit 
down, let me see, let them show me why it’s wrong but if 
he doesn’t do that but is dismissive would that be an 
indication of somebody who genuinely thinks it’s right to do 
this? 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA: 
 
 
Maybe 
it’s 
an 
understatement, I’m downplaying it to say that he might 
have thought because really, really, I mean a reasonable 
20 
man would not have thought like that, not at all.  Let alone 
at the level of the Minister, wouldn’t. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so you know of no grounds on 
which he would have thought both you and Mr Njenje were 
mistaken 
about 
thinking 
this 
would 
be 
de-
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 247 of 294 
 
regularised…[intervenes]. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   He would never have had a 
leg to stand 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but you made it clear to him that it 
was irregular? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I – it’s irregular and I also 
told him that it is going to be stopped or it has been 
stopped and Njenje has told me that he is going to stop it 
and I agree with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You go on in paragraph 96 to say 
what happened after this incident.  You’ve already told the 
Chair that, in relation to the Gupta investigation in all 
probability he’d received information from one of your 
subordinates and that, that was not in accordance with the 
protocol of reporting lines, do you recall that evidence? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You say then in paragraph 96, soon 
after this, and would you carry on from there please. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA: “Soon after this, Minister  
20 
Cwele began undermining my role and duties as 
head of the Intelligence Service.  He gave direct 
instructions to members below me and excluded, 
not 
precluded, 
excluded 
me 
from 
properly 
performing 
my 
duties 
under 
my 
performance 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 248 of 294 
 
agreement.  This is set out fully in my letter of 
resignation addressed to the former President”,  
that is Annexure MM2A, this is the Annexure that 
contains the performance agreements. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well for  what it’s worth Ambassador it 
appears to me that your choice of precluded may have 
been the more accurate one as opposed to excluded it 
sounds 
quite 
appropriate 
to 
me 
because 
it 
means 
prevented you from properly performing your duties, that’s 
10 
what that sentence means. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA: Okay Chair I’m not going to 
argue with you on that, I was still sharp in 2011, nine years 
down the line.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Ambassador apart from examples 
that you might give of him liaising with your subordinates 
and undermining your rule as head and duties as head of 
Intelligence Service are there any other reasons for the 
breakdown in the relationship? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   If we can continue – I think I 
20 
continue with this in paragraph 97. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   97 deals with declassification and 
the like, I don’t think we need go there, go to 98. 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA: 
 
 
It 
deals 
with 
the 
declassification? 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 249 of 294 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well if you want to deal with it you 
can but this deals with matters that occurred recently, last 
year, in relation to classification or declassification of 
documents and it can’t have been relevant to your 
resignation at the time. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Oh okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In other words, 97 is an 
explanation of why the attachments to the letter of 
resignation are not attached, and I don’t think it’s relevant 
to go to that. 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   No, it’s not. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The documents have been 
declassified but not all of them but only recently. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let’s go to paragraph 98 if we 
could. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA: “Ambassador Shaik felt very  
strongly that we should fight to the end against 
what he perceived as our constructive dismissal by 
the Minister. I felt that the Minister had the backing 
20 
of the former President and told Ambassador Shaik 
that we could not win the war as the former 
President would ultimately get rid of us”. 
 
Now, partly we have dealt with some of the issues 
about 
the 
former 
President 
but 
this 
paragraph 
also 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 250 of 294 
 
highlights that we continued discussing our situation and 
Ambassador Shaik was the one who was very, very strong 
to say, let us continue fighting this thing, let us not cave in 
because it’s intentional this thing, it’s going to lead to a 
constructive dismissal but as I said earlier, Chair, we 
concluded that – I’d said to them that, look you’re not 
going to win this fight, tell me of a DG, tell me of a 
Minister who has been reprimanded since 1994 and a DG is 
said to have been in the right, that’s not happening in this 
post 1994 I would still want to know of a case where a 
10 
President reprimands a Minister or sacrifices a Minister. 
No, at the end of the day the scapegoat will be the 
officials, either a DG or what, that’s why I felt that, 
continuing with what more was saying we should do was 
unsustainable, he actually proved it when he, ultimately, 
resigned. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   When who asked you to resign? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   No, I was not asked to 
resign. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sorry then I misheard you. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you might have to repeat what the 
last statement you said about, it was proved when what – 
you were following up on the point that you say, on the 
position that you say you conveyed to…[intervenes]. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   To Mo and Njenje. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 251 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that you – the three of you would 
not win the war, this war if you continued to fight and you 
said to them, show me a DG who has won against a 
Minister.  Show me a Minister who has been sacrificed by 
the President when there’s an issue with the DG. Then you 
made a statement about resigning, I thought that’s what I 
heard as well, you said this was proved when? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I was saying, I agree, I 
resigned but I was not told to resign.  I resigned because I 
couldn’t stand – it was strenuous, it was strenuous to say 
10 
the least and everybody in that farm was aggrieved by what 
was happening, you see and the situation was not being 
resolved, you see. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In summary then, in your view, did 
you 
receive 
the 
support 
from 
the 
Minister 
that 
you 
expected as DG? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   No, I didn’t. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, and was there any act on 
behalf of the Minister that served, in your view at least, to 
undermine the relationship between yourself and the 
20 
Minister? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:    
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   One, the direct instructions 
into the Department by passing me, is one clear example. I 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 252 of 294 
 
think somewhere in my report…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When you say report, you mean your 
statement, your affidavit? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I was just trying to be 
careful as to look at whether I deal with it. There is a point 
in time when people were reshuffled out of the Department 
into the Minister, Nkosi is one example.  When he came 
back from Ethiopia, he was working under Ambassador 
Shaik, right.  Now, protocol regulations states very clear if 
Njenje wants somebody from the Secret Service it has to 
10 
be mutually agreed and it has to be authorised by the DG 
and of course the Minister will be notified about the 
changes.  Now, in the case of Dlomo, that never happened.  
I heard on the grapevine, no I happened to have gone to 
the Minister and Dlomo was in the Ministry and then I 
remember asking him, what is it, he says, no DG I’ve been 
transferred that was all. I think Kaho Mbunga, Dr Kaho that 
I mentioned earlier on, he was also from the foreign branch 
and he was taken out of the foreign branch without any 
consultations.  One, with Mo Shaik as the head of the 
20 
branch, two, with the DG.  So that is another clear example 
Advocate. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, let’s move on if we may, 
you decided then to terminate the relationship is that 
correct? 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 253 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   I was not terminating the 
relationships 
with 
him, 
I 
was 
resigning 
from 
the 
organisation…[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right I’m talking about the 
employment relationship, you decided to resign. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   You see there is another 
dichotomy within the structure that might, perhaps be also 
relevant to the Commission.  Who appoints DG’s, the 
President, who dismisses, who terminates a contract of the 
DG, many cases, many cases you will not see the signature 
10 
of the President?  You will a letter signed by a Minister, it’s 
not only in the intelligence, also in the other structures and 
it’s not only under former President Zuma, that has been 
the trend in the end, you never know, actually what 
protocol.  And I know even up until today that thing is still 
an issue amongst former DG’s.  It is still an issue because 
it has never been resolved. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Well I am not sure that that 
particular topic should take us much longer.  The fact is that 
the relationship broke down.  You have given some of the 
20 
reasons for the relationship breaking down including the 
undermining of your position. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  By the Minister. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  The Minister. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 254 of 294 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And ultimately your decision to 
resign 
which 
you 
have 
described 
as 
a 
constructive 
dismissal. 
 
You 
said 
your 
employment 
had 
become 
intolerable. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  With that DC – the Chair can 
we go to paragraph 74? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Paragraph? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  74 on page 17. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes we can but before we do so let me 
10 
ask this question and I think we may have touched on 
[indistinct 00:01:12].  I want to be quite clear what your 
evidence is about it.  You said that after the two meetings 
one with the Minister the other with the President the 
investigation was not pursued further, is that correct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who made the decision that it should not 
be pursued further? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  You to be honestly answering 
that question Chair it never came from me. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ys. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I am not even sure if – I do 
not know if Njenje knows. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well – well you were the DG you should 
know.  Njenje was the Head of the Branch that was… 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 255 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Of the Branch. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That was that was at that stage. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And he should know but the reason why 
you should know is I think it was such an important 
investigation you would have wanted to know where is the 
outcome or anything like that? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I can unequivocally say I 
never gave the instruction for that investigation to stop. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I never. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You never. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you – do you know whether anybody 
took the decision to stop it or whether it just fizzled out – 
fizzled out? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I really do not know Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I really do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I cannot even say it fizzled 
out. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But after the two meetings did the 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 256 of 294 
 
three of you talk about whether the investigation would be 
pursued or not?  Because the Minister you did say made it – 
it 
was 
clear 
that 
the 
Minister 
was 
opposed 
to 
the 
investigation being pursued.  The President did not say 
anything according to you to indicate that he did not want 
the investigation to be pursued.  After the meeting or at 
some stage after those events did the three of you have a 
discussion to say, do we pursue the investigation or do we 
not pursue it? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No there has been – there 
10 
was no discussion around that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Now Mr Pretorius I do not 
know whether you have had – you have refreshed your 
memory of Mr Shaik’s statement and evidence and Mr 
Njenje’s one.  I seem to have the impression that one or 
both of them that what they said in terms of their 
understanding of where the President stood on whether the 
investigation should have – not continue.  I seem to have 
20 
the impression that they are – their evidence either was that 
the impression was that the President did not want the 
investigation to be pursued or that he did not want it to be 
pursued but I seem to think that at least one of them said 
he did not say it must be stopped or both might have said 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 257 of 294 
 
yes he did not say it must be stopped but – what is your 
recollection? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The evidence was to the effect that 
and it was consistent that no direct instruction to stop the 
investigation was given but they were left under the clear 
impression that the former President did not favour the 
investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I would like to qualify an answer that 
the witness gave Chair.  You said that the former President 
10 
said nothing in the meeting with you in relation to the Gupta 
investigation 
to 
indicate 
that 
he 
did 
not 
want 
the 
investigation to continue.  Do you recall that? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  He did however on your evidence 
expressly defend his relationship with the Gupta’s, is that 
correct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I think we have dealt with that.  So 
subject to that nothing else was said. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Secondly the timeline might be 
significant in assessing what happened here or what did not 
happen.  The meetings with the Minister and the former 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 258 of 294 
 
President when did they take place?  Can you recall? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  2011 that being said. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  The year 2011 no doubt about 
it.  What would be extremely difficult for me is to pin down 
the actual month and date. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  Okay. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I can – I seem to think it 
would have been June/July. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Somewhere mid-year? 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Somewhere mid-year? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes somewhere mid-year. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Because number 1 it was not 
a hot day.  It was not a warm day in Cape Town it was cold. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright so if it was around mid-2011 
there was a lapse of six or so months [indistinct 00:07:17] 
yes.  Mr Shaik – Mr Shaik’s evidence was in the later 
20 
months of 2011. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Later months. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Does that help you at all? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  It could not have been.  Okay 
depending again latter month of 2011 what does that mean? 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 259 of 294 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In any event I do not want to quibble 
with you. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No, no I am saying because 
advocate Njenje left in October 2011. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Njenje was part of that 
meeting. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  So I will argue that it was 
before October 2011. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But I think the point here is that the 
time lapse between those meetings and the departure of the 
first and later the other of the top 3 yourself, Njenje and 
Shaik was a matter of months.  In other words in assessing 
the continuation of the investigation all I want to establish 
is that the time lapse and we can discuss this later but the 
time lapse between the meetings with the former – with the 
Minister and the former President and the departure from 
the organisation – State Security Organisation was a matter 
of months. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes.  Yes that is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you.  Alright.  In your hands 
Chair but barring any other questions. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No, no I do not have other 
questions but I do know that you do have that topic of 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 260 of 294 
 
politicisation of state security.  It may or may not be that it 
can come after the one on page 17.  I leave that to you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well no, no the – the Chair the 
memorandum addressed to the Top 6 is the next. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In the sequence of events.  That 
must be dealt with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And after the statement is concluded 
we can then deal with the responses of the Top 6 but there 
10 
is also the heading – the matter involving General Mdluli 
and then there is also the Pan 1 investigation to be dealt 
with.  So those three issues need to be dealt with before 
dealing with the responses. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Okay.  And we can deal with it 
briefly because we will deal with it in more detail when we 
deal with the statement of Duarte – Ms Duarte. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But – and there has been evidence 
20 
quite a detailed nature in this regard but in summary on the 
18 March 2016 the – certainly that is the date of the 
memorandum addressed to the Top 6 of the African National 
Congress, is that correct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  That is correct. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 261 of 294 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That memorandum is attached and 
the purpose of that memorandum and the approach to the 
Top 6 was what in your view and summary? 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA: 
 
The 
purpose 
of 
that 
memorandum was to bring to the attention of the ANC as an 
organisation by former members of Mkhonto we Sizwe.  We 
were concerned about developments one in the country but 
also, we were concerned about developments within the 
party.  Remember now this is 2016 we are no more civil 
servants.  We then felt that it – okay. 
10 
1. A memorandum was drafted and by 101 members of 
the structure. 
Okay not that I will come to who drafted it.  Right.  Now on 
behalf 
of 
the 
101 
members 
generated 
was 
this 
memorandum.  That is a task as MM what? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  MM3 on page 115 but there are 
extracts in paragraph 77 so we need not go to the 
memorandum. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Okay.  The memorandum 
states or you say I might jump to 77. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes the memorandum states 
amongst other things:  
“That in light of these revelations that is around the Gupta’s 
now – that is paragraph 8 of that memorandum.  In light of 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 262 of 294 
 
these revelations we demand to know what role if any the 
Gupta 
family 
play 
in 
influencing 
the 
appointment 
of 
Ministers and to what end?  Which other Ministers have 
been approached by them in this manner? What private 
arrangements if any have been made with the Gupta family?  
What is their role in the appointment of board members of 
state owned enterprises?  Is the leadership of the ANC 
aware of these arrangements?  And on whose authority 
does the Gupta family act?” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The further questions raised in 
10 
paragraph 9 and 10. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   
“In the absence of any coherent explanation of all of the 
above we are forced to speculate that important decisions 
of state are subject to outside influence and unilateralism 
without any regard to the wellbeing of the country or our 
people.” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Paragraph 13. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Paragraphs 13 reads: 
“Whilst the challenges that face the ANC are many and 
20 
complex, we are most concerned about the increasing 
tendency of state capture.  We can no longer remain silent 
in the face of this most undemocratic and dangerous 
development.”  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And paragraph 14. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 263 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   
“There are many, many accounts of undue influence on the 
decisions of the state.  We need to establish the veracity 
and the validity of all these claims.” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now at this stage the evidence in 
the public domain particularly in the media around these 
issues what was the position? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Well the media had a field 
around this business there is no doubt about it.  This was 
not any secret information that we got.  We did not have 
10 
any access to secret information of state.  It was in the 
public domain. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And paragraph 16 is a call on 
the 
leadership 
of 
the 
ANC 
to 
establish 
independent 
commission of inquiry.  Now this call is made in March 2016 
and we will come to the timeline when we deal with the 
affidavit of Ms Duarte in due course as to whether this was 
acted upon and let me not pass any judgment at this stage 
but to ask you whether in your view this approach to the 
leadership was acted on sufficiently or promptly enough? 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I can safely say no. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And why do you say that? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  It was not.  Why I am saying 
this.  First let me also indicate that in that meeting what is 
not captured here.  In that meeting I must say it was a very 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 264 of 294 
 
friendly meeting from a number of the Top 6 members but 
one.  It is the then Secretary General of the ANC Qwede 
Mantashe.  He was arrogant.  Remember there was an 
alteration in that meeting between him and Jabu Molukete.  
And this alteration comes about he tried to politicise us and 
Jabu was – Jabu said to him please do not preach 
Catholicism to the Pope.  Temperatures rose.  The person 
who saved that day was Jessie Duarte who called calm and 
said Comrade this is not what we came here for.  There is a 
memorandum that should be discussed and these Comrades 
10 
are expected responses from us.  And I must say after that 
then there was calm.  That is when I think it is important 
because we will come to that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Later. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  And we will come to the 
sequence of events between March and the end of 2016 and 
in 2017.  But let us not forestall that at the moment. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Let us deal with the issue in 
20 
paragraph 79 and following if we may Ambassador.  Again, 
apologies Chair we are going out of time sequence but 
during your stint with the Crime Intelligence – with – not 
Crime Intelligence with the Intelligence structures SSA did 
you have occasion to deal with a report commissioned by 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 265 of 294 
 
General Mdluli? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Tell the Chair what happened. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes.  I had.  And also let me 
say that again thanks to Ambassador Shaik – Shaik’s 
memory.  By the way he is youngest within the three of us 
so his memory is still sharp.  Yes I interacted with this and I 
recalled and he did not actually give that background that 
this report from Crime Intelligence that is called the Mdluli 
Report was given to me by Minister Cwele.  He say there is 
10 
a report here that is very worrisome.  And I want you guys 
to look at this report. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Just very briefly what did the report 
say?  You say it was 
a report 
prepared by Crime 
Intelligence. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  To be exact now do I 
determine refer me to the… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Paragraph 79. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Paragraph 79.  Okay let me 
read it.  Let me read it. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Please do. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   
“Minister Cwele provided me with a report commissioned by 
General 
Mdluli 
and 
prepared 
by 
Crime 
Intelligence.  
Averring that there was a conspiracy waged by senior 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 266 of 294 
 
generals in SAPS to secure the removal from Crime 
Intelligence.” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The removal of General Mdluli 
surely? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or his removal. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  His removal – his removal – 
sorry Chair. 
“His removal from Crime Intelligence which he indicated the 
former President wished the SSA to analyse and report on.” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now we discussed in consultation 
10 
more or less when this occurred.  Do you recall? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I really do not recall.  As I 
said in my introduction I have completely forgotten about 
this report. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It was whilst you were still DG. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No, no it was welcoming.  
The SSA. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  And as I said most of these 
things happened during 2011, early 2011. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Now should a Crime Report 
of this nature have been given to you directly? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Now again in the spirit of that 
coordination here is Crime Intelligence having a report.  Let 
alone the report another thing which I have not – we have 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 267 of 294 
 
not – I never discussed with you.  This report alleges that 
there were general who wanted to remove me as Mdluli.  
That was one of the things that we said no, no there is 
something wrong with this report.  But as to whether the 
SSA 
would 
have 
been 
the 
correct 
structure 
it 
is 
questionable for me. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Because… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Let us leave that protocol aside if 
we may.  You do state it in paragraph 80. 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  As a result of that intervention did 
you investigate? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes we analysed the report. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And what was your finding? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Our finding was that there is 
no substance in these allegations.  There is just no 
substance. 
1. I remember we raised the issue of the process that 
this report should be taken by the very person who is 
20 
being accused. 
At least he should have had the wisdom to have left that 
report to be done by one his deputies because he is 
implicated.  Now how could we believe that the truthfulness 
of his report?  That was amongst the – but our conclusion 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 268 of 294 
 
and again let me state it was done predominantly by the – 
by the Domestic Branch because it is a domestic issue.  It 
falls within.  You see.  And then they advised me then – by 
me I mean the three of us on this report.  And we dismissed 
the report as having no basis. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So just to summarise.  General 
Mdluli to your knowledge commissioned a report to be 
produced by Crime Intelligence.  The substance of that 
report was that he General Mdluli was the victim of a 
conspiracy waged by senior generals in the South African 
10 
Police 
Service 
to 
secure 
his 
removal 
from 
Crime 
Intelligence. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That report was then given to you 
for investigation. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Or to the SSA for investigation. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It was investigated by Mr Njenje. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And found that there was no 
substance 
to 
the 
allegations. 
 
Do 
I 
understand 
you 
correctly? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Correct Advocate. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What happened then? 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 269 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Would there have been a 
document reflecting your analysis of the reports? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And your conclusions and reasons? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No that one would have been 
a formal document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  That was responding to a 
formal document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQETUKA: 
 
That 
came 
through 
the 
Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay and that should exist somewhere? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  No it should have… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I have a note Chair to try and obtain 
it.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay.  But if you are able to I 
would like you to just highlight two or three things on the 
basis of which it was said this report had no merit.  If you 
are able to remember.  But if you are not able to remember. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  You will pardon me again 
there.  Lapse of memory. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  And also, it looks like a 
person who still remembers these details of that report. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 270 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is alright. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Yes.  But no, I am sorry 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hopefully we get the report.  Okay you 
may proceed.  I think Mr Pretorius the question was, what 
happened after you had concluded that there was no merit 
in the Mdluli Report?  He was expecting you to answer that 
question.  What happened after you had concluded yes? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Oh, when we finished – when 
I received the report from Domestic, we discussed it as the 
10 
Top 3 and it was cleared and it was given back to the 
Minister as our response. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Do you know whether it was given to 
the former President? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I do not know that would have 
been the Minister who would have done that normally. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Just have a look at your own 
statement in paragraph 81 please.  Again, if you disagree 
with what is said here please say – say that to the Chair. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  This would – this would have 
20 
been twofold. 
1. It is possible that I would have been briefed by the – 
by the Minister on this response because personally I 
do not remember detailing with the President. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 271 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  On this. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No you do not say that here.  What 
you do say is that your report was not accepted by the 
former President. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  I can – I can really… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Please look at paragraph 81 and just 
tell me – oh sorry do not tell me tell the Chair whether what 
you say there is accurate or not? 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you may read it aloud for us and then 
10 
comment on it. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   
“But be it as it may I nevertheless referred the report to Mr 
Njenje to the Domestic Branch to investigate.  This was 
done and when completed the Domestic Branch found that 
the report had no substance and was full of unverified 
information.  However, our SSA report that is the response 
despite careful analysis was not accepted by the former 
President who chose rather to believe the commissioned 
report by Richard Mdluli.  This had the effect of stifling the 
20 
murder/rape and kidnapping investigations against Mdluli as 
well as the investigation into his involvement in the irregular 
appointment of members to Crime Intelligence and his 
abuse of Secret Service accounts, vehicles and safe houses 
for his own purposes.” 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 272 of 294 
 
Now that latter part I suspect must have been the content of 
that report that they were analysing.  But going back to your 
question about not accepted by the former President I 
cannot really say with absolute surety that it is a correct 
reflection.  I cannot.  Because I never communicated with 
the President on that.  I do not know if he communicated 
with Njenje.  It is also possible. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right well it may not necessarily 
flow from your evidence but the fate of the charges or 
investigation into General Mdluli and its partial finalisation 
10 
more recently approximately ten years later is a matter of 
other evidence and we need not deal with it here.  But it 
does not seem to me you have personal knowledge of this.  
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  No.  No, advocate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, if there may have been an error in 
signing the affidavit, which says this, when actually that is 
not 
your 
recollection, 
it 
may 
be 
necessary 
to 
do 
a 
supplementary affidavit, explaining that it is not like this. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  There are a few corrections that must 
be made. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Let us deal with the PAN 1 
Investigation.  Yes, you do have personal knowledge of this.  
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 273 of 294 
 
Is that correct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Sorry, I just need to put something 
to... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Do you recall... I must put to you for 
your own evidence, ambassador.  Mr Shaik gave evidence as 
to the meeting with the president, right? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  He said: 
10 
“The president welcomed us.  We were all seated.  I 
did get a sense that he was briefed about why we 
were here...” 
 
You confirm that? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   
“And obviously he knew that it was about the matter 
of the Gupta Investigation...” 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  H’m? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That coincides with your evidence? 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  He then goes on to say: 
“But the president started off with a discussion on 
essentially what is called the...” 
 
I have got to get this pronunciation right.  “The Richard 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 274 of 294 
 
Mdluli report”. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Do you recall that being discussed in 
the meeting with the president? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  That statement is correct 
because that is what Shaik reports... I mean, said in his 
evidence. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No, the question is, do you recall it? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  I do not recall that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Oh. 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  To be honest.  I do not recall 
that having been raised in that meeting but I recall how that 
report was brought to our attention.  I do not recall it earlier. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No, it is only fair that we speak to 
you once more and get an accurate version of your evidence 
in this regard because I understand that you do not recall 
this and you have no personal knowledge of what is stated 
here.  Is that correct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  No, no.  What I am saying.  I 
do not have... the place where it was raised, I do not recall it 
20 
being raised in that meeting with the president. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Oh, no.  Leave it aside or... you have 
said it that you do not recall it being said in that meeting. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  We have established that. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 275 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But what you say here is that the 
report that the SSA prepared under the hands of Mr Njenje 
was not accepted by the former president, right? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Who choice rather to believe that 
report commissioned by Richard Mdluli...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Mdluli. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now as I understand what you are 
saying now, you have no direct knowledge of that. 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is that correct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  No, that is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well, we must rectify your statement 
then.  If we can go on to the PAN 1 Investigation.  We... the 
time that you spent at SSA and you have told the Chair this, 
prior to your arrival, the investigation into PAN 1, the PAN 1 
Project, was ongoing.  Is that correct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But the incidents that gave rise to the 
20 
report had already occurred before you arrived. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Do I understand your evidence 
correctly? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 276 of 294 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  What was the position when 
you arrived then in relation to the expenditure, the report 
and related matters? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  The position of the recipients 
of the report who was the minister, because the investigation 
team was reporting in meetings that were chaired by the 
minister. 
 
And I have again to state here that with all the 
differences that I had with him, when it came to this PAN 1 
Report, 
there 
were 
no 
contradictions, 
there 
were 
no 
10 
problems, there were no challenges amongst us. 
 
We were listening to the investigators.  Well, I had the 
privilege of being sensitised and briefed by Njenje whenever 
there is going to be a meeting with the minister, with the 
investigation team but there were no differences, there were 
no contradictions amongst us on the PAN in particular. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  PAN is the Principle Agent 
Network? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Network 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And you will speak about that in a 
20 
moment.  But just briefly, if you could summarise the 
contents of this report?  What allegations were contained in 
the report?  What information found its way into the report? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Shu! 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry.  I am sorry, Mr Pretorius.  You are 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 277 of 294 
 
now referring to a report or the report?  Which report are you 
referring to? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well, perhaps that is the... it is better 
phrased as the information that ultimately founds it way into 
the report.  Let us take it step-by-step. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Into the report about PAN 1? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Collaterally referred to as the PAN 1 
Investigation and the PAN 1 Report. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But let us not get too far ahead and 
that is my fault.  I apologise.  In paragraph 82, you say you 
participated in briefings that took place at the ministry about 
the project, the PAN 1 Project.  Correct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Njenje was also present at the 
meetings.  I would understand that because he was Head of 
the Domestic Branch of Intelligence, he would have been 
dealing with it more directly. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  What sort of information was 
discussed at these briefings? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  The Investigating Team, 
which was a big team, also represented by the Legal Division 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 278 of 294 
 
of the SSA, the issues were a project by the SSA under the 
direction of Arthur Fraser, who was the Deputy Director 
General in charge of Operations.   
 
This principle network... this Principle Agent Network 
Project, number one it is important for me and I think you will 
agree, to state that it was a properly constituted and 
developed project in that one, it was authorised by then 
Minister Ronnie Kasrils.  That is number one. 
 
And number two.  It was then rolled out.  It is the covert 
operation which normally intelligence organisations would 
10 
have.  I want to be very clear on that.  There was nothing 
illegal about the setting up of that project. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The concept was a legit concept? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  It was a legitimate concept. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  And... but the problem... 
what went wrong, there was no Command and Control.  
There was no oversight.   
 
Command and Control, number one, from the DG who 
was then Manala Manzini, right.  Because after Fraser 
20 
reported to him, it is very important, as Njenje was reporting 
to me, Njenje would never have read a project like this 
without reporting to me. 
 
He might not have been given to me day-to-day, minute-
to-minute activities but I would have an interest as an 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 279 of 294 
 
accounting officer.  That is why I am saying, where it went 
wrong, there was no control.  Number one.  And I think it was 
just left to us, right. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Was 
there 
anything 
wrong 
with 
its 
objectives? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  I would say there would have 
been nothing wrong with its objectives. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Was there anything wrong with the 
manner in which it carried out its functions? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  That is where the problem 
10 
was.  Problem number one in relation to that question, was 
one of the problems with that project, number one was, that 
project was not linked to headquarters.   
 
The Secure Communication Systems that receive reports 
from their various agents was not going to headquarters.  
The database, the engine room for that system was housed 
where?  In Arthur Fraser’s house.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Sorry.  Perhaps in order to 
understand the significance of that point, it is necessary to 
explain.  Reports from operatives in any project of the SSA, 
20 
where do they go? 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQUETUKA: 
 
Reports 
would 
go 
to 
operational units through secure communication, the nerve 
centre of which is located at the farm.  And the reasons for 
those are multifaceted but the most important one is the 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 280 of 294 
 
security of that infrastructure. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now is that a necessary part of the 
operations that the state security has? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Absolutely very necessary 
and critical. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  And any violation of that 
would border around violation, serious violation of security 
protocol. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Now, was that process 
10 
followed in relation to PAN 1, according to the information 
that you were learning? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  According to the information you 
were getting in this process. 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQUETUKA: 
 In these 
briefings and 
according 
to 
the 
information 
as 
reported 
by 
the 
investigators... what was the question, sorry?  I lost the... 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You described a process to the Chair 
20 
...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  ...off reports from operatives in a 
project 
that 
go 
through 
a 
certain 
process 
and 
are 
centralised...[intervenes]  
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 281 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  ...within the SSA’s...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Right. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  ...records. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is that correct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now the question is, was that 
process followed ...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  No, it was not. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  ...according to the information you 
received in relation to PAN 1? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  No, no.  No, it was not. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What was...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Because number one, the 
nerve centre of that... that received that information was not 
linked to SSA Headquarters.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Where was it located? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  It was located at Arthur 
Fraser’s house. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What did it mean for the security of 
your information? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Wow, it is serious!  Not only 
for the security of the information but also for the security of 
those people who give you that information because sources, 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 282 of 294 
 
your assets in Intelligence are very critical. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  You can never compromise 
because remember, they become... they are recruited on the 
basis of trust.   
 
Now when they are not going to know or when they get 
to know that actually these reports that I am sending, they 
are not going to where I think they were getting to.  Then 
there is a problem there.  There is a problem there.   
 
In other countries, it can go to treason.  You can be 
10 
charged for treason for that.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Let us go to paragraph 86.3.  What 
was the further...? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  86.3? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Point... 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
In 
relation 
...[indistinct] 
...[intervenes]  
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:   
“There were no reporting lines to head office which 
20 
gave Mr Fraser a dangerous amount of unbridled 
power...” 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  86.4. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:   
“There was no oversight or accountability for the 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 283 of 294 
 
projects pursued or expenditure incurred.” 
 
Chair, can we just...? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No, I am listening. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  I just wanted to expand a 
little bit on that ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, please. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  The estimate for the mess 
that happened out of that, I think if I am still correct and 
Njenje mentioned it, I think it ran to about R 4 billion or 
more. 
10 
 
And how did it happen?  The number of houses, safe 
houses that were bought and Njenje gave account of the 
number of cars that were bought which ran in their hundreds.  
Some of them were never used.   
 
Now all these things come out as a result of the 
investigation but I can safely say Chair, one of the most 
beautiful things what the investigators did was to secure the 
database.  The target was “get that database out of that 
house”. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Out of Fraser’s house? 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  By hook or crook, because 
nonetheless, it is not his... get it out by hook or crook.  And 
they did get it.   
 
Now, that is how the beans were spilt because now the 
clever guys would be in a position... were in a position now 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 284 of 294 
 
to download, to analyse, and it was discovered that:  “Wow, 
there is a big, big problem!”  That the agency was not aware 
of.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  What happened in relation... 
or perhaps before I ask you that question.  In paragraph 87, 
you summarise what you referred to as the three main 
problems with the PAN 1 Project.   
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  The three main problems 
with the PAN Project as I recall were, in my view, therefore, 
the centralisation of power, the ability to draw large amounts 
10 
of money and the absence of accountability. 
 
Centralisation of power.  Arthur Fraser in regard to this 
project.  Here he acted like he is the DG.  That is one.  And 
because there was no accountability, there was no control by 
the DG.  It became a free for all.  He was a law onto himself. 
 
And I think there was a consensus amongst the 
recipients 
when 
the 
investigators 
raised 
these 
issues 
because questions would be asked, the lawyers would 
respond.   
 
Now in terms of the act that was irregular, that was 
20 
illegal.  It was not supposed to have happened but it 
happened.  That was the reality of the matter.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What happened to the investigation?  
It seems apparent from your statement in paragraph 88 that 
at a stage all expenditure relating to all PAN 1 Projects were 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 285 of 294 
 
stopped. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is that correct? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  I... what happened.  When 
this thing was leaked, I do not know how it was leaked, this 
project.  And then when investigating... remember, this is the 
time I am still not there when this project started. 
 
I am still not even there when the project was stopped 
but what I recall was, when the project was stopped it was 
when it was realised that damage has been done.  
10 
 
The minister instructed that the project immediately 
stop.  Now, I have to say, under those conditions the minister 
would have been justified because his department is not 
accountable for anybody. 
 
Under those conditions the minister, it would have been 
a legit... because he is the only one then in that case 
because Cele who... could he have... would he have done 
that 
when 
he 
was 
not 
adjudicating, 
monitoring 
the 
implementation of the project?  The answer is no. 
 
So in that case it was genuine that the minister should 
20 
come in.  I agree fully with Cele on that decision.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The investigation or the fruits of the 
investigation, were they referred to any law enforcement 
agency? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Ultimately, the investigation 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 286 of 294 
 
was completed and this would have been now 2011, one... 
before Njenje resigned.  What was the question advocate? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well, let us take it step-by-step.  Was 
the investigation complete? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes ...[indistinct]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Was it then referred? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  It was completed... it was 
winded up at the level of the minister and his senior 
management in concurrence with the investigators.  The 
recommendations of the... no, let me not go further with that.   
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well, go to paragraph 90 and tell the 
Chair what happened. 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:   
“In fact, Minister Cele had himself taken the view that 
the investigators and the legal team, headed by 
Advocate 
Willem 
Hanekom, 
had 
exhausted 
all 
avenues of investigation and that it was now up to 
the law enforcement agencies to act against those 
implicated.” 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Therein lies the question that I 
wanted to ask.  The matter was then referred to the law 
enforcement agencies, was it not? 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQUETUKA: 
 
That 
was 
the 
recommendation now of the collective as headed by the 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 287 of 294 
 
minister.   
 
It is also important advocate to indicate that when we 
talk of exhausting all internal processes... remember, our 
investigators in terms of their mandate, they can only 
investigate matters within the organisation. 
 
If those matters are then, they have got implications of 
criminality or what have you, then it goes to the law 
enforcement agencies. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  And that was or this is what 
10 
this paragraph is explaining. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Well, in paragraph 89 in the last 
sentence you say: 
“The matter was then referred by Minister Njenje to 
Peter Bishop at the Special Investigating Unit...” 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Yes, Mr Njenje then, as the 
custodian of that investigation, had to be the one who now 
finalise that handover over of the dossier to the law 
enforcement agencies. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Two things then happened, 
20 
and we can refer here, to your understanding of Mr Njenje’s 
evidence, who deal with in paragraph 90.  What did you 
learn? 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:   
“I was unaware until I heard Mr Njenje’s evidence 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 288 of 294 
 
before the Commission that after my departure from 
the SSA, he was instructed by Minister Cele to 
withdraw the PAN 1 Report from SSA and was given 
an instruction to stop the PAN 1 Investigation.” 
 
Let me just correct here again.  I was unaware until I 
heard Mr Njenje’s evidence before the Commission.  That is 
correct what the issue is here. 
 
And that after my departure from the SSA, which is 
again also wrong...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Because he left before you. 
10 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  He left before me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  He left before me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQUETUKA: 
 
He 
was 
instructed 
by 
Minister Cele.  Now I suspect the correct version here would 
have been: “he was instructed by Mr Cele to withdraw that 
report from the law enforcement agencies whilst we were still 
there but I was never informed”. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
20 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  I was never informed.  As I 
say, I first heard about that in his evidence this year. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, so what you were unaware of was that 
he was instructed to withdraw the report from the law 
enforcement because ...[indistinct]  
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 289 of 294 
 
AMBASSADOR MAQUETUKA:  Instructed.... because he 
never reported to me about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So SSA should read SIU? 
AMBASSADOR 
MAQUETUKA: 
 
“He 
was 
instructed 
to 
withdraw the PAN 1 Report from the SIU”.  You are correct 
there again. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  In any event, what we know ... 
BREAK IN AUDIO RECORDING 01.52.38 to 01.56.57 – 
microphones switched off from this point onwards] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In regard to her own observation but 
I don’t think that that matters will concern ...[indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Purview of what transpired. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And who was right or wrong or ... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It’s surely a matter between the 
Commission and her. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Is there something we ...[indistinct]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Only in part ...[indistinct] I am told 
Chair so it is important that we have a record, particularly of 
the procedural steps that we take to accommodate the 
versions of the implicated parties. 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 290 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I know that we should be able to 
finish within an hour and we can arrange another time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I canvassed this possibility with the 
investigator who says provided as we thought ...[indistinct] is 
quite ...[indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   ...[Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   It is just a pity that when we have gone as 
10 
far as we had to try and finish and then we can’t finish. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Great pity yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I will also tell you, you saw what 
happened, we were all trying to finish up and obviously with 
your cooperation we finished today or this evening.  I think 
that one can – I think that one should be done, Mr Pretorius I 
think what should be done is one of two things, one, we are 
going to have to adjourn, but the one option is of course that 
the Ambassador can be called back on a date to be arranged 
to finish, but also it may well be that if what he has not 
20 
covered, what was left is very limited my own thinking is it 
could be covered by way of an affidavit so he could be asked 
to deal with A, B, C, D issues in an affidavit and the 
response in an affidavit and then next time or at a certain 
stage somebody can go on record to say on this day the 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 291 of 294 
 
electricity forced us to stop before he could finish and to 
complete his evidence this is what is happening.  If it is an 
affidavit, he can say that here is an affidavit that covers 
what he did not cover and it could be marked exhibit 
whatever. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We could deal with the response to 
the top six affidavits in that way 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am also told though I am very 
reluctant to hear what was told to me, is that the venue is 
10 
available tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, well tomorrow in the morning I have a 
teleconference commitment. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then he has to fly, so I am 
relieved to hear that Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   He has to fly tomorrow? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sunday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sunday, what could be explored maybe 
either tomorrow afternoon, I am not sure whether we should 
just leave it to one of those two options, I am not sure, but 
20 
tomorrow afternoon could be explored, I am not sure. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No Chair if I may say we have to 
correct this affidavit in many parts.  As I understand the 
Ambassador’s response to the affidavits, he doesn’t really 
take issue with them ...[indistinct].   Any alterations that 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 292 of 294 
 
might 
concern 
your 
findings 
ultimately 
Chair 
are 
observations that arise after that response, which don’t 
really concern the factual evidence, they are an independent 
record in relation to which he has no quarrel, so it would be 
a 
fairly 
straightforward 
exercise 
to 
...[indistinct] 
the 
Ambassador’s response.  What is important though is that 
that response finds its way onto a record of sorts and we 
have to find somewhere of doing that, so those affidavits are 
heard.  They don’t ...[indistinct] version ...[indistinct] they 
merely would respond and then any consideration of dealing 
10 
with the issues raised there can be dealt with directly with 
those persons if necessary by way of an ...[indistinct], so it 
doesn’t seem to me to be too much of a challenge 
...[indistinct], in fact we finished the salient part of one or 
two paragraphs, so it is only that that needs to be dealt with 
as in a corrected affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no right, I think you are right, 
probably I think what we should do is you will reflect on 
possible going that route by way of an affidavit and that 
seems to both of us to be the right way to go.  That is one, 
20 
two I think that because we are not being recorded now 
when next the Commission is sitting before the next witness 
starts, I think you should be there so that we can just place 
on record the way forward. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is on Monday morning? 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 293 of 294 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well on Monday we are meant to hear the 
evidence of a certain witness and Tuesday I have been told 
that that witness is not going to be able to come.  So it is 
either going to be Wednesday or Thursday.  Ms Hofmeyr will 
know internally. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I will be here, it will be a short 
finding. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, it could be two minutes/three minutes 
ja, so we can start, you can be here when we start or 
whatever. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So but for also the media if they are still 
here there will be no hearing on Monday and Tuesday 
because the witness who was going to come I have been told 
he is not available to come and so we may be sitting on 
Wednesday but if that doesn’t happen we certainly will be 
sitting on Thursday, so the media will be informed about 
Wednesday once that is settled. 
 
Okay I think that it remains for me to once again thank 
you Ambassador for making yourself available to come to the 
20 
assistance of the Commission. We appreciate it very much.  I 
am sorry that we could not wrap up your evidence, we may 
be at fault to – but ...[indistinct] will be found to if possible 
without you having to travel here but Mr Pretorius will reflect 
on the way to do it, but we appreciate it very much that you 
10 JULY 2020 – DAY 231 
 
Page 294 of 294 
 
took the trouble and came, I am sorry we had to sit so late, 
but I am hoping that we will still have more past and present 
Directors General and Ministers and Deputy Ministers come 
forward and share with the Commission what they know. 
 
Thank you very much. 
AMBASSADOR MAQETUKA:   Thank you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.   Okay we are therefore 
going to adjourn, I think we have never sat till so late. 
 
We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
10 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 15 JULY 2020 
