 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
11 AUGUST 2020 
 
 
DAY 248 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 259 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
11 AUGUST 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 3 of 259 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 11 AUGUST 2020 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Of the – of the commission those 
affidavits place in context the substantial documents that 
were obtained from – from MTN relating to the – the 
location of certain important witnesses related to the 
evidence of Mr Van Rooyen.   
There is also a Public Protector ’s Report that 
became available to – to me during the latter course of 
yesterday that we have included in the bundle as well and I 
have discussed the matter with my learned friend for Mr 
10 
Van Rooyen but he would prefer to address you directly on 
both those issues i.e. the attitude towards the affidavits 
and the additional documentation that has come in during 
the latter course of yesterday as well as on the – the 
address relating to the order of proceedings.   
During the latter part of last week Mr Chair, we also 
gave notice to some of the witnesses whose names will be 
mentioned this morning or during the course of todays’ 
proceedings 
including 
Mr 
Bobat 
and 
Mr 
Whitley. 
 
I 
understand that Mr Whitley is in fact represented by the 
20 
same firm of attorneys as Mr Van Rooyen and I understand 
that Mr Bobat has an attorney present this morning a 
certain Mr Krause of BDK Attorneys. 
 
As it pleases Your Worship – Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 4 of 259 
 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Morning Deputy Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning, good morning, good 
morning. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Together with Mr Mathipa we appear 
for Mr Van Rooyen on the instructions of Lucky Thekisho 
Attorneys. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Chief Justice we – sorry Deputy Chief 
Justice we did think this would be a matter that occupies 
any of your time but we are informed that we have a right 
10 
to cross-examine a witness who implicated our client.  You 
recall that there is a ruling in terms of which Mr Van 
Rooyen was given that right so the evidence of Mr Fuzile is 
incomplete until my client has had the opportunity to cross-
examine him on the issues that he testified in respect of 
their interaction.  It is quite unusual to have a cross-
examination done in the manner that my learned friend 
suggests and there are two reasons for it.   
 
The first one is something I would have thought 
would dispose of this issue quite quickly.  On the 8 
20 
February 2019 this commission addressed a letter to our 
attorneys in which it is clearly – it was made perfectly 
clear that the process – the sequence is going to be as we 
always – as we all know cross-examination and then the 
leading of the witness not the other way around. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 5 of 259 
 
 
So that letter… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Have you got a copy of that letter by any 
chance? 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Yes I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Other than your own copy? 
ADV MASUKU SC:  I am happy to – my… 
CHAIRPERSON:  If there is a spare copy. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  My attorney has got a copy of that 
letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
ADV MASUKU SC:  If I may just be – while the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  I can read it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  It says: 
“We refer to two applications submitted to the commission 
on the 30 January 2019.  The legal team has decided not 
to oppose your application for condonation your application 
to testify – to testify and cross-examine Mr Fuzile.  This 
decision will be communicated to the Chairperson and he 
20 
will be requested to decide the application without hearing 
any oral submissions.  The evidence of Mr Fuzile and Mr 
Magojane is scheduled for the 18 t h and 19 t h February 2019.  
It 
will 
be 
convenient 
to 
cross-examine 
Mr 
Fuzile 
immediately after he completes his evidence thereafter you 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 6 of 259 
 
must testify and be cross-examined – you must testify and 
be cross-examined as soon as you complete your evidence.  
The approach will ensure the smooth running of the work of 
the commission.  You are accordingly required to – 
requested to indicate the proposed duration of cross-
examination as this is a matter of – for that Chairperson 
must decide as soon as possible.  In view of the legal team 
is that one hour will be sufficient for cross-examination for 
Mr Fuzile.” 
 
And we agree that one hour would… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry Mr Masuku let me just read it.  Yes 
continue. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Thank you.  And then on the – just 
when we were preparing to come to this commission on the 
24 July 2020, we addressed a letter to the commission in 
which we sought to ask – just to confirm that the procedure 
is as we always understood it would be.  And we said we 
are writing this letter to seek your confirmation that as it is 
normal practice the order of the day shall be as following: 
 
We as the legal representatives of our client will 
20 
cross-examine Mr Fuzile first.  After the cross-examination 
of Mr Fuzile has been completed it is then that our client 
will testify and be asked questions.  Please confirm that 
this is – this will be the – this will indeed be the order of 
the day? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 7 of 259 
 
 
And of course, we got the response that that is not 
the order of the day.  That will not be the order of the day 
that the order of the day will in fact be that Mr Van Rooyen 
will testify first and then Mr Fuzile will be cross-examined 
thereafter.   
 
We then checked the rules of the commission to 
ascertain what the procedural justification for this unusual 
procedure is and we could find none in the rules of the – in 
the Rules of the Commission. 
 
What regulation – what rule number 8 says is: 
10 
“That the order and sequence in which witnesses will be 
called before the commission will be subject to the 
discretion of the Chairperson.” 
 
I specifically asked my learned friend yesterday 
whether he had obtained a directive from the Chairperson 
regarding the procedure that he was indicating would apply 
to today and his answer was no and that is why we are 
addressing you now. 
 
And then he said – then the rule also says that the 
Chairperson 
may 
in 
his 
discretion 
direct 
the 
cross-
20 
examination of a witness by any implicated person or his 
legal representative to take place and this is important 
after the commission’s legal team and the Chairperson 
have 
exhausted 
their 
respective 
questions 
of 
the 
witnesses. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 8 of 259 
 
 
So we can see no procedural justification for 
adopting the approach suggested by my learned friend. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  We certainly think it is unfair firstly 
because the purpose of cross-examination is – cross-
examination is always done after the witness has – I am 
sorry – the evidence and the property value of the 
evidence is determined after a witness has been cross-
examined.  So Mr Fuzile with respect has not completed 
his evidence until the cross-examination has been done. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. Let us talk about that.  The – the 
letter that – to which you have referred I think it is clear 
from it that was written by the acting Secretary probably 
drafted by somebody in the legal team to reflect what their 
attitude was.   
At a certain stage last year and probably after this 
month – probably later in the year than February or so I 
began to say it is not going to be – it may not be generally 
speaking appropriate or warranted for purposes of the work 
of the commission that we follow what is followed in trials 
20 
in courts in terms of a sequence.   
It may be that if the witness who is sought to be 
cross-examined if it is accepted that he or she has 
subjected himself or herself to the questioning by the 
evidence leaders of the commission it may be that the 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 9 of 259 
 
person who seeks to cross-examine him or her should first 
subject himself or herself to the same process. But also, to 
say once both of them have subjected themselves to this 
process the areas of factual disputes might be much more 
limited, they may have appeared at – after the evidence of 
the one would be helpful in terms of us using our time 
optimally.   
So the idea did not necessarily emanate from the 
legal team you know.  It emanated to me from me but it is 
not necessarily like most things you know.  Most things are 
10 
not meant to be rigid but that is where it comes from.  That 
is point 1. 
Point 2 and you may address this when one talks 
about fairness.  If the person who seeks to cross-examine 
a witness has been furnished with the statements or 
affidavits of that witness knows all the evidence basically 
because the evidence has been transcribed is available 
that this witness has given – has been given – well knows 
all of that evidence has had enough time to prepare to deal 
with that evidence.  And then is asked to take the witness 
20 
stand so that he can put his side of the story and the 
evidence leaders and the Chairperson can probe issues 
that they think are important for purposes of the inquiry. 
He is ready – he has been given enough time – he 
has had enough notice – he knows what the allegations are 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 10 of 259 
 
– he knows what the evidence given by the other witness is 
– he gets a chance to deal with those.  On the fact of it it 
does not seem to me that within the context of an inquiry 
which might be different in litigation in a trial – within the 
context of an inquiry there would be any unfairness in him 
being allowed to exercise his right to cross-examine that 
he has been given after both have subjected themselves to 
that process. 
So that is what I say.  It may well be that in the 
light of what was communicated to your side by way of this 
10 
letter it may well be that I must consider your request in a 
certain way but generally this is my thinking and you may 
wish to address that. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Yes on the first issue Deputy Chief 
Justice we are not aware of any directive coming from 
yourself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Regarding that regulates cross-
examination in the manner you have just explained.  It is 
the first time that I hear that you have a view that cross-
20 
examination should not be conducted in a manner that is – 
in a manner that fits the purpose of cross-examination. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Because once the commission accepts 
that part of its truth finding mission. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 11 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Is to – is going to be – is going to be – 
is going to depend on cross-examination of witnesses it 
must 
accept 
that 
the 
purpose 
of 
cross-examination 
generally which is to test evidence that has been given by 
a witness is very important for the commission as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Because we cannot see any reason 
why the commission would say that the witness who has 
specifically made an application asked to cross-examine a 
10 
witness of – who has presented evidence that implicates 
him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  And pursuant to the Chairperson that is 
married in the request to cross-examine that when it comes 
to cross-examination on the day that he is meant to cross-
examine the person before he gives the evidence is now 
asked to give his evidence before he has cross-examined.  
Part of his evidence of the person that seeks to cross-
examine is – is embedded in what the cross-examination 
20 
has.  So my answer really is – seeks to answer the second 
question. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Which relates to fairness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, ja that is what I want, what is unfair 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 12 of 259 
 
about it? 
ADV MASUKU SC:  It is extremely unfair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Why? 
ADV MASUKU SC:  For a witness to be asked or to be told 
by the commission that its procedural rules are intended to 
find the truth and part of the device that the commission 
will rely on finding the truth is the right of the witness to 
cross-examine a witness who has implicated that particular 
applicant for the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
ADV MASUKU SC:  The – Mr Van Rooyen applies to cross-
examine.  He comes here, argues before you – the 
Chairperson.  He says I want to cross-examine and he is 
told by his lawyers that cross-examination is important 
because what has been said about you is in some material 
respect it is not true. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  And it is important for a truth finding 
mission of the commission for the commission to get the 
truth.  And the only way it can get the truth is if cross-
20 
examination is permitted.  We persuade your – the Chair 
that cross-examination is important for our client. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I accept that – I accept that but I 
think the real issue is how is it – how is it unfair when the 
cross-examination takes place after your witness – after 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 13 of 259 
 
the witness or implicated person has made – has subjected 
himself or herself to questioning by the evidence leader 
and the Chairperson? 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Firstly, Deputy Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  It has got no precedence.  That 
procedural – that procedure has no precedence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  At all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Not in commissions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  It has no precedence in commissions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  It has no precedence even in this 
commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but what is unfair about it? 
ADV MASUKU SC:  What is unfair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Is that it is – that is why it is never 
20 
used because the purpose of cross-examination is that the 
witness who is being cross-examined’s evidence is not 
complete until that witness has been cross-examined. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  So Mr Fuzile’s evidence in your – when 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 14 of 259 
 
you evaluate Mr Fuzile’s evidence you are going to 
evaluate it from the point of view of the questions he asked 
when he – the answers he gave to the questions you asked 
him and the answers he gave when he was cross-
examined.  That is the complete set of his evidence.  His 
evidence is only complete when he has been cross-
examined.  That is the only basis on which you can then go 
to the people he implicates – the people that Mr Fuzile 
implicates with the full evidence of Mr Fuzile. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Right now, Mr Van Rooyen will take the 
stand before Mr Fuzile to testify.  What is the purpose of 
cross-examining Mr Fuzile after Mr Van Rooyen has 
testified – has given his evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us look at this scenario Mr Masuku.  I 
am asked to conduct an inquiry which I decide to for 
example conduct without any evidence leader. Think of any 
inquiry.  I call Mr Fuzile.  I asked – I ask him to tell me 
what happened in regard to the matter that I am – that is 
the subject of the inquiry.  He tells me the story and the – I 
20 
asked him – I ask him whatever questions and he is done.  
I let him go.  Now in his – in what he tells me implicates 
somebody else.  I call that person.  I say, tell me what 
happened and he tells me what happened and I tell him 
what Mr Fuzile said as well to say but Mr Fuzile says this 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 15 of 259 
 
and that and that.  He tells me the story and at a certain 
stage I am done with that – with him.  And I look at the – at 
what both of them have told me maybe I am satisfied that 
even though there are some disputes of fact here and there 
between the two versions in terms of what is really material 
I have got enough evidence.  Mr Fuzile has finished giving 
evidence.  The person he has implicated has finished 
giving evidence.  If I am satisfied that I can make a 
decision without any cross-examination I go ahead and 
make a decision.  But if I think that there are certain 
10 
material differences even after I have heard both of them, I 
might say, look I cannot really decide unless this is sorted 
out.  So I will let the implicated person cross-examine Mr 
Fuzile.  I do so at that stage.  What is unfair about that 
process? 
ADV MASUKU SC:  It is – I am happy that that – is that 
what you have given to me Deputy Chief Justice is 
theoretical. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  I want to address the court – I mean 
20 
the commission on the basis of its own rules. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  And practice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  You upfront you tell the participants to 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 16 of 259 
 
the commission what your rules are. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  And they play by those rules.  And in 
this case. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One second.  Just give me the – oh – yes 
continue. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  And so, what – what you have said is 
that – what you say upfront to the public that I have an 
interest 
in 
the 
commission 
these 
are 
the 
rules 
of 
engagement.  The party who is implicated has a right to do 
10 
a number of things, three of them.  And one of them is the 
right to ask for – from the Chairperson for the right to 
cross-examine a witness who has implicated him.  The 
witness who has implicated or the person who is implicated 
exercises that right. He comes before you he says, please 
I have heard the evidence of Mr Fuzile.  There are certain 
material issues that he raises about me which I – which are 
unfair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  And I want the opportunity to cross-
20 
examine him on that evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  You agree with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  In other words, you say to him, yes I 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 17 of 259 
 
am giving you the right to come and cross-examine the 
implicated – I mean the person who implicates you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Now you do not say to the person I am 
only – that right can only be exercised after you have given 
the evidence that I need you to give. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Because it is clear that the evidence of 
Fuzile – of Mr Fuzile is not complete until the implicated 
person who has been granted the right to cross-examine 
10 
tests through cross-examination the version that he has 
been – he has given.  There are certain aspects it is not 
everything that Mr Fuzile has said that is contentious.  
There are certain aspects that Mr Van Rooyen would have 
wanted to cross-examine Mr Fuzile on before he can give 
his 
evidence. 
 That 
is 
material 
because 
the 
cross-
examination also exposes what Mr Van Rooyen’s own 
evidence is going to be. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  In the absence of cross-examination 
20 
being complete then of course it is difficult for Mr Van 
Rooyen to say, this is my evidence which evidence there 
will be – it may well be disposed of by cross-examination.  
Cross-examination will result in a situation where we say 
we do not have to deal with 1, 2, 3 aspects because 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 18 of 259 
 
through cross-examination we have been able to get to the 
truth of this aspect of the dispute between the two of us.  
Chairperson I urge you to – I did not think that this would 
be an issue that we would occupy your time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let me say you refer to rule 8.  I 
think you did read 8.1. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It says: 
“The order of sequence in which witnesses will be called 
before the commission will be subject to the discretion of 
10 
the Chairperson.” 
So when you say – when you say through the rules the 
commission says this is how we will operate that includes 
that rule. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  No, no, no.  I accept that but what is 
fundamental in it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Is that here the facts are different.  
You have already granted Mr Van Rooyen the right to 
cross-examine Mr Fuzile’s evidence.  You have already 
20 
done that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Except that the – the order granting him 
the leave to cross-examine does not tell him the sequence. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  No but then we have got a letter.  In 
fact, this rule tells you the sequence.  This gives you the 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 19 of 259 
 
sequence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You mean the letter or the rule? 
ADV MASUKU SC:  No both the rules and the letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let us go to the rule.  I read – I rule 
– I read rule 8.1 to say: 
“The sequence of witnesses in the – is in the discretion of 
the Chairperson.” 
ADV MASUKU SC:  If you – if you read rule 1 with 
reference also together with rule 8.2. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just let us go to 8.2.   
10 
“The Chairperson may in his discretion direct the cross-
examination of a witness by an implicated person or his 
legal representative to take place after the commission’s 
legal team and the Chairperson has exhausted their 
respective questions for the witness.” 
ADV MASUKU SC:  The Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  And the legal team have exhausted 
their questions to Mr Fuzile. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
20 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Only after that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  This rule say direct may – in his 
discretion direct the cross-examination of a witness by 
implicated persons. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 20 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  So the Chairperson and the legal…. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But – but I know I am interrupting you.  
But I think – I think we – I just want to make sure on this.  
You see the first 8.1 effectively says the sequence is in the 
discretion of the Chairperson. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Deputy Chief Justice perhaps let me 
make it easy for you.  It is clear that you – this is the 
procedure you want. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Let me make it easy for you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Let us do it this way.  May I suggest 
that I record that we are deeply concerned by the debate 
you and I are engaged in. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  About a procedure that is elementary. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  On cross-examination. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.  You… 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  But secondly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  To say to you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  That I do not understand. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 21 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  What is unfair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  About the procedure that it is normally 
adopted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Of giving a witness who is being cross-
examined – to be cross-examined first before.  I do not 
understand.  The question should be what is the unfairness 
in the normal procedures of cross-examination?  Why 
10 
should there be a deviation from the normal practice of 
cross-examination?  What is it that we are protecting here 
about getting Mr Fuzile to be cross-examined first before 
Mr Van Rooyen gives his evidence?  What is unfair about 
that process? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Masuku I said to you earlier on it 
may be that in terms of this letter I may have to look at 
your request differently from how I would have looked at it.  
So the debate we have been having is for me to try and 
understand your submissions and for you to understand 
20 
what my thinking is.  That is the – that is why we have 
heard that – we have been having this debate.  But I did 
say to you it may well be that in the light of this letter I 
might have to look at your request different.  But I wanted 
to benefit from what you may have to say about the general 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 22 of 259 
 
approach. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  No I have said my submissions I think 
it is unfair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  That is my approach. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  The fairness of the process of cross-
examination is guaranteed.  It is a long-held procedure that 
dates back to – to eternity that a person who is implicated 
he is cross-examined first before the – the fairness of that 
10 
is in your judgments.  I mean your judgments are – they 
have – there is a lot about the importance of cross-
examination to guarantee – to guaranteeing fairness.  If 
you deviate from that – from that process it must be 
because there is some fairness that you are trying to – to 
ring fairness.  So your discretion is – must be exercised in 
order to ring fairness in order to promote fairness and also 
in the process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but also it is important to promote an 
optimal utilisation of our time.  You remember I said one of 
20 
the issues is once I have had the benefit of hearing both 
before there is cross-examination it might become very 
clear where the areas of dispute are that remain.  It may 
be disputes of fact.  It may be that the disputes of fact that 
remain are really in my view not so important or material.  
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 23 of 259 
 
It may be that I say, no they are – they are quite important.  
But I have heard what you have said. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  But Chief Justice – Deputy Chief 
Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  The – when we request for the cross-
examination right we spell out all that.  You ask us to 
identify the areas on which we intend to cross-examine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  And that is the basis on which you 
10 
grant cross-examination. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  It is not a cross-examination of 
everything. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  It is particular areas that we think do 
not warrant a cross-examination. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes I think you said you – you have 
made submissions. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Yes so but the second one relates to 
20 
the documents that we got last night.  And I did convey 
that to my learned friend that the unfairness of it is 
obvious.  We sat on the whole weekend we sat with our 
client consulting on documents that we have been given by 
the commission on which they – when they gave us those 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 24 of 259 
 
documents so that the documents on which they said we 
are going to – the rules of the play are going to be based 
on these documents that we are giving you.   
 
Yesterday I made a call to Mr Hulley at quarter to 
five in the evening,  I made the call, he didn’t call me to 
tell me that there are further documents that he is going to 
be sending us.  After I had called me that is the time that 
he tells me that that documents, but to his fairness he did 
say that he had received those documents also late, but we 
have got to be fair to our witnesses and to our clients.  We 
10 
should expect that when they come here, they are able to 
help the Commission by giving clear evidence.   How am I 
expected to help Mr van Rooyen tell the truth and to give 
the Commission the truth of what he is about when he has 
been given, when documents are put under the door, over 
the window a day before the hearing. 
 
I mean we are given the report of the Public Protector, 
you know, learned friend knows that that report is the 
subject of litigation as we speak. 
 
But we do not know what aspect of the report they want 
20 
to cross-examine on.  We just got this document yesterday in 
the evening around eight and it is just not right. 
 
It is not how the Commission should be doing its work 
but clearly through its legal team. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  No, what do you propose in regard to 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 25 of 259 
 
the issue of the documents? 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Well, he should... should my... we are 
also mindful of the time.  And my client has got... as you 
know, he is no longer working.  So the less he comes here 
the better for him. 
 
We will consider that... we will consider the questions 
that are being asked in relation to those documents.  And if, 
in our view, they require a consultation with him, would raise 
our objection at the time that the questions are being raised. 
 
But we will allow him to use the documents subject to 
10 
our right to object to... or even now, our client to object to 
answering questions from documents that he was never 
given yesterday or that he has just received last night.   
 
In fact, he has not even received them because they 
were sent to us, not him.  So we still have to say him here 
are the documents that came yesterday.  This is what they 
say about you. 
 
But subject to what the legal team seeks to do... to ask 
of our client, subject to our right to object to those 
documents being used, we will allow these documents to be 
20 
used.   
 
And there should not be a problem if we stand up say, 
“Can we be given an opportunity to consult with our client on 
those documents, on those questions?”   
 
Because clearly, they are documents for which legal 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 26 of 259 
 
advice is necessary for our client to get. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, it is 
unfortunate if there 
are 
documents you received were that late.  I will hear what Mr 
Hulley has to say.   
 
If I were to allow the cross-examination of Mr Fuzile first 
rather than Mr Van Rooyen getting into the witness stand 
first before he cross-examines Mr Fuzile, would that afford 
your client and maybe your junior counsel to have time to 
look at the documents with the client so that when later on 
he gets to the witness stand he will have... had a look at 
10 
them properly? 
ADV MASUKU SC:  If that... that would be... we could do 
that Deputy Chief Justice.  I mean, I think it is important that 
the Commission proceeds ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  ...on the... on its work.  And if these 
documents are necessary for what the Commission intends 
to use them, then they must be used.  So we welcome that 
opportunity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You would ...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Particularly because we are keen to 
have Mr Fuzile cross-examined first before our witness is 
given.  The only problem though is that now I have to consult 
with my witness while Mr Fuzile is giving his evidence 
...[intervenes]  
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 27 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  ...which my client is entitled to listen to 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  ... the cross-examination. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  And then engage with the answers that 
he gives while he does that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes, yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  But the easier one Chief Justice... 
10 
Deputy Chief Justice is if you could rule that we cross-
examine Mr Fuzile for one hour and then we take a break 
maybe for twenty or thirty minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  We come back and then we decide what 
the position is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  I can assure the Chair that we are not 
going to be obstructing in as far as these documents are 
concerned. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  
ADV MASUKU SC:  We think that some of the documents are 
not signed.  I mean, the affidavits are not signed.  The other 
relates to a Public Protector’s report which is a subject of 
current litigation and I do not understand what it is that they 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 28 of 259 
 
are really seek to find from that document but it is not for us 
to speculate.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  We will have to deal with that.  I would 
propose that that approach be adopted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  Okay, thank you. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Thank you, Deputy Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you, Mr Masuku.  Mr Hulley? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you, Mr Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Mr Chair, just briefly if I can just deal 
with the issues in the order in which they have been dealt 
with by my learned friend i.e. firstly the application for leave 
to cross-examine first, Mr Fuzile before the evidence of Mr 
Van Rooyen is tendered. 
 
The... if I can make a few submissions only to be of 
assistance to the Commission rather than to advance an 
argument in support either way. 
 
When it comes to the rules and the rules have already 
been debated between yourself Mr Chair and my learned 
20 
friend. 
 
Rule 8.1 is quite clear.  It deals with the sequence in 
which the... the sequence in which the witnesses should be 
called to testify before the Commission. 
 
And it makes the point that it is subject to the discretion 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 29 of 259 
 
of the Chairperson.  And as far as 8.2 is concerned, it says 
that: 
“The Chairperson may, once again in his discretion, 
direct that the cross-examination of a witness by an 
implicated person or his legal representative is to 
take place after the Commission’s legal team and the 
Chairperson 
have 
exhausted 
their 
respective 
questions of the witnesses...” 
 
So that sets out a fairly broad ambit in which the 
Chairperson, yourself, is entitled to order the sequence.   
10 
 
Now, you have asked my learned friend a very pertinent 
question which is:  “Why is this... the order that has been 
suggested by ourselves as the legal team to the other side, 
why is this unfair?” 
 
And with respect, if one considers what is being said 
other than with reference to the actual letter itself that was 
sent in February of 2019 by the legal team.  Although the 
argument appears to be simple that this is the established 
practise.   
 
Now in truth it is an established practice that the parties 
20 
will testify in a particular order and even that practise is also 
subject to the discretion of a court where that is done. 
 
It may depend upon who bears the onus of prove.  The 
court is not always going to... it is not always going to call 
witnesses in the order, in a particular order. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 30 of 259 
 
 
Sometimes the plaintiff will testify first because he or 
she bears the onus.  Other times it may well be that there is 
an onus which rest upon the defendant and in which even 
the defendant will be... might be called to testify first. 
 
And the two do not necessarily goes hand-in-hand.  The 
onus to adduce evidence and the... what we refer to as the 
onus proper or the burden of prove as it were. 
 
So there is a lot of discretion insofar as those issues are 
concerned.  Additional discretion arises in the context of 
where you have got more than one plaintiff and more than 
10 
one defendant.  The court has to exercise a discretion in that 
regard. 
 
The... not necessarily confronted with that over here but 
of course Mr Van Rooyen has been implicated by more than 
one person.  He, of course, has applied for leave to cross-
examine specifically one person and you have granted him 
leave to cross-examine that one person which happens to be 
Mr Fuzile. 
 
But there are other witnesses who have implicated him 
as well in relation to specified issues, not as... not quite as 
20 
broad as what Mr Fuzile’s evidence has gone. 
 
There would be nothing wrong, for instance, when one 
contemplates how the order in which things should be done.   
 
There would be nothing wrong, for instance, conceivable 
if 
the 
Chairperson 
of 
the 
disciplinary... 
sorry, 
the 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 31 of 259 
 
Chairperson of this inquiry were to, for instance, order one 
witness to testify about a specific thing and then turn to the 
other party and say to the other party:  “Well, what do you 
say in response to that?” 
 
There is a whole range of different options.  There is a 
permutation.  There is a number of different permutations 
that may be utilised.  Certainly, disciplinary inquiries.  It is 
not unheard of for proceedings to unfold in that fashion. 
 
Frequently it is when attorneys and advocates and 
counsel and legal representatives get involved that they tend 
10 
to become very rigid in the way in which they perceive the... 
that proceeding should unfold and that is, of course, 
informed by their background.   
 
It is a comfort zone for them.  The rules offer structure.  
The rules of court offer a safe zone for in which they are to 
present the evidence but it is not... that it is not to say that it 
is the gold standard against which every form of adducing 
evidence should be tested. 
 
It is 
always 
a question 
of the 
discretion 
of the 
chairperson and it is always a question of what might be 
20 
convenient. 
 
In light of that context, of course, that one must consider 
the letter that was sent off by the legal team in February of 
last year. 
 
Now I have tried to ascertain precisely who it was that 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 32 of 259 
 
sent out the letter and the context in which it was sent out.   
 
Sadly, I have been unable to get to the bottom of that.  It 
seems to have been, not only before the time of the present 
legal team, but also prior to the time of some of the members 
of the secretariat.  So they actually do not know the 
background. 
 
But having read the letter for myself, it struck me that 
what was been contemplated at the time was that there 
would be a number of witnesses testifying.  
 
And that the evidence of Mr Fuzile would be led first and 
10 
that there were at least two other witnesses that would come 
and testify in support of what he was saying including Mr 
Magubane to come and testify to bolster some of the 
expenses. 
 
In the context and without knowing... actually knowing 
the background, it seems to me that it would have been 
convenient in that context to follow the procedure that was 
contemplated or which was proposed in the letter. 
 
There is no suggestion by our learned friends that what 
is stated over there is somehow considered to be binding.  
20 
Had there been such a suggestion, of course the suggestion 
of court could be repelled on the basis that the legal team 
has no... it cannot bind the Chairperson.   
 
We are subject to the Chairperson, not the other way 
around and we certainly cannot make a suggestions or 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 33 of 259 
 
proposals that would ultimately become binding upon the 
Chairperson. 
 
A letter itself does not suggest that and my learned 
friends quite correctly have not proposed or not argued that 
that is the case.  So the discretion is entirely within your 
hands Mr Chairperson. 
 
The order that has been suggested would, in fact, make 
sense for a number of the reasons that you have debated 
with my learned friend.   
 
One of which is of course that we need to hear from Mr 
10 
Van Rooyen to his own testify what he has said on affidavit.  
He needs to come and explain that.   
 
So it is true that you have granted him leave to come 
and testify and to cross-examine but it is in the context of 
having done so on paper.   
 
He needs to know get into the witness box and advance 
the same argument, if you like, in-chief and also be 
questioned about some of the answers he has given. 
 
It is also clear from the evidence that Mr Fuzile has 
really just triggered an investigation into some of the 
20 
allegations. 
 
The allegations, ultimately, found their way into the 
report of the previous public protector which then became 
the basis upon which this Commission was established. 
 
So it is in that context that Mr Van Rooyen finds himself 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 34 of 259 
 
here.  Mr Van Rooyen does not understand for a moment that 
the case against him is confined to what Mr Fuzile has said.  
In fact, it has ranged much further than that.  Investigations 
which have gone beyond that, have been then triggered on 
matters which Mr Fuzile has not, for instance, testified. 
 
Mr Fuzile at the time when he made his affidavit was 
quite unaware of the fact that, in fact, there was interaction 
between Mr Van Rooyen and certain members of the Gupta 
family prior to that.   
 
He did not testify to that but in fact the previous public 
10 
protector picked that up based on cell phone records that 
she had investigated and after some interaction between this 
Commission and Mr Van Rooyen, it seems that he has 
conceded that there was indeed interaction.  Those issues 
need to tested. 
 
So it would seem to me Mr Chairperson, in having regard 
to what is the appropriate procedure, one must have regard 
also to the fact that the evidence that has been uncovered 
goes way beyond what Mr Fuzile has testified to. 
 
In that context, we leave it ultimately to your discretion 
20 
Mr Chairperson.  That brings me, of course, to the question 
of the provision of documentation to our learned friends that 
at a very late stage. 
 
Unfortunately, 
there... 
some 
of 
the 
documentation 
including the protector’s report only came to my attention 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 35 of 259 
 
last night.   
 
And to be clear, it seems that I had been told of the 
public protector’s report before but I misunderstood it to be a 
reference to the previous public protector’s report.  In other 
words, the one that is presently or had been in the bundles 
previously. 
 
It turns out that it was in fact a reference to the new 
Public Protector’s report.  One which is dated 2018. And I 
was quite unaware that there was this distinction that was 
been drawn and that I was not aware of the fact or the 
10 
existence of the new public protector’s report until I was 
given it last night. 
 
It is in that context that we had made it available to our 
learned friends.  We understand that Mr Fuzile... sorry, Mr 
Van Rooyen has in fact brought an application to set aside 
that public protector’s report. 
 
We are not aware, having only obtained it last night, we 
are not aware of how far those proceedings have gone but it 
there certainly the new public protector’s report deals with 
the interaction between the public protector’s office and Mr 
20 
Van Rooyen and certain responses that is given in that 
public protector’s report. 
 
That is certainly very important to us and we would 
certainly wish to have an opportunity to cross-examine him 
on that. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 36 of 259 
 
 
Insofar 
as 
he 
suggests 
that 
they 
may 
want 
an 
opportunity to stand down in the middle of being questioned.  
Well, it seems to me that the appropriate route to take is to 
make their call now to suggest which process they wish to 
follow. 
 
I have asked my learned friend to suggest whether he 
has got any... any... if he is unhappy about the report going 
in and if he would need an opportunity to consider the report 
and perhaps to consult with his client beforehand. 
 
The indication that is given is, more or less, consistent 
10 
with what he has indicated to yourself Mr Chair but certainly 
it would seem to me in considering that issue, it would seem 
to me to be rather inappropriate if there is a consultation 
that takes place while the witness is being questioned. 
 
Or to use the language that we use in the context of the 
rules which govern the members of the bar, the profession of 
advocates that it is inappropriate to consult with a witness 
while he is under cross-examination. 
 
And it seems to me that they must make their call.  So 
that is as far as I can take it Mr Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, that is fine.  Obviously, there is... 
there may be some unfairness there. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  We accept ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe unfairness when somebody is given 
documents as late as they were given to him.  That is partly 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 37 of 259 
 
why it may be important that attempts be made to mitigate 
that unfairness.   
 
It may be that it would not be appropriate.  And I do not 
know if Mr Masuku meant this it would not be appropriate 
that while Mr Van Rooyen is being questioned by the 
evidence leader, there is consultation, he might not have 
intended that. 
 
But what I certainly heard is that they might raise 
objections to certain questions.  Whether those would lead to 
a need for a consultation might be something else.  
10 
 
I think that it may be important to see how that is 
handled to make sure that we strike a balance between two 
things.   
 
One, being fair to Mr Van Rooyen to, at the same time, 
be able to complete the business of the day. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Indeed, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I understood Mr Masuku’s attitude to 
be one that seeks to strike a balance the two as well in 
terms of not wanting to obstruct the smooth running of the 
proceedings but at the same time, being alive to his duty to 
20 
protect his client as well.  So.  No, that is fine.   
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me hear what Mr Masuku might wish to 
say in response to your submissions.  Mr Masuku. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Yes.  Deputy Chief Justice, I have just 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 38 of 259 
 
conferred 
with 
my 
learned 
friend 
about 
my 
previous 
presentation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  And he said that I looked angry.  I am 
just ugly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] 
ADV MASUKU SC:  And if I did sound or look angry, I 
apologise if you got the same impression. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  I am generally a pleasant guy who likes 
10 
to laugh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I thought you are a generally a pleasant 
guy.  [laughs] 
ADV MASUKU SC:  I am glad you think so Chief Justice.  
Deputy Chief Justice, the discretion you have, obviously, 
must be exercised with due regard to the rights that you 
must vigorously protect.  It is not a discretion, the nature of 
which must just disregard procedural fairness and the 
purpose of cross-examination. 
 
As we say, the difficult position that your adopting... the 
20 
position that are adopting now or the position that you 
articulated to me is a different... is not a different position. 
 
A different position is that the cross-examination follows 
after the witness... sorry, the cross-examination completes 
the evidence of the witness who is going to be cross-
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 39 of 259 
 
examined. 
 
And if you are going to deviate it from there, it must 
never lose the attribute of fairness.  That procedure must not 
lose the attribute of fairness. 
 
If your procedure protects the fairness aspect of my 
client, then it must be adopted, and I cannot argue against 
the procedure that you say is fair.  I do not believe the one 
that you have explained to me is fair and I made my points 
on that aspect. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs]  H’m. 
10 
ADV MASUKU SC:  But the second thing is that we do think 
that it would make the Commission’s work must faster to 
eliminate those aspects.  I know my learned friend has got a 
number of witnesses that he wants to cross-examine or that 
he wants to cross-examine our client on. 
 
That is fair enough.  But Mr Fuzile should not have to sit 
here for the whole day listening to what my client has to say 
about witnesses.  He has no interest in that. 
 
And I think, it seems to us, that the best way is to have 
him be cross-examined so he can go and do important work 
20 
that he does outside this Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And we agreed about an hour.  Is that 
right? 
ADV MASUKU SC:  We would not want more than an hour. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 40 of 259 
 
ADV MASUKU SC:  And my learned friend, Mr Mathipa is 
dealing with that cross-examination. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay, okay. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  I think with all the others. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  And about the issues of the 
documents.  Were you seeking an arrangement in terms of 
which while Mr Van Rooyen is being questioned, you might 
ask that we adjourn so that you can consult with him? 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Well, it depends.  We have not also 
engaged with the documents ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Evidence?  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  ...to give you and undertaking that the 
kind of consultation we would require with the client is much 
longer than ten minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Yes, okay. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  But our purpose of the document is 
not... we do not think Mr Van Rooyen will be unable to 
answer or some of the questions there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Although we think it is grossly unfair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  And we accept that it is unfair to give 
him documents today to ask him about documents he has not 
seen.  When they do ask him questions, they must remember 
that their position is not to cross-examine him. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 41 of 259 
 
 
It is to elicit answers from documents that they must 
understand he got today.  So it means that in the manner in 
which they ask him, it must accommodate that possibility 
that he might say, “Look, can I seek legal advice from my 
legal team to understand what exactly it is?” 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think what I am quite happy to do and I 
do not think anybody would have a problem is that if I allow 
Mr Fuzile be cross-examined first, when that is done, we 
have a certain amount of time. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  You estimated twenty minutes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We have about that time to enable your 
team to consult with Mr Van Rooyen on those documents or 
whatever you... and then he takes the stand after that. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  We will be indebted on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In that way, there would be no need for 
any adjournments to consult while he is being questioned. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  We would consider that Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  Thank you Mr Masuku. 
20 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Thank you Deputy Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am going to allow your side to cross-
examine Mr Fuzile before Mr Van Rooyen takes the stand.  It 
is not so much because of your arguments on the merits of 
the... 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 42 of 259 
 
ADV MASUKU SC:  I understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is more about the letter and maybe to 
some extent the fact that the certain documents were 
received late by your side. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  That is part of my argument Deputy 
Chief Justice.  The letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  That is part of my argument.  So I can 
snatch the bargain on that too.  [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs]  No, thank you very much.  
10 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that is the decision I have made.  The 
cross-examination will start... will come first.  And then Mr 
Van Rooyen will give evidence later.  Thank you, Mr Masuku. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe what we should do.  I have eleven 
o’clock now.  We normally take tea at quarter past eleven.  I 
do not know whether Mr Hulley you will need some time 
before Mr Fuzile takes ten minutes, some adjournment or 
not? 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes, I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  ...or whether we should take the tea-
adjournment now? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  We would be indebted to your Mr 
Chairperson if you would take the adjournment now.  We 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 43 of 259 
 
need to explain to Mr Fuzile what exactly the implications of 
this are and just, you know, just acclimatising to the change 
process. 
 
Because 
we 
had 
previously 
advised 
him 
that 
the 
proceedings would take place in a different format and in 
light of your present ruling it seems appropriate that I should 
explain what is happening at the moment and just afford him 
an opportunity... or just have an opportunity to engage with 
him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Actually, if we take... we normally take a 
10 
fifteen minutes break at quarter past eleven for tea.  If we 
take thirty minutes now from eleven to half-past eleven, that 
might help Mr Masuku’s side as well to consult with Mr Van 
Rooyen in regard to the documents so that maybe later they 
will not need any further time.   
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So let us take thirty minutes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then... so we will resume at half-past 
eleven. 
 
So 
we 
combine 
the 
tea 
break 
and 
some 
20 
adjournments.  So we make optimal use of that.  I think Mr 
Masuku is happy with that arrangements. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Yes, we are.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay alright.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 44 of 259 
 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Mathipa, I understand you will 
conduct the cross-examination. 
ADV MATHIPA:   I am going to do the cross-examination, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, that is fine. 
ADV MATHIPA:   I assume that you have got my names? 
CHAIRPERSON:   From last time, I think. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is M-o-t-h-i...? 
10 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes, it is M-a-t-h-i-p-a.  Mathipa. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then will you administer the oath or 
affirmation?  Ja, okay. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR LUNGISA FUZILE:   I am Lungisa Fuzile. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR FUZILE:   No. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR FUZILE:    Yes. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing else but the 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 45 of 259 
 
truth?  If so, please raise your right hand and say so help 
me God. 
MR FUZILE:   So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Thank you, Mr Fuzile, thank 
you for coming back to make yourself available to assist 
the Commission.  You will be cross-examined.   
If there is any question you do not understand feel 
free to ask it to be repeated.  You might need to either take 
off your mask or move it a bit unless when you talk 
everybody can hear you well but at least there is social 
10 
distancing, I hope it is enough, just so that we can hear 
what you have to say.  Yes, Mr Mathipa? 
ADV MATHIPA:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Mr Fuzile, I 
assume I can address you as Mr Fuzile, is that alright?  
Yes, I am just going to address you as Mr Fuzile 
throughout, is that okay? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Alright.  In this cross-examination I am 
going to use – there are files which I am going to use 
which the Commission gave us.  The first one is the one 
20 
that runs from page 1, I think it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you – all of them are supposed to 
be written something on the spine. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Which should help identify which one. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 46 of 259 
 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay, on the side, hey? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it written EXHIBIT PA? 
ADV MATHIPA:   Ja, EXHIBIT PC. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, PC, that is the...? 
ADV MATHIPA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Somebody must assist Mr Fuzile 
to identify – oh, he has found it. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay, that is the one, I think it goes from 
10 
page 1 to 500. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes.  And then in addition to that, there 
is another file.  I notice later that this file did not contain 
the statements of Mr Mogajane and Ms Macanda and that 
has been given separately.  I hope …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, do you want to give me that as and 
when you arrive when you get to that stage? 
ADV MATHIPA:   Ja, I think we can deal with it when 
…[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, starting with the other one, let us 
deal with that one once we are done then we can move into 
the next one. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 47 of 259 
 
ADV MATHIPA:   Mr Fuzile, I would like to take you back to 
your relationship with Mr van Rooyen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, the lever arch file that I have 
got now is written Advisors 1 and then below that EXHIBIT 
PC.  Is that how your one also reads on the spine? 
ADV MATHIPA:   Ja, it is EXHIBIT PC. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV MATHIPA:   (C). 
CHAIRPERSON:   But it is written Advisors 1 above that or 
not?  On the spine? 
10 
ADV MATHIPA:   Ja, it is, yes, exactly the [inaudible – 
speaking simultaneously] .   
CHAIRPERSON:   It is, ja.  Mr Fuzile, you have this same 
file? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes.  It looks that way, Deputy Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR FUZILE:   On the spine it is written Advisor 1, EXHIBIT 
P(C) in inverted commas there is Van Rooyen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR FUZILE:   Page 001 to 427. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, it is the one.  Thank you. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Alright, thank you.  Mr Fuzile, I am just 
going to – I just wanted to confirm the following things and 
then you can just tell me if you agree.  You have already 
indicated that you had a very good relationship with Mr van 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 48 of 259 
 
Rooyen which dates back for many years, am I correct?  
Before you met – before he became Minister of Finance.  
That appears – if I may just refer you to – on page 359 and 
I am using the pages at the top right corner. 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Ja.  On page …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, hang on one second? 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You will find, both you, Mr Mathipa and 
Mr Fuzile, we find that on each page at the top there are 
10 
two numbers.  One is red the other one is black.  The red 
is on the top right-hand corner and  the black one is one 
top left corner.  Whenever there is a black number – 
normally in the past was have been using the red numbers 
but for a certain reason whenever there is a black number 
we have to use the black number.  Mr Hulley, that is still 
the case, hey? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   That is so, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  So when you refer to page 
numbers use the black number but you do not have to say 
20 
Advisors 1 – 008, for example, you just say page 8 and we 
will all know you are referring to the black numbers. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay.  Chairperson, the only challenge 
is, I do not have black numbers.  I have red, both of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 49 of 259 
 
ADV MATHIPA:   But what I have, the pages I am using the 
top right is the one on the top most right column. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, well… 
ADV MATHIPA:   Even that is exactly what I have. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Fuzile, do you have the black 
numbers/ 
MR FUZILE:   Yes, I have got …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You do have. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Oh, you mean the ones in the middle? 
MR FUZILE:   ON the top left hand corner. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
MR FUZILE:   And the red one …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   On the top right. 
MR FUZILE:   On the top right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR FUZILE:   Which starts with PC.  
CHAIRPERSON:   The correct numbers I am talking about.  
That appear on your top left, you have got them. 
ADV MATHIPA:   The one starts with PC. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is the red ones. 
20 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then you are supposed to have on the 
opposite that one, on the top left you are supposed to have 
a black one starting with Advisors – 1 …[intervenes] 
ADV MATHIPA:   Oh, I see that, yes. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 50 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see? 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay, I have got that.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so use the black ones. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But also, each time you refer to a page 
you do not have to say Advisors 1 – 008. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Oh, okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You just say page 8. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Alright.  Okay, the only challenge is, I 
use my cross-examination based on the red ones, so I 
10 
prepared along those, so I will have to…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, but of course you can …[intervenes] 
ADV MATHIPA:   I can call it first. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you can call it first or otherwise you 
go to the red one and then look at the black one. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV MATHIPA:   So if you go with me to that page – the 
one that I referred to as …[intervenes] 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Mr Chairperson, sorry, if I can be of a 
20 
bit of assistance over here.  It must be borne in mind, of 
course, given the order in which things are unfolding that 
the present document has not been entered into evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, well is he not referring to an 
affidavit that has already been admitted? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 51 of 259 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes, not that is true. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   But I just want to alert my learned 
friend to that so that he can address it, of course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  Thank you.   
ADV MATHIPA:   I am not sure I follow. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I assume you are referring to Mr Fuzile’s 
affidavit. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes, I am referring to his own affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that would have been admitted 
10 
previously. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I imagine.   
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if that is not so then I should be told 
about it but otherwise I think it would have been admitted 
previously. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Alright.  So the affidavit, I am referring 
to, Mr Fuzile, appears on – it starts on page 357, I am talk 
about the black one now, the black number.  357 and 
20 
where I am is page 36 …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Mathipa, maybe what you 
should do is, go to – because you have prepared on the 
basis of the red numbers. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 52 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That you go to that page without telling 
us about the red numbers. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then you when you get there tell us 
about the black numbers. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Oh, I see. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, so that there is no confusion. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes.  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So what is the black number on the page 
you are talking about? 
10 
ADV MATHIPA:   It is 362. 
CHAIRPERSON:   362? 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes, yes, 362.  Just as a starting place, I 
am 
saying 
this 
that 
in 
paragraph 
34 
you 
indicated 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, do you want to just confirm that is 
his signature on page 372 and that this is his affidavit 
before you move on? 
20 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes, yes, okay.  Alright, can I confirm, Mr 
Fuzile, this is your affidavit, this document? 
MR FUZILE:   It looks like it, ja. 
ADV MATHIPA:   It is.  And then it is signed on page 372.  
That is your affidavit, right?  Thank you.  Now on page 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 53 of 259 
 
362, in paragraph 34, that is where you deal with your 
relationship with Mr van Rooyen.  Do you see that? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Right.  And then you indicated in 
paragraph 34 that you first met him when he was a member 
of parliament. 
MR FUZILE:   Yes.   
ADV MATHIPA:   Right and that he was a member of the 
standing committee on finance and Chief Whip of the 
majority party, right?  Now in paragraph 35 you also speak 
10 
about a very good professional relationship that you had 
with him, am I right? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes.   
ADV MATHIPA:   And that there was mutual respect 
between you and him for each other’s roles, right?  Do you 
agree with that? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   And then 36 you actually give examples 
to illustrate the quality of the interactions that you had with 
him, 
right? 
 
You 
give 
two 
examples 
of 
positive 
20 
engagements that you had with him.  I do not want to -  I 
mean, it is something that I do not think – but I just want to 
confirm that relationship and that interaction.   
36.1 you speak to the information that he requested 
from you when he preparing for a debate during the State 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 54 of 259 
 
of the Nation address, that is when the State of the Nation 
address.  Do you see that? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   And then 36.2 you speak about the 
mediation role that he played in a meeting at National 
Treasury on the 9 November 2015.  Am I correct with that? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   And then you say in the very last line of 
paragraph 36.2, you say – just the last three lines: 
“In that meeting Mr van Rooyen played a role of 
10 
mediator.  He was very polite and constructive 
throughout the engagement.” 
Am I correct that? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay, now …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Fuzile, just be the 
recording, ja. 
MR FUZILE:   Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So your answers must not be too soft. 
MR FUZILE:   Okay. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Now in paragraph 38 on the next page 
you speak about the cordiality that prevailed between you 
and Mr van Rooyen throughout the many years of your 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 55 of 259 
 
interactions and you say this can be attested to even by 
your former colleagues at National Treasury and his 
colleagues, other MPs.  Do you confirm that? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Alright.  Now let me check with you.  In 
these interactions that you have had with him, specifically 
at National Treasury where he played the role of a 
mediator 
where 
you 
say 
he 
was 
very 
polite 
and 
constructive throughout the engagement.  Was he also 
polite to the other people or was he only polite and 
10 
constructive to you? 
MR FUZILE:   He was polite to other people. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay. 
MR FUZILE:   As well. 
ADV MATHIPA:   As well, okay.  And the years that you 
have known him where you say there was cordiality that 
prevailed between you and him and you say this can be 
attested by your own colleagues at National Treasury as 
well as by his other MPs.  Are you aware of him not being 
cordial to other people and let us say – I think let us just 
20 
start with your own colleagues.  Was he only cordial to 
you, was you he also cordial to your colleagues? 
MR FUZILE:   This is prior to his arrival at Treasury as 
Minister, yes, he was cordial to everyone. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 56 of 259 
 
MR FUZILE:   And to be clear, prior to his arrival to the 
Treasury as Minister. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Definitely, yes, I just wanted to confirm 
that.  Now I think we can now move to the events of the 9 
December 2015 now that we have set the scene.  First, I 
would like to refer you to – I want to go back to your 
statement.  Just one second?   First, I think let us look at 
page 044.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MATHIPA:   That page …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is an index, is that right? 
ADV MATHIPA:   Ja, it is an index page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   And then the next page is a statement.  I 
just want us …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the next page says …[intervenes] 
ADV MATHIPA:   It is the table of contents. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Ja and then the third page is – says 
Lungisa Fuzile there.  Do you see that?   
20 
MR FUZILE:   H’m. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Can you confirm that this is your 
statement? 
CHAIRPERSON:   This is a statement or affidavit that 
starts on page 46. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 57 of 259 
 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And goes up to – oh it says – it looks 
like a statement rather than – it goes up to page 65, is that 
correct? 
ADV 
MATHIPA: 
 
 
Page 
65, 
ja, 
if 
we 
exclude 
the 
attachments. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, ja, it is just a statement and 
not an affidavit. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is dated 16 November 2018.  Do you 
10 
confirm it is your statement? 
MR FUZILE:   I confirm that it is my statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
MR FUZILE:   Signature on page 65 is mine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Alright, so I want us to look at page 048.  
Are you with me on page 048? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MATHIPA:   Alright.  On that page in paragraph 15 – I 
do not want to read the whole of it but you mention that 
you received a message from the then Minister of Finance, 
Mr Nene, telling you that the axe has fallen.  Are you with 
me on that paragraph? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 58 of 259 
 
MR FUZILE:   Yes, I am. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay.  And then  - and he explained that 
– so you changed direction then you went him, right?  
Okay? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay.  Now in paragraph 17, that is 
where I would like us to look at.  You then say you 
received a call from Mr Enoch Godongwana who said you 
are now going to receive a Gupta Minister who will arrive 
with advisers.  Am I right?   
10 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   I just want to confirm something with you 
here before I proceed.  When you received this call from 
Mr Godongwana were you already aware that Mr van 
Rooyen was the new Minister? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay, so you knew that he was referring 
to him then? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay.  Now let us then look at – okay, I 
20 
think just before we move, in paragraph 18 you say: 
“I asked him to elaborate what he meant and he 
said I should watch it, my new minister is likely to 
come with advisers he does not know.  They would 
be given to him by the Guptas.  I was perplexed to 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 59 of 259 
 
say the least.” 
Am I reading it correctly, nè? 
MR FUZILE:   Ja, you are reading it correctly. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay, sure, that is fine.  Now I want us to 
look at – I think there is one question before we proceed 
on that, is when you say you were perplexed – and by then 
you knew that the Minister is Mr Des van Rooyen, did this 
change your view of him? 
MR FUZILE:   If you read my own statement… 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes. 
10 
MR FUZILE:   …where on 19 I say that I never even got to 
speak to Dr Ramontja that he had suggested I should 
speak to because at that point I took the matter somewhat 
lightly, disturbing as it was. 
ADV MATHIPA:   I just want to confirm what you – I wanted 
to confirm just what you mean by I was perplexed to say 
the least because I am assuming that …[intervenes] 
MR FUZILE:   The suggestion that I was going to get a 
Gupta minister, one.  Two, that he is going to come with 
advisers of Indian descent, I said under cross-examination, 
20 
and the suggestion that he might not know them that well 
even, was actually puzzling to me. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes. 
MR FUZILE:   Having heard what he said, I still thought 
could it really be?  Right, because he went on, if you read 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 60 of 259 
 
my own statement. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes. 
MR FUZILE:   To say that in fact if I want to confirm this, I 
should check with Dr Ramontja the modus operandi of the 
Gupta appointees, in his own way.  And, by the way, I am 
saying – this is Enoch Godongwana talking to me. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes.  No, no, I understand. 
MR FUZILE:   It is not me talking to him saying that this is 
– I am getting a Gupta minister.  So he said you are going 
to get a Gupta minister, he is going to arrive with advisers, 
10 
they are likely to be of Indian descent, they will be given to 
him and so on and I am saying then, shocked at one point, 
but shocked that I kind of said look, I doubt it really could 
be which is why even though I had Dr Ramontja’s number, I 
knew him very well, we had very great rapport.   
I had time to call him, I had airtime on my phone 
but I did not call him. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes. 
MR FUZILE:   I still let that lie. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay, that is fine.  So my only question 
20 
was did that change your view? 
MR FUZILE:   No at that stage, I did say to you. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay, that is fine.  Let us move on.  Then 
let us look at page …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, is the position that is you 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 61 of 259 
 
were concerned about what Mr Godongwana said about 
your new minister but nevertheless you did not think you at 
that stage wanted to call Dr Ramontja and confirm what 
you had been told, you still wanted to see how things 
developed or what the – you did not form a fixed view 
about the situation? 
MR FUZILE:   No.  Precisely, Chief Justice, I mean, I 
wanted – I mean, the day was going to – the night was 
going to pass and the morning was going to come. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR FUZILE:   And he was going to arrive at the Treasury. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then you could see. 
MR FUZILE:   I did not have to check it with anyone.  If he 
arrived on his own, Enoch would have been proven wrong, 
first point, just getting there on his own.  Needless to say, 
he actually arrived with advisers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR FUZILE:   So then that was the first moment – first 
when I got to the Union Buildings actually but you will 
come …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR FUZILE:   But what I am saying, that the first time then 
I met the adviser, I kind of started to wonder now, oh, 
okay, perhaps there was truth in what was said but let us 
see how it unfolds. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 62 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Mr Fuzile, let us look at page 49, 049.  
Are you on that page? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Paragraph 22 on that page, you say that 
you remember calling Mr van Rooyen to speak to him and 
congratulate him.  And I am reading: 
“During the call I indicated to him that I was going 
to put him on speaker phone so that our head of 
communications, Ms Phumza Macanda, could be 
10 
part of the discussion and I introduced her.  I 
encouraged him to consider two things.” 
Okay?  You said: 
“First to try and get to the department early, 
sometime before inauguration, which was at 11.00 
so that he can meet Mr Nene and so that together 
they can address the staff for outgoing Minister 
Nene to say goodbyes.” 
And so on.   And then: 
“Minister 
designate 
to 
introduce 
himself 
and 
20 
essentially calm them.” 
Then in 2.2 you say: 
“Second, I asked him to seriously consider issuing a 
media statement as soon as he possibly could, 
possibly after the inauguration.  I was suggesting 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 63 of 259 
 
this because it was evident that the market reacting 
adversely to the untimely removal of Mr Nene 18 
months into his first term.  They now anticipated an 
imminent 
breakdown 
in 
the 
fiscal 
discipline 
procurement 
of 
nuclear 
and 
the 
weakening 
of 
Treasury.” 
Do you see what I have just read there? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Do you agree that I have read it 
correctly? 
10 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Alright.  Now where I am coming to is 
paragraph 23.  You say: 
“He turned down both these suggestions.  On the 
contrary, he sternly told me that our officials of 
Treasury tendency to issue statements has come to 
an end.” 
Do you confirm that that is what you said? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Alright.  Now I want us to look at 
20 
paragraph 9 of what Ms Macanda said about what the 
Minister said and this is going to be …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:    Do you remember where we will find 
that? 
ADV MATHIPA:   This is where we go to the …[intervenes] 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 64 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, just tell me what is written on the 
spine of the file? 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay, just one second?  9 is on page 26. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Tell me what is written on the spine of 
the file first, on the spine of the file, here, tell me what is 
written here? 
ADV MATHIPA:   You know what I have doesn’t have 
anything like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It doesn’t have? 
ADV MATHIPA:   No. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well Mr Hulley – oh look at counsel 
behind you is helping you, on your left is helping you. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, just tell me what is on the back, on 
the spine? 
ADV MATHIPA:   It is EXHIBIT P. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it written Advisors Two or what, on the 
spine, on the spine? 
ADV MATHIPA:   On the outside. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On the spine. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Mr Chair if I could be of some 
assistance? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   What my learned friend is referring to 
is a historical document, so in other words it is what Mr 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 65 of 259 
 
Fuzile testified to which was PA, in this case it forms part 
of Exhibit PB so on your spine Mr Chair it should refer to 
PA and B. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I understand that is how it was 
compiled in the past. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so it’s the file written Exhibit PA 
on the spine?   Okay Mr Fuzile have you got that file? 
MR FUZILE:   I think I have got it Deputy Chief Justice, 
Exhibit BA. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja that is the one.  And what is the 
page number? 
ADV MATHIPA:   It is page 26. 
CHAIRPERSON:   26? 
ADV MATHIPA:   Ja, 26.  Alright are we all there? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you referring there to 26, the one is 
written with a marker and the other one is typed. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Ja, that is the bigger letters, which is – I 
think it is the marker one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Where there is a table or 
20 
something, flexible remuneration package. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Oh, I don’t ...[intervenes]  
MR FUZILE:   My file DCJ looks exactly like yours. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It’s like mine, okay. 
ADV MATHIPA:   It’s got the tables of salary scale. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 66 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   31 s t March 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so our page 26, written with a 
marker Mr Mathipa. 
MR FUZILE:   Okay just to make use of the time, I also, by 
the way have sent Mr van Rooyen a couple of sms’s, in one 
of them was congratulating him in another one, and I was 
saying to him exactly what is contained in this statement, 
I’m sure you would have seen it Mr Mathipa, in which I was 
saying to him, I would urge him to come to …[intervenes]. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Chair, if I can just interject briefly, it 
seems as if the witness’ voice is not being captured on the 
microphone, if he can just bring it closer to his mouth. 
MR FUZILE:   Is that so? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no that’s fine. 
MR FUZILE:   So I was just making the point, to make use 
of the time because we’ve got an hour to go through this 
but I thought it’s a valuable data point, I had sent Mr van 
Rooyen a couple of messages, one of the them the night 
before, I sent him a message congratulating him at about 
20 
ten or so that evening. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR FUZILE:   That’s material, actually and that’s what I 
would 
normally 
do 
after 
hearing 
a 
Minister 
being 
announced. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 67 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR FUZILE:   Find his telephone number and then call him 
or sms him.  Secondly I did say to him, it would be good if 
he comes to the department, I think this one, I may have 
sent it in the morning of the swearing in day, the 10 t h, 
where I said to him, it would be good to come to the 
Department to say his goodbyes and Mr Mathipa has 
repeated this but very importantly, very important, I said to 
him to also just talk a couple of things that relate to 
unfinished business of the Treasury. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR FUZILE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that’s fine, Mr Mathipa maybe I 
should say this, you know sometimes it’s good to look for 
the right page but sometimes you find that if you just ask 
the question the witness would answer it, even without 
…[intervenes]. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Oh, maybe there’s no need…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Without looking at the page, if he wants 
to look at a page then he can be given that chance. 
20 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You might find that if you ask him the 
question he will answer. 
MR FUZILE:   But Chairman, I know you run the show here 
but I would prefer that, when reference is made to 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 68 of 259 
 
something that I wrote or said, I must be directed to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR FUZILE:   Because I don’t want it to be interpreted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s fair enough. 
MR FUZILE:   I wrote it, I took the trouble to write it, I said 
it, so there’s a record of it, I will insist on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that’s fine, that’s why I said, you 
might be able to answer without needing to look but if you 
want to look, certainly. 
MR 
FUZILE: 
 
 
That’s 
fine. 
 
So 
okay 
at 
this 
10 
stage…[interveners]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I can say we had a witness a few 
weeks ago, I think, Mr Nhleko the former Minister who was 
saying to Mr Hulley, effectively, ask the question I’ll be 
able to answer without looking so – okay, alright continue. 
MR FUZILE:   Yes, so I’m referring page 26 of that – are 
we on the same page? 
ADV MATHIPA:   No we’re not, but you said because you  
were – your page 26 is different from ours. 
MR FUZILE:   Okay, so none of us are on that page. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no Mr Fuzile and I are on the same 
page, tell us…[intervenes]. 
MR FUZILE:   Okay let’s look at the statement of Macanda, 
ja because the file that I was given by my colleague here is 
also the same as mine, so it’s the same page. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 69 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, page 26 on my one and I think on Mr 
Fuzile’s one doesn’t have Ms Macanda’s one so it’s – it 
can’t be the right file. The file that we have is written on 
the spine that is at the back of the file Exhibit PA then says 
statement of Lungisa Fuzile then says Exhibit PB then says 
application for condonation re: Fuzile Lungisa and Phumza 
Macanda or Macanda, it might be much towards the end, 
Mr Hulley are you able to…[intervenes]. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes Chairperson, sorry if I can be of 
assistance.  My learned friend has got to refer to the 
10 
specific divider that he’s dealing with, in this case it 
happens to be part of PB, so it’s from Exhibit PB and it’s 
on page 26 of that Bundle.  The document that you’re 
referring to, Mr Chairperson is part of PA, Exhibit PA. 
MR 
FUZILE: 
Ja, 
I’ve 
now 
found 
Ms 
Macanda’s 
statement…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, and what page did you find it on? 
MR FUZILE:   There’s a divider on my file which is, I think, 
the person was writing PC, DCJ, there’s a divider in the 
file…[intervenes]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I don’t have a divider written PC, 
I’ve got only PA and PB. 
MR FUZILE:   Sorry, maybe I was – the person’s 
handwriting is quite – I think it’s PB, it is PB. 
CHAIRPERSON:   PB? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 70 of 259 
 
MR FUZILE:  Ja.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, under PB what page have you got. 
ADV MATHIPA:   That PB yes, then that’s where the 
statement of Ms Macanda starts actually…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I’ve got a notice of motion on page 
one…[intervenes]. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Just past that then there’s a statement.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Then I’ve got – the next affidavit I’ve got 
is that of Mr Mabunda on page 9. 
ADV MATHIPA:   That’s right DCJ keep going you’re 
10 
getting there. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Yes, the page where I am is 26.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Fuzile is your page also 26? 
MR FUZILE:   I do see a 26 before me but when Mr 
Mathipa goes to the contents, I might realise that I’m on 
another 26 but let’s see. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay but let’s – you just need to be the 
same page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay I have found it but on mine it is 
on page 23. 
20 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay, mine is 26 but the – okay where it 
starts is 23 I think. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This is not satisfactory I think you’ll just 
have to refer to paragraph numbers. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay paragraph 9 Mr Fuzile, I want to 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 71 of 259 
 
refer you to paragraph 9 of Ms Macanda’s message.  I 
think, just before I go to 9 the previous paragraph, the last 
sentence of it says, 
“The DG asked the Minister if Treasury Officials 
could draft a statement for the Minister ’s approval 
then 9 says, the Minister told the DG that a 
statement had already been drafted and that there 
was no need for him to worry about that.  The 
Minister said he would provide DG with a statement 
later”, 
10 
 
You see that? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes, I see that. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay, but you see, Mr Fuzile, that this is 
different from what you said was the Minister ’s response, 
Minister van Rooyen’s response? 
MR FUZILE:   You mean, what was said when Ms Macanda 
is different from what was said by me? 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes. 
MR FUZILE:   In what respect? 
ADV MATHIPA:   First you say the Minister rejected both 
20 
suggestions and said this thing of drafting statements must 
come to an end, that’s what you say. 
MR FUZILE:   And I stand by that. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes, but do you see that it’s different, 
that’s what I’m asking? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 72 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry, I am at paragraph 9, just 
indicate, Mr Mathipa, what is different and different from 
what so that I can follow the question. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Paragraph 9 says, the Minister, that is 
Ms Macanda, talking, the Minister told the DG that a 
statement had already been drafted and that there was no 
need for him to worry about that. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s one, the Minister said, 
10 
“He would provide the DG with the statement later, 
both the DG and I were puzzled and wondered who 
would have drafted such a statement from where 
and 
how. 
 
This 
was 
surprising 
because 
the 
Treasury, 
under 
the 
direction 
of 
the 
Finance 
Minister was the only institution with the authority 
to prepare a statement on behalf of the Minister of 
Finance, the DG or DDG’s.  We did not respond to 
this but indicated we would meet the Minister at the 
swearing in ceremony”.  
20 
 
Now, do you want to specify…[intervenes]. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay, I – let me refer back to paragraph 
23 which is on page 49 – 049 of Mr Fuzile’s statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just read what it says. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Ja, it reads, 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 73 of 259 
 
“He turned down both suggestions, the suggestions 
are contained in paragraph 22.1 and paragraph 
22.2”. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:  “He turned down both suggestions, on the  
contrary he sternly told me that (our) Officials of 
Treasury tender to issue statements has to come to 
an end.  Ms Macanda was on speaker phone with Mr 
Fuzile 
when 
Mr 
van 
Rooyen 
– 
when 
they 
communicated with Mr van Rooyen but her response 
10 
in paragraph 9 says, the Minister told the DG that a 
statement had already been drafted and that there 
was no need for him to worry about that”. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, do you want to put to Mr Fuzile 
what your…[intervenes]. 
ADV MATHIPA:   So, my question…[intervenes].   
CHAIRPERSON:   Understanding is of that and say 
whether…[intervenes]. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Ja, I said, do you see that there’s a 
difference between what you said the Minister said and 
20 
what she said the Minister said? 
MR FUZILE:   What’s the difference…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry Mr Fuzile, I suggest, Mr 
Mathipa you put to Mr Fuzile that what Ms Macanda is 
saying is different from his evidence in respect of A and B 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 74 of 259 
 
and let him comment on that. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes, do you see that there’s a difference? 
MR FUZILE:   No, I don’t. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now put to him what the difference is. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What – on your understanding of what 
Ms Macanda says at paragraph 9. 
MR FUZILE:   Show me the difference. 
ADV MATHIPA:   The first difference is this, you say, your 
suggestion, let’s take one suggestion, your suggestion that 
10 
the Minister should prepare a statement, that there was a 
need for – to prepare a statement was rejected outright, 
you said that, is that correct? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Ms Macanda says, the Minister said, I’ve 
already prepared a statement. 
MR FUZILE:   No, I don’t know why you choose to do that, 
the essence of what I was saying to the Minister was, we, 
the people, within the protocols of what we normally follow 
of issuing a statement as a Department for which there is a 
20 
policy that governs it, can we do it this way and I am 
saying that he turned that down.  Phumza says that he 
turned that down, he’s not saying that he agreed we should 
do the statement, he even – she even says, we were 
surprised because under the direction of the Minister of 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 75 of 259 
 
Finance we were the only ones who normally do the 
statement and you say this is different.  Sure she’s not 
using my own words, she is using her own words to say, Mr 
van Rooyen said, he did not need a statement prepared by 
us or with us, are you disputing that, I’m saying that these 
two paragraphs say exactly the same thing but they use a 
different language. 
ADV 
MATHIPA: 
 
 
Mr 
Fuzile 
let’s 
face 
this 
matter…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on Mr Mathipa, I just want to say, 
10 
in terms of the time we agreed upon you are left with 20 
minutes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Ja I can see that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I will give you a little bit more – maybe 
another 10 minutes…[intervenes]. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I just want you to be alive to the time 
so that you use it optimally.  
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
ADV MATHIPA:   Mr Fuzile, you and Ms Macanda were on 
speaker phone listening to Mr van Rooyen at the same 
time.  You wrote, in the statement and confirmed in your 
testimony that Mr van Rooyen rejected your suggestion for 
the preparation of a statement, am I correct? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 76 of 259 
 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:   But Ms Macanda says he said that he had 
prepared a statement.  Why didn’t you tell the Commission 
that he said that he had prepared a statement? 
MR FUZILE:   I told the Commission, he turned down our 
offer to draft a statement for him.  What – where in this 
paragraph is there a difference between that which I said 
an what is said by Ms Macanda, I don’t see it, maybe you 
see it but further, later on in my own statement I do refer 
to the fact that he had his own statement that he issued so 
10 
it’s a moot point that he did have a statement that we had 
nothing to do with.  So, I’m not denying that he had a 
statement, so I don’t know the point you’re trying to prove 
with this but you are the lawyer.  I simply am telling you 
that, factually, we offered him to prepare statement which 
he would approve, by the way, he turned it down.  As to the 
detail of these issues, and by the way there is further 
detail prior to this that I would say, it’s important, I said to 
him there are pressing issues and the situation is not okay 
and he said, no, continue its business as usual. You would 
20 
have seen that, I’ve sent copies of the SMS’s that I sent to 
him, business as usual when the currency has collapsed 
like it did and then I’m just saying, okay fine. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay, Mr Fuzile, at the same time I would 
suggest that you only answer my questions. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 77 of 259 
 
MR FUZILE:   That’s fine, ask your questions. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Because a lot of the things you’re saying 
are already in your statements.  Can I refer you to 
paragraph 22.2 again just what you said - of your 
statement. 
MR FUZILE:   Okay. 
ADV MATHIPA:   It says, 
“Second, I had asked him to seriously consider 
issuing a media statement as soon as he possibly 
could.  Possibly after the inauguration, I was 
10 
suggesting this because it was evident that…” 
 
I’ve read the statement already, so let me not 
repeat it, we’ve seen that.  You did not say, can we prepare 
statement for you, you are not saying that here, am I right?  
You said, you asked him to consider seriously issuing a 
media statement, am I correct or wrong, just say whether 
I’m correct or wrong? 
MR FUZILE:   I’m saying to you, in the Department – 
Departments are run on the basis of rules right, clearly Mr 
van Rooyen didn’t know the rules of the Treasury, right 
20 
because I was saying to him, in terms of the rules we 
follow, let us issue a statement.  The issuance of a 
statement is not something that the Minister does on his 
own in a corner somewhere right and the evidence of this 
is borne out by two data boards.  Minister Gordhan, when 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 78 of 259 
 
he then replaced Mr van Rooyen, the first thing he did after 
he was appointed, he asked me to prepare a statement – 
no it does matter, I mean the fact that I’m saying this does 
not help you, he asked me to prepare a statement which I 
did…[intervenes]. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Can I just say something, Chairperson I’m 
just concerned about time because Mr Fuzile, I asked him 
to please confine himself to my questions.  I’m concerned 
that, instead of answering the question directly he wants to 
say…[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just remind me what was the question? 
ADV MATHIPA:   I’m saying to him, can he see that, what 
he asked Mr van Rooyen was to seriously consider issuing 
a media statement, it was not, can we prepare you a media 
statement it was, can you seriously consider issuing a 
media statement as soon as possible.  I’m asking a simple 
thing, can you see that, that’s what you’re saying? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but he’s explaining the context of 
his – of what he wrote. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR FUZILE:   Okay, now you may not like it but I’m 
explaining 
it, 
and 
it’s 
the 
truth 
Mr 
Mathipa 
that…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Basically, he’s saying …[intervenes]. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 79 of 259 
 
MR FUZILE:   A Department – sorry Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, basically, he’s saying, Mr Mathipa, 
when he spoke about Mr van Rooyen issuing a statement 
he was talking about the issuing of a media statement in 
the way that the Department normally does, that’s, in 
effect, as I understand him where the process is that the 
Department would be involved in the drafting of that 
statement, as I understand it, that’s what he says he was 
talking about. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay, Mr Fuzile, do you admit that you 
10 
did not tell the Commission when you testified, that Mr van 
Rooyen said that he had prepared a statement? 
MR FUZILE:   There are many things I did not tell the 
Commission. 
ADV MATHIPA:   No, no I’m only asking on that one, can 
you please confine yourself to my question? 
MR FUZILE:   Ja, oh sure. 
ADV MATHIPA:   You agree? 
MR FUZILE:   Ja. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay, why did you not? 
20 
MR FUZILE:   I may have forgotten that detail. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Okay, now, I want to refer you to another 
– to an affidavit which you prepared and I’m going to go to 
that, it’s page 367. 
MR FUZILE:   Which file? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 80 of 259 
 
ADV MATHIPA:   367 the same – the main file that we are 
working on, 367. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that the one that has got Ms 
Macanda’s statement? 
ADV MATHIPA:   Ja, no, no it’s the main one that we’re 
using, 367. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Just one second, I’ll tell you what – on 
the black number it’s 370. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You know, Mr Mathipa, before we go to 
10 
the pages, we need to know which Bundle, that’s why I 
keep on saying, what is written on the spine. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Sorry about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because I must know I have the right 
Bundle. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Sure I understand ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it the one that has got Exhibit PC? 
ADV MATHIPA:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that the one? 
ADV MATHIPA:   Ja. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay and what page?  
ADV MATHIPA:   The main one,  the one that has got black 
numbers and red numbers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, what is the page you…[intervenes]. 
ADV MATHIPA:   370. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 81 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   370? 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Mathipa, I just want to say that, 
obviously I’m not going to suggest how you run your cross-
examination but you might consider focusing on important 
issues. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before your time runs out. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Definitely I’m going to do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I’ve got 370 – I am at 370. 
10 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes, before I ask a question on that 370, 
Mr Fuzile, you did not tell the Commission that Mr van 
Rooyen read out a statement and asked for your inputs, am 
I correct? 
MR FUZILE:   I don’t even know what you’re talking about. 
ADV MATHIPA:   No …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The question is, did you, in your 
statement say that Mr van Rooyen asked for your input into 
his statement? 
MR FUZILE:   But in the – ja when we arrived at the Union 
20 
Buildings and he came – I don’t actually recall even seeing 
his statement but it’s possible it happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But do you recall whether it happened, 
let’s start with that, he ask for your input. 
MR FUZILE:   The material thing I remember, Deputy Chief 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 82 of 259 
 
Justice, is that the statement he read had nothing to do 
with me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR FUZILE:   And the thing I cared about was that, a 
statement that is issued by the Minister of Finance, says 
something that is meant directly to deal with what the 
market was wondering about, what South Africans were 
wondering about, what investors were wondering about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR FUZILE:   That’s what I wanted to do. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR FUZILE:   I had no opportunity to do it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR FUZILE:   If I had been given a statement, I certainly 
would have fixed it if it was a statement that is in such a 
way that I can fix it.  What I do recall seeing at some point, 
was a piece of paper, actually with some purplish things on 
it which was ready in a fraction of a time before Mr van 
Rooyen was sworn in.  Remember, I had spoken to him 
from around 6am, now if he wanted my input on a 
20 
statement, he had from 6 until the time the statement was 
issued.  You can’t tell me that five minutes before you 
speak, as an example, you genuinely want my view but I 
don’t recall perfectly that happening but I’m simply saying 
that, logistically I am at the Union Buildings, I don’t have a 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 83 of 259 
 
computer to type anything on, I don’t even think that he 
can read my handwriting if I write with it, just practically, 
what was he hoping for a few minutes before he spoke? 
CHAIRPERSON:   So is the position that, one, you say you 
did offer him an opportunity to have your input into 
whatever statement may be issued? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you say, he did not make use of 
that. 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you say, you don’t remember 
whether he ever asked you to make any input into the 
statement that he prepared, you don’t remember whether 
he did or not? 
MR FUZILE:   No, I don’t remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you say, if he did ask you, it 
probably would have been too close to the time of 
addressing the media or releasing the statement for you to 
be able to make any contribution? 
MR FUZILE:   Precisely. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that what you are saying? 
MR FUZILE:   That is what I’m saying DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR FUZILE:   And in addition to that you would recall, 
when I got to the Union Buildings there was Mr Bobat, he 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 84 of 259 
 
says to me, I am going to require a statement from you.  I 
said to him, but check with the Minister because I spoke to 
him earlier and he said he doesn’t need the statement right 
and Ms Macanda confirms that and I don’t understand this 
issue that we had time to give him the statement or to 
input on the statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that’s fine. 
MR FUZILE:   But look, if you want to make the point, feel 
free to make it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Mathipa, continue? 
10 
ADV MATHIPA:  I’m going to conclude that matter by 
saying, Mr van Rooyen, as you must have seen from his 
statement is that he asked for your input, you made input 
and you agreed with the statement that he was going to 
deliver, is that true or not?  
MR FUZILE:   It would be interesting if he shows us the 
version he brought and the version he had after my input 
because these things have got versions, right.  He must 
have come with a version and then I must have edited the 
version. 
 
There 
was 
nothing 
in 
his 
statement 
that 
20 
resembles anything that concerned me which I would have 
included in the statement and thankfully, as fate would 
have it, then he gets removed and I had the opportunity to 
influence the statement that Minister Gordhan issued and I 
can read it, I can find it on the internet now quickly and 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 85 of 259 
 
read it to you to show the congruency between what I had 
wanted him to consider, not to tell him just bearing in mind 
what was evolving and of course the experience I had, I 
mean, you cannot take it away, I ran the job I’m an 
economist, I’ve studied these things, so I knew what 
needed to be said in consultation with the Minister of 
course and this is exactly what we did with Minister 
Gordhan.  This is exactly what we did with Minister Gigaba, 
even though, in Minister Gigaba’s case, by the way, the 
statement still had things that I didn’t like in it right 
10 
because he, too, came with people who thought they knew 
it all.  So you can have things in the statement and 
wording that is really unlike the Treasury and that is what I 
wanted to prevent with Minister van Rooyen but I didn’t 
have the opportunity to do that. 
ADV MATHIPA:   The only thing I’m putting to you, Mr 
Fuzile, is that you did not tell the Commission the truth 
when you suggested – when you said that your suggestion 
for a statement was simply rejected outright and you were 
told not to issue statements anymore. 
20 
MR FUZILE:   I am puzzled by the fact that you seem to 
think that, what matters, is the issuance of a statement, 
not its content. Sure the statement was issued, how do you 
think that I could deny that Mr van Rooyen issued a 
statement when, in fact, he stood in front of the media and 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 86 of 259 
 
issued it…[intervenes]. 
ADV MATHIPA:   You don’t understand the question. 
MR FUZILE:   I’m saying the content of it, had nothing to 
do with me. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes, but I’m saying that you agreed with 
the content, that’s what you’re not telling the Commission 
the truth. 
MR FUZILE:   Okay, where did I agree? 
CHAIRPERSON:   What do you say to that? 
MR FUZILE:   Where do you prove that I agreed with it, 
10 
simply because you said so? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Fuzile…[intervenes]. 
ADV MATHIPA:   What is your response, you can just say 
no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on Mr Mathipa, Mr Mathipa is 
telling you what Mr van Rooyen’s evidence is or is going to 
be, he says he is going to say, you actually agreed with the 
content of the statement that he issued.  He’s giving you 
an opportunity to say, yes I agreed, maybe with some 
qualification or, no, that is not factually true I never agreed 
20 
with the content, that’s the opportunity he’s giving you 
to…[intervenes]. 
MR FUZILE:   That is a lie. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that’s a lie? 
MR FUZILE:   Yes. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 87 of 259 
 
ADV MATHIPA:   Let’s pass, at the place where Mr van 
Rooyen was sworn in, Minister van Rooyen introduced Mr 
Bobat to you and told you that he identified him as the 
person he’s going to appoint as his special advisor and 
asked you to expedite his appointment, do you agree with 
that? 
MR FUZILE:   Mr van Rooyen found Mr Bobat with me, he 
did not introduce us, we introduced each other. 
ADV MATHIPA:   Yes, but that’s not my question, the 
statement I’m putting to you…[intervenes]. 
10 
MR FUZILE:   That is your question. 
ADV 
MATHIPA: 
 
 
The 
statement 
I’m 
putting 
to 
you…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Fuzile let Mr Mathipa put the 
question again. 
MR FUZILE:   Okay. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Mr Van Rooyen told you that – that Mr 
Bobat – Mohammed Bobat was the person that he had 
identified to be his special advisor.  Do you agree? 
MR FUZILE:  That is untrue.  That is false. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did – did he never say to you Mr Bobat is 
going to be my special advisor? 
MR FUZILE:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At any stage? 
MR FUZILE:  He said so at the Treasury. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 88 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR FUZILE:  The morning – on the day at the Union 
Buildings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR FUZILE:  Mr Bobat I found him there.  He introduced 
himself to me as advisor. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR FUZILE:  When they met, they did not quite know each 
other that is the impression I got.  It maybe they have not 
known each other for a long time.  But as I say that is not 
10 
true what he is saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you – Mr Mathipa. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were you – would that be – will that be Mr 
Van Rooyen’s evidence? 
ADV MATHIPA:  Ja but his evidence is that… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on – hang on Mr Mathipa. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me finish.   
ADV MATHIPA:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  What you say is going to be Mr Van 
Rooyen’s evidence is that in relation to the Union Buildings 
or National Treasury? 
ADV MATHIPA:  National Treasury. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay alright. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 89 of 259 
 
ADV MATHIPA:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay so Mr Fuzile I think what – what Mr 
Mathipa is saying is that Mr Fuzile is going to say that when 
he met you at National Treasury, he told you that Mr Bobat 
was going to be his special advisor?  You have – is that true, 
is that not true? 
MR FUZILE:  At the Treasury. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At some stage at the Treasury. 
MR FUZILE:  At some stage. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MR FUZILE:  When we were in the Minister’s office, he is 
seated with the three gentlemen.  He then said that this is 
Mohammed Bobat he is going to be the Chief of Staff.  And – 
and the one sort of – he said no, no, no, advisor.  And by the 
way that is not the biggest issue for me – that confusion and 
you asked me on the day.  Right.  But it was just puzzling.  
But he – they corrected each other and then from then on, I 
understood Mohammed Bobat was going to be the advisor, 
Ian Whitley the Chief of Staff. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So is the position therefore… 
20 
MR FUZILE:  This is now on Friday the 11t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  the 11t h. 
MR FUZILE:  I thought he was asking about the Union 
Buildings because he did mention Union Building this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That time. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 90 of 259 
 
MR FUZILE:  At the Union Buildings where we first met on 
the 10t h Mr Bobat introduced himself for me not Mr... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Van Rooyen. 
MR FUZILE:  Mr Van Rooyen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so your evidence is that Mr Van 
Rooyen initially said Mr Bobat was going to be his Chief of 
Staff. 
MR FUZILE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And Mr Bobat corrected him. 
MR FUZILE:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  And said advisor or special advisor. 
MR FUZILE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And Mr Van Rooyen – after that the 
conversation proceeded on the basis that Mr Bobat. 
MR FUZILE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would be his special advisor. 
MR FUZILE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So he did say even though there 
might have been some confusion. 
MR FUZILE:  Ja, ja. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Okay but I think just to clarify the position 
of my client is Mr Van Rooyen is that he told you after his 
inauguration at the Union Buildings that this man Mr Bobat is 
going to be my special advisor please expedite the process 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 91 of 259 
 
of his appointment.  That is what you deny, right? 
MR FUZILE:  I deny that. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Okay.  I want us to move on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second Mr Mathipa. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You have exhausted an hour.  I will give 
you some more time. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I will give you fifteen minutes. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Okay. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Try and deal with the important issues for 
your client. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV MATHIPA:  In paragraph 49 of your statement Mr Fuzile 
it is on – let me just check the page.  Let us just go back to 
Mr Fuzile’s statement.   
CHAIRPERSON:  You have to remind us where that is. 
20 
ADV MATHIPA:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because there are a few of them is it not? 
ADV MATHIPA:  Ja so I am just going to get –  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well there is one that is at – that starts at 
page 46. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 92 of 259 
 
ADV MATHIPA:  Right it is page – it is – it is page – just one 
second.  On the black number it is page 057.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I have got it. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Okay.  I am just looking at paragraph 49 of 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think Mr Fuzile is still looking for the 
page. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Okay.  It is your statement Mr Fuzile.   
ADV MASUKU SC:  Ja. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Mr Fuzile in your – in this paragraph your 
10 
say: 
“Mr Van Rooyen instructed me to expedite the process of – 
of normalising – formalising the appointment of Mr Bobat and 
Mr Ian Whitley as Advisor and Chief of Staff respectively.”  
Right – am I right? 
MR FUZILE:  Ja. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Okay but the difference though is that when 
you went to testify at the commission you then said: 
“He confused their position.” 
In the – in his very office.  But in your statement the only 
20 
time you say that Mr Van Rooyen confused the positions of 
the two people was at the meeting of the Executive 
Management. 
MR FUZILE:  The point then being? 
ADV MATHIPA:  You did not tell the commission the truth.  
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 93 of 259 
 
That is what I am saying because nothing happened.  He did 
not confuse them. 
MR FUZILE:  No.  I thought the most material thing you 
would have tried to deal with but thus far I can tell you it is 
the fact that he had not followed due process to appoint 
them.  That is the material thing rather than he confused 
their names.  To be honest with you. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Yes. 
MR FUZILE:  I thought the process like you say. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Okay but what I am saying is that you lied 
10 
to the commission when you said in his office – in his office 
he confused their positions. 
MR FUZILE:  He may have confused them again in the place 
and I may not have mentioned it in my statement.  Does it 
make it a lie simply because I do not repeat it? 
ADV MATHIPA:  I put it to you that is a lie because in 
paragraph 49. 
MR FUZILE:  Okay. 
ADV MATHIPA:  If he had confused it you would have said it 
in paragraph 49. 
20 
MR FUZILE:  I deny that simply because I do not repeat it 
that he confused them it makes it a lie. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Okay.  After Mr Van Rooyen had introduced 
Mr Bobat according to your version, he asked you expedite 
the process of the appointment, right? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 94 of 259 
 
MR FUZILE:  Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Okay.  Now you said in your statement I do 
not want to waste time to refer to it that you regard yourself 
as the Chief Advisor to the Minister.  You remember that? 
MR FUZILE:  Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Okay now at no stage Mr Fuzile did you say 
to the Minister you are not entitled to appoint these people – 
you are not entitled – these people are not supposed to work 
until I have formalised all the processes.  You never said 
that to him?  You agree?  You agree or do you not agree? 
10 
MR FUZILE:  I did not know that the Minister does not know 
that people do not work without a contract. 
ADV MATHIPA:  No.   
MR FUZILE:  And I did twice I reminded them that there is a 
ministerial 
handler 
– 
twice. 
A 
minimum 
twice 
that 
I 
remember.  First in the office when I met Mr Van Rooyen with 
the three guys and second in the board room Media 
Executives.  And when I said that I was suggesting that – 
and I even went further by the way to say, please familiarise 
yourselves with what the ministerial handbook says and 
20 
allows so that from now on our engagement would be on the 
route.  And you do not consider that to be advice to him in 
your world.  When I say to him the rule book for what you are 
wanting to do is this please read it.  And Ian Whitley 
confirms that in his own statement.  So you missed that.  Are 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 95 of 259 
 
you saying that it was not sufficient? 
ADV MATHIPA:  Minister  
MR FUZILE:   Of course, I was not there when you met them 
at Melrose Arch so I could not advise him not to bring them 
to the Treasury.  They were already there now.  So we had to 
deal with the fact that he had permitted an egregious 
violation of the rules in bringing people into a department 
and give them access to everything before they had 
formalised 
contracts. 
 And 
I 
said 
to 
him, 
familiarise 
yourselves with the rule book if you want to do this.  And you 
10 
say that that is not advice? 
ADV MATHIPA:  Mr Fuzile I am going to ask you questions 
you do not ask me questions. 
MR FUZILE:  Okay ask, ask Chair. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Yes.  I am saying – I am putting the 
following statements to you.  First you are the Chief Advisor 
to the Minister. 
MR FUZILE:  Yes. 
ADV 
MATHIPA: 
 
Second 
you 
agree 
to 
expedite 
the 
appointment of the Special Advisor and Chief of Staff, right? 
20 
MR FUZILE:  Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:  You did not say to the Minister they cannot 
assume duty until I have finished expediting the process.  
You agree? 
MR FUZILE:  What you are missing is that I referred him to 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 96 of 259 
 
the book that sets out the rules that govern by. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Yes.  No I hear that I am just asking you the 
question. 
MR FUZILE:  If you are asking me for something and I say to 
you, the Public Finance Management Act will help you 
understand this.  Are you saying that that is not advice in 
your world?  When I refer you to the rule book that sets out 
how you do what you want to do. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Mr Fuzile there is a reason… 
MR FUZILE:  I consider that to be advice to be direct to your 
10 
question I did advise him.  I said he must read the rule book 
and then we can proceed with the process. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Mr Fuzile. 
MR FUZILE:  And it is confirmed by the people he brought.  
So I am saying to you your question is misplaced. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Mr Fuzile you went on to give access cards, 
laptops to Mr Bobat and Mr Fuzile – sorry Mr Whitley, am I 
correct? 
MR FUZILE:  No.  I never gave them.  Where do you get that 
from? 
20 
ADV MATHIPA:  No, no your department. 
MR FUZILE:  No I said to the people who normally do that do 
the process and I did not prescribe a sequence to them.  
They knew the sequence. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Yes. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 97 of 259 
 
MR FUZILE:  They knew the sequence.  I said to them, do 
what is normally done. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR FUZILE:  Why do you have ...[intervenes]  
ADV MATHIPA:    That is all that I mean.  I mean … 
MR FUZILE:  Why do you… 
ADV MATHIPA:  You see why did you give the instruction? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on Mr Fuzile just answer the 
questions. 
MR FUZILE:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Mathipa. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Why did you give Mr [indistinct 00:12:03] 
Zulu the instruction to on-board these people while you knew 
that it was unlawful to do it? 
MR FUZILE:  No.  There was nothing unlawful about 
appointing advice lest you confuse me if you are confused.  
That is not the contention.  The contention is that he caused 
them to start working before they had contracts – before the 
processes that are prescribed in the rules had been 
followed.  That is the contention. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So… 
MR FUZILE:  Doing it later on does not reverse it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you… 
MR FUZILE:  It just regularises – regularises it from that 
point on. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 98 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so you are saying it was un-
procedural or it would have been un-procedural for him to let 
them start doing anything until there was – the process of so 
to speak up on boarding them had been completed.  Is that 
what you are saying? 
MR FUZILE:  You can use many adjectives DCJ to 
characterise it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR FUZILE:  Un-procedural, illegal, egregious because 
when then see the value of going through the right process 
10 
is when you go and see the specimen of the contract that I 
provided the commission with which then conscentises both 
parties about the relationship they are entering into. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR FUZILE:  How to treat information. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR FUZILE:  Mr Bobat knowing that I am not there as 
Director General to receive instructions from him.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR FUZILE:  And, and, and.  And I am saying getting them 
20 
to 
start 
to 
involve 
themselves 
in 
the 
affairs 
of 
the 
department. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR FUZILE:  Even before at the very lightest if you are in a 
hurry at least signing a contract with them was improper. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 99 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR FUZILE:  Grossly improper in my view. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR FUZILE:  That is what I am saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR FUZILE:  I am not saying that the Minister in terms of 
the handbook does not have the authority to appoint advisors 
and he could not – was not allowed to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR FUZILE:  That is the contention.  The contention is when 
10 
he arrived with them at the department, they had no 
contracts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR FUZILE:  And they carried on started working without a 
contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Hm. 
MR FUZILE:  Interacted with people without a contract.  You 
will see the contract specimen that I gave you – I gave you 
also deals with the issue of information, treating the 
information of the department.  Which is quite material 
20 
because these guys have already received the information. 
ADV MATHIPA:  I am going to come to that. 
MR FUZILE:  They started to distribute it.  And when you do 
not have the contract you have got nothing against which to 
hold them.  Why is that simple thing not so obvious to you? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 100 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.  Mr Fuzile.  Just answer the 
questions he is going to put to you. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Mr Fuzile you were the Chief Advisor to 
Minister Van Rooyen. 
MR FUZILE:  I agree. 
ADV MATHIPA:  At no stage did you say to him, these 
people cannot work until they have signed a contract.  Do 
you agree with that? 
MR FUZILE:  I disagree with you.  I said to you I referred 
them to the handbook. 
10 
ADV MATHIPA:  No.  You are not answering the question.  At 
no stage did you say to him they cannot work until they have 
signed a contract.  Am I right or wrong? 
MR FUZILE:  When I refer him to the document that says an 
advisor must have a contract my hope was that he would 
read it and understand because it is written in simple English 
and understand that they need to have contracts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it correct therefore that you did not say 
that to him – you did not say to him the – your special 
advisor and your Chief of Staff cannot start working until 
20 
they have signed a contract.  Is it correct that you did not 
say that at least expressly? 
MR FUZILE:  Not in those words. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR FUZILE:  And if you – if you wish that I say it in your 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 101 of 259 
 
words DCJ or his words then I did not say it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR FUZILE:  But let me just say this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But what you can say. 
MR FUZILE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is whether in the discussion you had with 
the Minister that was – that was implied if it was implied or 
that – that – or he was going to get that in the handbook or 
whatever but it is important to make the point that you did 
not say it to him expressly if that is the position? 
10 
MR FUZILE:  I did not say it to him in the way in which the 
two of you say it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  Just repeat the way in which… 
MR FUZILE:  But I said two things. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You say you said it. 
MR FUZILE:  Two things to him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR FUZILE:  One I referred him to the book and two second 
time when I referred him to the book I said, please 
gentlemen here we do things according to the rules that is 
20 
contained in my statement it is contained in Ms Masanda’s 
statement.  I do not know about Mr Mogata and if I remember 
it very well.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR FUZILE:  Now it could be that maybe if I did not say it in 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 102 of 259 
 
the words in which the learned people like yourselves say it 
it did not seem to be said.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR FUZILE:  But if you read the handbook cover to cover on 
the appointment of advisors it states everything. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR FUZILE:  And in that way I have directed them to where 
they must find the rules that would govern that they wanted 
to do which they had started to do without any reference to 
the rules by the way. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright.  Mr Mathipa. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Mr Fuzile the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The fifteen minutes is expired.  I give you 
five minutes injury time. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Oh sorry.  I am just going to deal with – just 
the last statement on this aspect.  Mr Fuzile the – Mr Van 
Rooyen left before the appointment was done, you agree of 
these people?  In other words, you were in the process of 
formalising the appointment and by the time he left it had not 
– they had not yet been appointed? 
20 
MR FUZILE:  That is probably correct. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Okay.  Now in paragraph 69 of your 
statement and just to save time I am not going to read it you 
deal with the issue of what you call leaked of classified 
information.  And there are emails that you attach right?  And 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 103 of 259 
 
those emails show that the document called ‘Economic 
Outlook’ was sent by you to Mr Ian Whitley and somebody 
called Marlon Gasvent [indistinct 00:19:04] I think, you agree 
with that? 
MR FUZILE:  Ja. 
ADV MATHIPA:  And then – now are you – are you familiar 
with the classification of documents? 
MR FUZILE:  Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:  You know about classifications like top 
secret, secret, confidential, restricted? 
10 
MR FUZILE:  Hm. 
ADV MATHIPA:  What classification did this document have? 
MR FUZILE:  It was actually headed for cabinet and it was 
going to be classified as ‘Top Secret’.  If you are requiring 
the stamping of ‘Top Secret’ but anyone who has undergone 
the security clearance process who works at the Ministry 
who has signed a contract would know that the moment you 
start typing the first letter on a document if it is intended for 
cabinet it is going to carry the ‘Top Secret’ classification.  On 
a rare occasion that it does not.  For the fact that at the time 
20 
it may not have been stamped ‘Top Secret’ is neither here 
nor there. 
ADV MATHIPA:  But do you agree that the document was not 
classified? 
MR FUZILE:  Yes. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 104 of 259 
 
ADV MATHIPA:  Okay.  Secondly, I want to put this to you.  
This document was a document that was still at the level of 
seeking inputs on it, do you agree? 
MR FUZILE:  No.  From outsiders? 
ADV MATHIPA:  From anybody? 
MR FUZILE:  No not from anybody man.  Where have you 
seen that?  Where have you seek government seeking input 
from the street – anyone in the street? 
ADV MATHIPA:  Mr Fuzile you yourself testified before this 
commission. 
10 
MR FUZILE:  That? 
ADV MATHIPA:  That before – that the public is often 
engaged to seek their inputs into documents. 
MR FUZILE:  Show me where I say that? 
ADV MATHIPA:  But do you not remember saying that? 
MR FUZILE:  No I am saying show me where I said it. 
ADV MATHIPA:  No, no I am asking whether you remember 
or not? 
MR FUZILE:  If I remember or not. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Because I do not want to waste time. do not 
20 
want to waste time. 
MR FUZILE:  I do not remember it. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Okay.  Okay.  Anyway, let us – let us leave 
that but let us go to the document itself. 
MR FUZILE:  So let us leave it on the understanding that we 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 105 of 259 
 
never sought input from anyone.  Right.  We sought inputs 
from people who had something to do with the department 
not on a document that is written that is going to cabinet.  
You send this to outsiders.  It is never done.  Not at the 
Treasury. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Okay.  Mr Fuzile. 
MR FUZILE:  This was the first. 
ADV MATHIPA:  When you testified before the commission 
Mr Maleka asked you to show on that document because you 
said if this document can get into the hands of – we use the 
10 
word ‘astute business person’ they will use – they can use 
the opportunity as to get advantage over others right? You 
referred – I want to refer you just on that – on that file that 
we are dealing with page 093. 
MR FUZILE:  0? 
ADV MATHIPA:  093.  093. 
MR FUZILE:  Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:  There is a third bullet that you dealt with on 
that page.  Are you on that page? 
MR FUZILE:  Ja. 
20 
ADV MATHIPA:  Ja.  There is the third bullet that you dealt 
with when Mr Maleka asked you to show – to look at the 
document itself and to point out.  You dealt with the third 
bullet which says: 
“State 
owned 
enterprises 
are 
championing 
African 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 106 of 259 
 
Infrastructure Development as a Transnet Maputo Corridor 
launched in September 2014.” 
You remember that you referred to that? 
MR FUZILE:  Ja. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Do you see that on the paragraph you 
referred to refers to a project that was launched in 
September 2014.  You see that? 
MR FUZILE:  No I do not see it. 
 do not see it. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Now it is written launched in September 
10 
2014, do you see that? 
MR FUZILE:  You are on page 0? 
ADV MATHIPA:  Page 093. 
MR FUZILE:  Okay hold on. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Sorry I think you were on the wrong page.  
Page 093.  Do you see that? 
MR FUZILE:  Wag ‘n bietjie.  Ja 093. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Ja you referred to the particular state of. 
MR FUZILE:  Yes, yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:  State owned enterprises are championing 
20 
African Infrastructure. 
MR FUZILE:  Yes I see it. 
ADV MATHIPA:  And then it refers to Transnet and you said 
that a person who gets this information will have – can have 
an advantage of beginning to approach this for example 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 107 of 259 
 
Transnet, right?  So what I am saying to you is do you see 
that the document itself was launched in September – the 
project was launched in September 2014? 
MR FUZILE:  I see that. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Yes. 
MR FUZILE:  What is your point? 
ADV MATHIPA:  That tells you that when this document was 
shared in December 2015 there is no way that based on this 
information could give anybody an unfair advantage to 
anyone. 
10 
MR FUZILE:  Are you suggesting that the document was – 
simply because it makes reference to a 2014 matter on that 
[indistinct 00:24:02] then the document was old history it 
was not relevant. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Mr Fuzile I am referring you to what you 
yourself said. 
MR FUZILE:  No the point I made and I will make it again is 
that this document was any other document that the people 
had access to or were soon to have access to are such that 
a person who gets them beforehand if he is a business 
20 
person can position themselves in – to benefit.  Right.  That 
is the general point.  Now you can take one bullet and refer 
to 2014 and sort of say it was old or something like that it 
does not matter by the way it was continuing.  The reason 
we are referring to here it may have started in 2014 but 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 108 of 259 
 
phases of it were continuing. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Yes.  But I put it to you that that is not true 
because this document as it is there is nothing sensitive 
about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Mathipa is Mr Van Rooyen going to 
say it was not – the document was not – is he going to say 
the document 
was 
meant for everybody 
and anybody 
including people who are outside of National Treasury and 
people who are outside of government?  Is that going to be 
his version?  Is he going to say it was proper? 
10 
ADV MATHIPA:  Yes.  Definitely yes.  He has already said 
that in his statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:  That this – this was a document that could 
be used to solicit inputs from people therefore there was 
nothing wrong with Mr Bobat having emailed it to anybody for 
their inputs. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR FUZILE:  And to that I would say then thanks God that 
he did not stay long at the Treasury. Because we would have 
20 
had a serious problem with the Minister who seeks opinions 
from people in the street about taxis, about what is to be 
done by government on a state-owned entity and stuff like 
that.  Honestly, I would have fundamental problems.  Just to 
illustrate DCJ the seriousness of this matter. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 109 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR FUZILE:  Certain tax proposals are walked into cabinet.  
Even cabinet ministers do not have the luxury to receive a 
copy of a cabinet memorandum as per the rules before they 
walk into cabinet.  And today I am told that a document that 
is going to cabinet you can solicit views from everyone.  And 
I say God save South Africa. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Mr Fuzile it is not true that this document 
was a cabinet document?  You have accepted yourself that 
this document was not classified. 
10 
MR FUZILE:  This document was a cabinet document.  It 
may not have been labelled with a classification that you 
say.  There is an email attached to these documents which 
comes from a Yolande of our department who was guiding 
how we should write the document in response to Minister I 
do not know what you are talking about. 
[several parties speaking simultaneously] 
ADV MATHIPA:  And just a last… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay Mr Mathipa. 
MR FUZILE:  The last thing to say… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are at one o’clock so I will not allow 
you to go beyond that. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have been more than fair. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Just the last statement. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 110 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:  To prove that this document was not a 
classified document you sent it to Mr Whitley knowing that 
he had not – he did not have security clearance and nowhere 
in your email did you say please note that this document is 
confidential or say anything like that.  You simply sent the 
document as it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you want to respond to that and that 
will be the last. 
MR FUZILE:  No I mean what – the point here is made DCJ 
10 
kind of confirms the awkwardness of the time we operating 
in.  When you have got people, who do not have efficient 
consciousness about the rules and the responsibility that 
goes with the positions that they are assigned to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR FUZILE:  Here we were – we had people who had no 
contracts whom we barely knew, whom in our hearts of 
hearts we felt actually the person who brought them might 
not even know them that well himself but we had to work with 
them because he had brought them.  You know.  You cannot 
20 
say to the Minister because you have brought dubious 
people here, we will not work with you.  Of course, true to 
form why was he removed?  It is partly because people 
realised that what had happened was egregious and it 
needed to be stopped on its tracks.  Now time will tell 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 111 of 259 
 
whether I am correct or not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No thank you Mr Fuzile. 
ADV MATHIPA:  I will leave it there Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No thank you very much. 
MR FUZILE:  Am I done now? 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are done.  You are – and you are 
excused. 
MR FUZILE:  This means I can go home and do my work? 
CHAIRPERSON:  You can go home now and do your work. 
MR FUZILE:  Okay. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are going to adjourn for lunch and then 
resume at two o’clock for Mr Van Rooyen to take the witness 
stand.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  To presumably to forego the need for me 
to lead him through the evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Is there an indication how much he 
20 
might need?  Mr Van Rooyen, how much time would you ask 
for to make that? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Plus-minus ten minutes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No, that is fine.  You may do so 
immediately.  You may make your statement immediately. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 112 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  [Speaking vernacular] Chairperson.  
Thank you very much Chairperson.  Maybe let me start 
Chairperson by pointing out that the evidence against me 
was presented sometime in November 2018.   
 
It is almost two years that I finally have an opportunity 
to present my side of the story and of course to answer 
questions that the Commission has for me. 
 
This means that for two years Chairperson, I have not 
been able to present information to the Commission.  Of 
course, information that could mitigate the adverse reports 
10 
that follow to the evidence of those that implicated me in 
State Capture and corruption. 
 
Chairperson, I am, however, grateful for today, not 
because that my name, which has been tarnished and failed, 
through this process will finally get reprieved. 
 
But because I regard it as my duty to present whatever 
information I have to the Commission for it to hopefully find 
the right balance in its findings.   
 
I also thank the Commission, Chairperson, for allow my 
legal 
representatives 
to 
cross-examine 
Mr 
Fuzile 
who 
20 
presented his evidence implicated me in some wrongdoing 
albeit time was just too short. 
 
The 
right 
to 
procedural 
fairness 
is 
an 
important 
constitutional right and shall be practised by all.  The 
credibility, Chairperson, of the Commission depends entirely 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 113 of 259 
 
on how its processes have complied with this important 
constitutional guaranteed right. 
 
A decision to hear my story is far different from a 
prejudicial decision taking by the former Public Protector, Ms 
Thuli Madonsela when she published her report. 
 
That 
report, 
we 
all 
know, 
is 
precursor 
to 
the 
establishment of this Commission.  Without giving me a 
chance to respond to all those findings that implicated me in 
some wrongdoing. 
 
Upon these Chairperson, was the fact that all these 
10 
happened after Ms Madonsela herself assured me that... I 
mean Ms Madonsela herself assured me that her report 
made no adverse findings, did not express a point of view 
and did not make recommendations involving any allegations 
concerning me. 
 
And that if there was such a report that implicated me, 
my procedural right under the Constitution, as well as the 
Public Protector Act, will be respected.  
 
Chairperson, I am here today and I can assure to you 
that that assurance was never kept.  Instead, she relied on a 
20 
media article about a cell phone tower record on my cell 
number 
which 
implicates 
me 
in 
this 
serious, 
serious 
allegation of state capture and corruption without giving me 
a chance to respond. 
 
Chairperson, I think it is important for me to emphasise 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 114 of 259 
 
the above point because already the so-called court of public 
opinion had long concluded and issued a verdict that myself 
and anyone associated with His Excellence, President Zuma 
are corrupt and for those corrupt reasons allows private 
interest to capture our democratic state and its institutions to 
advise corrupt motives. 
 
All this happened because of this expeditiously compiled 
report by a former public protector.  It is interesting 
Chairperson, but not surprising, to note that at the centre of 
these court of public opinion is a political narrative that is 
10 
driven by a biased white-owned media controlled by white 
capital. 
 
This is the same white capital, if we are to be 
remembered... I mean, to... if you are to remember.  This is 
the same white capital that acquired its control over the 
economic 
resources 
of 
our 
country 
through 
the 
cruel 
exploitation of the blood and sweat of the black people 
during the evil system of apartheid. 
 
Chairperson, this is the same white capital in the mid-
80’s that smelt the coffee of the coming liberation and we 
20 
have tarnished things madly down the apartheid government 
which 
they 
had 
created, 
nurtured 
and 
used 
for 
its 
exploitative and greedy to recruit and form new alliances 
with the new liberals within our ranks. 
 
We should remember that time Chair, the ANC was 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 115 of 259 
 
regarded by all as the government in waiting.  All this 
created an opportunity for this white capital to continue 
shaping the public policy of our democratic state in a manner 
that 
protected 
and 
advanced 
their 
own 
selfish 
socio-
economic and political interest. 
 
Chairperson, please, please.  Let South Africans not be 
fooled.  The socio-economic and political interest of white 
capital is not boldly addressed in equalities, poverty and 
grow as they continuously claim in their own media. 
 
Their 
interest 
remains 
and 
will 
continue 
to 
be 
10 
accumulations of unjustified profits through the exploitation 
of our people and the nation’s resources. 
 
That is why it seize the advent of our new democracy.  
The gap between the rich and the poor continue to increase 
to dangerous levels.   
 
Our 
revolutionary 
reconstruction 
in 
development, 
planned policy frame which is our policy was abandoned 
Chairperson to pursue new liberal policies that are not aimed 
at ensuring real structural changes to the racial practice of 
our economic ownership and control. 
20 
 
The gap of poverty continues to widen with the rich and 
privileged becoming more richer and more privileged.  The 
poor continue to black poorer and there is currently no hope 
for them. 
 
Even the revolutionary demands of our constitutions are 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 116 of 259 
 
not met because this important legal instrument has been 
hijacked to largely entrenched interest of white capital 
instead of going down our own resolution that we took 
before. 
 
We might want to downplay this Chairperson because of 
the strong media influence on our perceptions but the reality 
is that white capital which created the apartheid area was 
strong under aid. 
 
It is emerged and it is channelled in our new democratic 
government system and works with some amongst us and 
10 
works with established local financial market role-players to 
continue with their exploitative wealth over accumulation 
programme at the expense at our developmental priorities 
enshrined in our national development plan. 
 
It is important to underscore the fact that this liars does 
not act alone.  They have definitely selective opted some 
amongst us.   
 
It is for this reason Chairperson that I support the call 
for the expulsion of this Commission’s Terms of Reference 
because I think entirely, this... will a court... this Commission 
20 
an opportunity to investigate the relationship of white capital 
with our new democratic state. 
 
Accommodating this, definitely, will shed some much 
needed light on a plethora of questions and perceptions 
about our democratic state and its relationship with private 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 117 of 259 
 
interest. 
 
I just want to cite some few examples.  Example like why 
out of all ministers or ministries decided out of our 
negotiated settlement, the National Treasury an important 
minister to make a deal with revenue generation and 
resources distribution was assigned to a certain Chris 
Liebenberg, a former Nedbank and Nedcor Executive. 
 
Why at its infancy stage our government revenue was 
allowed to be shunt adopting unjustified economic measures 
like what they did the drastic or maybe what we did a drastic 
10 
reduction of corporate tax rate, allowing wealthy white South 
Africans and their companies to move apartheid and capital 
to offshore site? 
 
Why did we allow companies like LoanMean, MTN and 
Shanduga Fund, financial off-shoring to zero tax havens?   
 
Government of national youth was allowed to sign 
general agreement on tariffs and trade on adverse attempts, 
leading to a drastic fall on custom tariffs and tariffs revenue 
that we need for our development agenda. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Mr Chairperson ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Why Chairperson ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sorry, if I may just interrupt? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  ...our domestically  ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry, sorry. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Without being rude towards Mr Van 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 118 of 259 
 
Rooyen, it has been thirty minutes that he has been 
speaking.  He asked for ten minutes.  I am not sure how 
much longer he is going to be. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, leave it to me.  I will give him some 
more time. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may continue Mr Van Rooyen. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Thank you very much Chairperson.  Why 
our domestically and democratically developed policing 
framework of Reconstruction and Development Programme, 
10 
(RDP), which was a product of extensive consultations. 
 
I know the previous witness indicated that we do not 
have business of engaging our people.  This is a document 
that was developed by the people.   
 
Why this document was abruptly planted by something 
that was developed in London or in Washington, called the 
Growth Employment and Distribution here? 
 
I mean, despite all these promises or when it was 
introduced, we were promised of growth rates, we were 
promised of employment, we were promised of distribution.  
20 
We are still waiting.  Our people are having it tough. 
 
Why this democratic government Chairperson allow a 
foreigner by the name of Collin Andrews, former South 
African Airways CEO, who sends 61 of our airline aircraft to 
a private company and want then to release them from the 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 119 of 259 
 
same company at a cost of R 1,46 billion per annum to our 
state? 
 
Monies what... which was supposed to have been used 
to strengthen the current - the National Airline balance 
sheet. 
 
As if this was not enough Chairperson, the same CEO 
was given a golden handshake of more R200 million after 
spending only two-and-a-half years at the airline. 
 
Why Chairperson, is it possible for a minister under our 
current democratic government by the name of Pravin 
10 
Gordhan who is the serving minister in our democratic? 
 
And non-racial government in charge to overlook and 
obviously ensure that there is compliance in the department 
that is needed, the current department of ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  In five minutes time it will be doubled the 
time you asked for.  So. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, I think if you try and wrap up.  
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Why this minister is allowed to – and in 
this regard competed a highly qualified black professional, 
20 
and in most instances, replaced them with less qualified 
people.   
 
Why is it possible Chairperson, so easy for former 
national treasury ministers and deputy ministers and senior 
national treasury officials to be absorbed by financial 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 120 of 259 
 
institution just immediately?  It happens automatically. 
 
Immediately after they attended National Treasury, I 
mean, they are absorbed.  I have coined this development 
what [laughs] is a called a revolving door phenomena.   
 
Why is it so possible?  Why is it so obvious?  And we 
are not asking this question.  I think if the Terms of 
Reference of this Commission Chairperson [laughs] are 
extended, definitely we will get to understand why some of 
these things are happening.  
 
Why 
the 
leading 
party, 
the 
ruling 
party, 
elective 
10 
conference, private sector is so much in that conference - 
they pump in so much money in that conference just to make 
sure that their preferred candidate comes out of that. 
 
Is this not the signs of State Capture?  But also 
Chairperson, I am more worried about this development of 
NASREC because there is a strong allegation that there were 
some members of our judiciary system who are involved in 
this particular process because there is an embargo, 
embargoed ...[indistinct 00.14.08] report that we think, at 
some stage, we will shed some more light but I am saying it 
20 
will accord us with an opportunity Chairperson to understand 
the relationship of private interest and our new democratic 
state. 
 
Lastly, Chairperson.  After all these bad and malicious 
publicity about myself, I want to ensure South Africans of me 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 121 of 259 
 
continue commitment who are far from over.   
 
Our struggle is not yet over. [Speaking vernacular].  For 
the 
full 
emancipation 
including 
really 
economic 
empowerment. 
 
This is a commitment I made at an early age of my life 
Chairperson when it was not fashionable to do so.  I gave up 
my youth days and academic opportunities.  I led from the 
front as a young activist, an armed struggle operative. 
 
In all the positions I have served, I must assure you 
Chairperson, as a leader, I was democratically elected or 
10 
assigned by my organisation. 
 
I never and will never sell my soul to the highest bidder 
or made to be elected to a leadership position and no 
amount of character assassination and intimidation is going 
to destruct me from tackling real developmental challenges 
facing our country and our people. 
 
And Chair, the allegations made against me by Mr Fuzile 
that I was deployed as a Minister of Finance to capture 
National Treasury on an agenda of feeding insatiable interest 
of private greedy interest. 
20 
 
It is a political lie made by those afraid that National 
Treasury is a national asset which has a duty to drive our 
collective agenda to develop our state beyond its current 
democratic, not an entity in, you know, in isolation. 
 
This is a... National Treasury is like any other ministries. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 122 of 259 
 
The ministry of this government of the people by the people.  
And I must indicate to yourself Chairperson, that I stand by 
what I have said in my affidavits on the many aspects 
relevant to the Terms of Reference. 
 
Save on one aspect.  I am relating to the date on which I 
made His Excellence, President Zuma, before I was sworn in 
as the Minister of Finance. 
 
In my affidavit Chairperson, I said that I met the 
president on the 9 t h of December 2015.  In fact, it was on the 
8t h of December 2015.   
10 
 
I was assisted in this regard by cell phone records which 
was given to me sometime last year. 
 
Thank you again, Chairperson.  I am now available to 
questions from the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Thank you very much Mr Van 
Rooyen.  Thank you for coming to assist the Commission.  
And I must say that I have never had any complaints that you 
have not cooperated with the Commission. 
 
So you applied for leave to cross-examine Mr Fuzile.  
That was dealt with.  And I think in your application, you 
20 
indicated.  So this time has arrived.  Mr Hulley, you may 
proceed. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you, Mr Chairperson.  Just to 
commence with the affidavit that you filed before this 
Commission.  There have, in fact, been three affidavits.  And 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 123 of 259 
 
I want to take you specifically to two.  If you would turn with 
me to... it is Advisors Bundle 1 Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just check that it is the correct one Mr Van 
Rooyen, whether on the spine at the back it is written 
Advisors 1. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes, I can confirm that Chairperson.  
That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And if you would turn with me, dear sir, to 
page...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  You will have to raise your voice mister... 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Pardon me, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or speak closer to the mic.  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  If you would turn with me Mr Van Rooyen 
to page 110 of that bundle.  Now, bear in mind that you have 
got to look at the top left numbering system. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Oh, alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The black numbers. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  110? 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is so Mr Chairperson.   
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I found it Chair. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you.  And if you would then keep 
that page open but turn with me to page 136 of the same 
document.  
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 124 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I got it Chair. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Okay whose signature is it? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes, that is my signature. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And this document is the statement that 
you provided to the Commission? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes, I have. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Then in the statement you address the 
allegations that were raised by Mr Fuzile against you.  Is 
that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe you could confirm that its contents 
are true and correct, maybe safe in regard to the matter of 
the date when you met Mr Zuma if that is contained in the 
statement. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I do confirm Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do confirm? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now, if you would, for your benefit and I 
will take you through certain parts of your statement and you 
20 
are, obviously, at liberty...  
 
I will ask you specific questions, but you are at liberty to 
supply, after answering the question, you are at liberty to 
actually supply certain detail or explanation relevant to your 
answer. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 125 of 259 
 
 
My understand if... is that you... you start... you were 
appointed on the 10t h of December of 2015 as the Minister of 
Finance but the announcement... 
 
Or let me rephrase me that.  The swearing in took place 
on the 10t h of December 2015 but the announcement took 
place on the 9t h of December 2015.  Is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And if I understand correctly.  Based on 
the change that you have indicated or the amendment that 
you have indicated this morning or today, you are saying 
10 
that, in fact, you did not meet with the president on the 
9t h of December, as indicated in your statement.  You, in 
fact, met with him the day before which will be the 8 t h of 
December.   
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And if you have met with the president on 
the day before that, that would have been the day before the 
announcement for the removal of Mr Nene had been given.  
Will that be correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Correct. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So when the president spoke to you on 
the 8t h, you are telling this tribunal that he had indicated to 
you his intention to remove Mr Nene as the Minister of 
Finance.  Is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  May you please repeat your question? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 126 of 259 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So when the President, Mr Zuma spoke 
with you on the 8 t h of December, he would have told you at 
the same time that it was his intention to remove Mr Nene as 
the Minister of Finance.  Is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Correct.  It is so obvious. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now, that particular meeting that you had 
with the president, at what time of the day did it take place? 
MR 
VAN 
ROOYEN:  If 
my 
memory 
serves 
me 
right 
Chairperson, the meeting took place in the evening.  I cannot 
remember the exact time but it was in the evening. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Was it late evening, early evening.  Do 
you recall? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Ja, maybe between eight and ten. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Okay.  Now, if we can just take a step 
back, a little bit, to understand how your appointment took 
place.  If my recollection serves me correctly with regard to 
your statement, you had in fact been in Durban at the time 
when the president phoned you.  Is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And that was to request that you come up 
20 
to Johannesburg to meet with him.   
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes, to be around Gauteng, not 
necessarily Johannesburg. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  I see.  And at the time you were in 
Durban on holiday.  Do I understand that correctly? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 127 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes, I was away with my family, with 
them. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  With your family? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And you then flew back to Johannesburg 
in order to meet with the president at some stage on the 7 t h, 
8t h of 9t h if I recall correctly because at that stage when the 
president 
had 
contacted 
you, 
he 
had 
not 
indicated 
specifically which day he would meet with you. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  That is correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, Mr Hulley.  I think when you mean 
Gauteng you say Johannesburg and I think that is because 
quite a lot of people associate Gauteng with Johannesburg 
even when somebody is going to Pretoria.  [laughs] 
ADV HULLEY SC:  No, no absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, he emphasised that the president 
asked him to Gauteng ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...Johannesburg.  So. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  No, no, no.  Absolutely.  I think in his 
20 
statement he says Gauteng as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So forgive me if I keep mentioning 
Johannesburg. What I was referring, or at least I was 
referring to, was the flight back to Johannesburg. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 128 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay, okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now that flight, if I recall correctly, was 
on the 7t h of December.  Is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I have to check my statement but I know 
it was... I think it was on the 7 t h December.  I am not sure 
but it was around that time.  Because the request of the 
President was that I should be around Gauteng between the 
7t h.  Any time from the 7t h. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sure. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  But I also know that they landed at O.R. 
10 
Tambo Airport. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Pardon me? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I learnt that at O.R. Tambo Airport. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sorry, I cannot hear what you are saying.  
If you could speak into the mic? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I was saying, I learnt that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  And face this side so I can... yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Oh, yes sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I think that is correct Chair.  I should be 
20 
addressing the evidence leader through you.  
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Sorry for that Chair.  But I was saying, I 
landed at O.R. Tambo Airport. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 129 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On the ...[intervenes]  
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I just wanted to emphasise that because 
that is on resistance in acknowledging that we have renamed 
that airport. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Very well, and that was on the 7t h of 
December of 2015? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now, if you would turn with me to page 
10 
125 of the same bundle.   
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I have got it. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now at 33 of that bundle, you mention at 
the foot of the page that on the 6t h of December while you 
were on holiday, you say: 
“I received a call from the former President Zuma, 
informing me that he wanted to see me between the 
7t h and the 10t h of December 2015 in Gauteng..” 
 
You say you immediately abandoned your family holiday 
and you flew back to Gauteng on the 7t h of December of 
20 
2015. 
 
Now, when you arrived in Johannesburg or in Gauteng, 
did you then contact the president or were you expecting a 
call from him? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I did not contact the president.  I 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 130 of 259 
 
expected a call from him.  I think it was enough for him that 
he communicated it with me on the 7t h.  On the 6t h in fact.  
So I was waiting for a call from him from his office. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sorry, your voice keeps fading away.  If 
you would not mind speaking into the microphone sir? 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, I think he says he was waiting for a 
call from the former president.  That is what you are saying? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes.  Yes, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  After arriving in Johannesburg, you did not 
call the president.  You waited for his call. 
10 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  that was the instruction Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  That was the instruction.  So I stayed to 
the instruction.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now, you say in your statement, if you 
continue, in the same paragraph: 
“On the 9t h of December 2015, I was called by a 
gentleman from the presidency, requesting me to 
20 
come to Mahlamba Ndlovu Presidential Offices in 
Pretoria for a meeting with the ...from President 
Zuma...” 
 
You say you arrived, at the following page: 
“I arrived at the meeting as scheduled...” 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 131 of 259 
 
 
Now if I understand you correctly.  What you say that 
that particular meeting actually took place on the 8 t h of... in 
fact, took place on the 8 t h of December in the evening. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Correct Chairperson.  Not on the 9 t h. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now this telephone call that you received 
from a gentleman in the presidency, what time was that call? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  It was landline call there. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Pardon me? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  It was a landline call.  It was not from 
my cell phone.  
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes, the question is.  What time was the 
call? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Oh, the time?  Ah, I would be lying 
Chair.  I do not remember.  I do not remember.  I mean, the 
fact that I was called by the high office truly speaking a lot 
went through my mind, so I cannot remember the specific 
time.  I will be lying.  Chair, I do not want to lie to the 
Commission. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now, the... I just want to understand.  
When you flew back to Johannesburg, you came back to 
20 
Johannesburg on your own.  You left your family in Durban.  
Is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Ja, you know it was not easy because 
we travel collectively with my family and we are not even 
flying.  I think some flew but flew but I drove with my boys.  
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 132 of 259 
 
So, ja.  So it was not easy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So when you came back to Gauteng in 
response to the former president’s call, did you drive 
together with some members of your family? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  No, no, no.  Chair, I flew back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You flew? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Because I did not want to disturb. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  That is one thing that I do not want.  I 
do not want to involve my family in some of these things. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   So I left them to continue enjoying their 
holiday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, did you drive to go to Durban? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Some members …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   With the family. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Ja, because it is a family and an 
extended family. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, okay. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, so some flew, some – and I drove 
20 
with my boys. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   And then my wife took the girls and 
they flew back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 133 of 259 
 
ADV 
HULLEY 
SC: 
 
 
And 
when 
you 
got 
back 
to 
Johannesburg you got to the airport, how did you travel 
from your airport to wherever your destination was from 
that point?  Did you take the taxi, did you take a shuttle, 
did somebody pick you up?  How did you get to your 
destination? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, no, no, we left one of the cars 
there.  Remember, those who flew, my wife had to drive 
and left the car there.  So I used the car that we left at the 
airport. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay, so you had a vehicle at the 
airport. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, I had a vehicle at OR Tambo. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And whose vehicle was that? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Sorry? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Do you recall whose vehicle that was? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   That is my family vehicle. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   What vehicle was it? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I think we left the Prado there, we 
drove with a bakkie. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   It was a bakkie? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, I think it was a Prado. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   A which? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   A Prado. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   A Prado? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 134 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay, do you recall the registration 
number of the Prado?  Just off the top of your head. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I will have to check my phone,  Hey, 
no, cars I do not memorise the registration but I have to 
check my – I can provide that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you can provide it in due course. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And then where did you travel to from 
that point?  So you alighted from the airplane, you then go 
over to your bakkie that is – or sorry, your Prado, you get 
10 
into the Prado and where do you go to at that point in 
time? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I think if my memory serves me well, 
Chairperson, because I cannot remember step-by-step 
what happened after I have landed but I think if my memory 
serves me well, I went home. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And home would be where? 
MR 
VAN 
ROOYEN: 
 
 
In 
Johannesburg 
South, 
the 
…[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   In Johannesburg South, oh, okay. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   That is where my residence is, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now presumably, if I understand 
correctly from the sequence of events in your affidavit, 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 135 of 259 
 
presumably at that stage where the President had invited 
you to come or asked you to come back to Gauteng in 
order to meet with you either the 7 t h, 8 t h or 9 December, 
you had some idea or some inkling of what the purpose of 
this discussion was. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   To be honest – because I had 
meetings before, as I have indicated in my affidavit, with 
the President around various issues, so I knew around that 
time that there are some rumours about reshuffling and 
that.  So, you know, when you are called by the high office 
10 
and there is such developments taking place in the country 
there is no way in which you cannot think of – I may be 
called to be assigned or I may be called - you know, you do 
not know but definitely I had my own suspicions, you 
know?  
ADV HULLEY SC:   But when you say you had suspicions 
you knew that there was a possibility that you were going 
to be resigned but …[intervenes] 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, that is what I have just said 
because around that time, Chairperson, obviously there 
20 
was a rumour about cabinet reshuffling and all that.  So, 
you know, that was one of the things that came to my mind. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay.  So on the 6 December when you 
get invited or you get asked to come back to Gauteng you 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 136 of 259 
 
already – immediately you are aware that there is likely to 
be a cabinet reshuffle and the first thing – or one of the 
things that comes to mind, at any rate, whether it be the 
first or otherwise, is that you are likely to be redeployed 
into a cabinet position, correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Not correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I never said it was the first thing.  I 
thought I [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Sorry, I corrected that, I said first or 
10 
otherwise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, ja, he corrected himself. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Oh, first or otherwise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct, then I agree. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And in fact, you had already given the 
President your CV at that stage, if I recall correctly. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct, in one of the meetings that 
happened before, but the CV, if the President say we 
request your CV does not mean then you are going to be 
20 
deployed as a Minister, no.  You might be deployed as an 
ambassador, you might be reassigned to do any other 
thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   That is the nature of our organisation, 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 137 of 259 
 
you know? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So I think your statement says it 
was on the 30 November 2015 when you were called by the 
Presidency and you were invited to submit your CV, is that 
correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   That is correct then, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you submitted your CV on that date. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes because I was in parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   So it was easy for me just to go to my 
10 
office and print my CV. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no, that is fine. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes.  But it happened, Chair, let me 
just indicated, paragraphs before that. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Ja. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Indicates that there were other 
meetings. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   That had to do with my work in 
parliament. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Ja. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Where I was to brief the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Just to get back to the conversation 
that you would have had with the President and some of 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 138 of 259 
 
the things that were going through your mind.  You get the 
call from the President requiring you or requesting you to 
come back to Gauteng on the 6 December, you know at 
that stage that you have already given the President your 
CV on the 30 November.  What goes through your mind 
whether at that point or shortly after is in light of the 
rumours that are circulating that there is going to be a 
cabinet reshuffle, you anticipate that you are going to be 
redeployed.  Do I understand that part correct thus far? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, I do understand, among other 
10 
things. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And, if I understand correctly you 
anticipate that it may be a position in cabinet that you will 
be appointed. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Among other things I anticipated that. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Sure.  And you also understand from 
the telephone call with the President that you should make 
yourself available anywhere between these three dates, 
the 7 t h, 8 t h or 9 t h December.  Do I understand that 
correctly? 
20 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I do understand. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now during the course of that 
discussion with the President does he indicate whether this 
particular issue is something of grave urgency, does he 
give you any indication of what the nature of the meeting 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 139 of 259 
 
with him will be? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Over the phone? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Over the phone, ja. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, not at all.  Not at all. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   On that – on the 8 December of 2015 -  
you have just returned now, you returned in fact on the 7 t h.  
What is the first thing you do the following day?  That is 
now the 8 December, what is the first thing you do? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   On the 8 December? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   H’m. 
10 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I checked with my – by my office at 
Luthuli House on what are the outstanding things that need 
to be done, I checked with my secretary.  I went to Luthuli 
House to my office. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now I am just trying to understand 
because you are supposed to be on holiday at this stage.  
Why do you check in with your secretary at Luthuli House?  
Let me just understand that. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   You know, time is of essence, I mean, 
I was on holiday, now I am no longer on holiday, I am 
20 
waiting for a call. I cannot stand and fold my arms when I 
have other duties to perform.  One of my tasks and which 
was a pressing task, especially around festive time in 
January, 
is 
to 
ensure 
that 
those 
members 
of 
the 
association that I am the Treasurer General, there are 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 140 of 259 
 
welfare issues that I attended to.  So that was a priority to 
me and that is exactly what I did instead of sitting and 
waiting for a call. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay.  So, if I understand correctly, 
you 
had 
in 
fact 
been 
appointed, 
according 
to 
your 
statement, you had been appointed as the Treasurer 
General of the MK Veterans Association as early as 
October – sorry, September of 2015. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now going back to – and we are going 
10 
to come to the events of the 8 December in a moment, 
going back the events after your appointment as the 
Treasurer 
General 
of 
the 
MK 
Veterans 
Association, 
according to your statement you in fact acknowledge that 
you would have met on several occasions after that with Mr 
Rajesh Tony Gupta. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, I did and it is not only Rajesh, I 
met 
various 
business 
people 
as 
part 
of 
the 
- 
my 
responsibility. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes, I am concerned specifically with 
20 
Mr Gupta but since you mention that you met with various 
business people are you saying that you met with them at 
the Gupta compound or the Gupta residence? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, all over, no, not at the Gupta 
residence, all over.  That is the work of a Treasurer 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 141 of 259 
 
General if maybe the evidence leader not understand is to, 
among 
other 
things, 
to 
create 
a 
relationship 
with 
businesses with the sole intention of ensuring that you 
attend to budgetary requirements of the association but 
also you attend to the welfare issues of your members and 
that is a very difficult task because fact of the matter is 
that our association is not an association that is supported 
by big business so you have to meet extensively with those 
considerate and progressive business people extensively 
outreach to make sure that you fulfil your mandate and that 
10 
is exactly what I did.  So it is not about meeting them at 
the Gupta’s residence.  No, we meet them at various 
places, I and my fundraising team, in some cases, but also 
myself and some – of course, it is apart from my members 
of the executive when there is a need. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You might have to bring your mic closer 
to you.  Sometimes I do not hear.  See if you can bring it 
or when you speak come a little closer to it. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Alright.  Sorry for that, Chair. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   The meetings with Mr Tony Gupta, 
20 
were those always at the Gupta residence in Saxonwold or 
did they take place elsewhere? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  If my memory serves me well because 
there are cases where I met Rajesh or Tony Gupta at the 
residence, there are cases where I met them as companies 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 142 of 259 
 
in their meetings in their offices in Sandton so the 
meetings did not only take place – some of the meetings 
that I remember did not only take place at their residence. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And were all these meetings in your 
capacity 
as 
the 
MK 
Veterans 
Association, 
Treasurer 
General or was there any other capacity? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, no, that is the only capacity. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So can we accept then that on every 
occasion that you would have met with Mr Gupta, that is Mr 
Tony Gupta, there was no other capacity, you met with him 
10 
solely for the purpose of conducting the affairs of the MK 
Veterans Association? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes.  Now on each of these different 
occasions that you would have met with him, would you 
have been – insofar was the MK Veterans Association is 
concerned would you have been on your own or would 
there 
have 
been 
other 
people 
from 
the 
Veterans 
Association with you?  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, in other meetings of course I had 
20 
to rope in some members of our association, more 
especially from the executive. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   More especially? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:   From the executive.  
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 143 of 259 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Sorry, you said more especially? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   More especially from the executive. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you.  Thank you, Mr Chair.  Now 
…[intervenes] 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Chair, you know, I am very vigilant, I 
hope these microphones are properly sanitised, hey?  I am 
still too young to leave …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, actually, no …[intervenes] 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   We still have a lot of work to do in 
this country. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, you are right, I do not know if they 
were sanitised after the – but they would normally do that 
– was it done, Reverent?  Was it done before?  It was 
done, just sanitised again.  No, thank you for raising that, 
Mr van Rooyen.  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chair.  And can you 
give us an indication of approximately on how many 
occasions you met with Mr Tony Gupta before the 8 t h? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, I would be lying, I cannot 
remember but as I have indicated in my affidavit, I met with 
20 
them on several – I met Mr Tony Gupta and he introduced 
to companies that they did business with himself and other 
members of the Gupta family. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would it be correct to say it was several 
times or would that not be correct? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 144 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   It will be correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It would be correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   It will be correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But how many times you cannot 
remember. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I cannot remember, I would be lying, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, that is fine, that is fine. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you able to remember when it was 
10 
more or less when you met him for the first time?  Not 
necessarily in the capacity of …[intervenes] 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   The first time, to be honest, with you, 
Chair, let me …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   …Treasurer General, but meeting him 
for the first time in whatever capacity?   
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Okay, let me sketch this scenario, 
Chair, how I came to know Mr Rajesh.  They came to our 
offices after my election. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To your offices? 
20 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, at Luthuli House. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   After my election. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, at the ANC headquarters? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 145 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   And then we had a discussion but 
because 
remember, 
we 
are 
fresh 
from 
conference 
so…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   When would that have been? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Around October. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of 2015? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   2015, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, alright, yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   And they introduced themselves to us. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Was it an arranged meeting or…? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, it was not an arranged meeting, 
you know, that is why you going to run away from Luthuli 
House because when you are in that office you do not time 
to work because people come announced, you know? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, with no appointments. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   So I do not know if maybe he was in 
that office because he had the meeting with other people 
and realised that we were in the office, I am not sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
20 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   But it was not arranged – it was not 
even an appointment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   If I had appointments in my office, to 
be honest with you, Chair …[intervenes] 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 146 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So as far as you know he was not there 
to meet you, as such. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, no, no, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But he came into your office. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, the rest, continue? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that was – so October 2015 is the 
first time you met him? 
10 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   That was the first time I met him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you cannot remember around what 
date by any chance? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   What would bring my submission to 
the date is the date of the conference if you looked at – 
because it happened immediately after the conference, so 
a few days after the conference. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of the conference of the association of 
20 
which you are …[intervenes] 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Of the association, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, so what – if you remember the 
date then you would know when it was that he met you.  
Are you saying that …[intervenes] 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 147 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, no, no, I am not saying I can 
remember but I am just saying what I remember is it 
happened closer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, closer to the date of the conference 
of …[intervenes] 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Our conference, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of the M …[intervenes] 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   The conference where I was selected 
to come in as a Treasurer General. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, okay, alright. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:   But that meeting was not intended to 
be with you, he was there for – in some other – or to meet 
with somebody else, is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, no, I am not sure, I am just saying 
that is my …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   He came into your office, you did not 
have an appointment to meet with him, you do not know 
whether he had a meeting with somebody else but he came 
into your office at Luthuli House. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chair.  And that would 
have been in October.  After that, at that particular – well, 
let us start off with that particular meeting, this is now in 
October.  What exchanges take place between the two of 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 148 of 259 
 
you at that particular – on that particular occasion.  There 
is presumably a discussion of some sort before the two of 
you. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, his submission in our first 
engagement he narrated the relationship of their business 
with the ANC and – but also with MK.  I am saying that is 
our association and I think his idea was to say to me as a 
Treasurer General, we also work with your association so 
in your engagements please consider engaging us, do not 
maybe hesitate to engage us.  So that was – it was not a 
10 
long meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, so – when he came into your office 
on that occasion, you were already Treasurer General or 
you were still be elected as Treasurer General? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, I am already Treasurer General at 
that time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You had already been elected? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   That is why he started congratulating 
20 
me for being elected. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  So he might have come to – 
he might pop into your office because he knew you had 
been elected Treasurer General and wanted to convey the 
message that he conveyed? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 149 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct, correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now your understanding, if I am 
interpreting your evidence correctly, your understanding 
was that having conveyed the message or having conveyed 
to you that he was aware that you had just – you had been 
elected as the Treasurer General, he started to explain to 
you that they – that the Gupta family and the businesses 
had had dealings with MK Veterans Association.  Was it 
your understanding from that that he was inviting you, 
10 
either expressly or impliedly to engage in business with the 
Gupta businesses? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And, if I understand correctly, he – you 
then followed up on those invitations? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, I think at some stage we then 
started engaging. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now what stage was that when you say 
you started to engage with him? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, I do not remember exactly if you 
20 
want the specifics of the day and the time but it happened 
– because remember, it all happened in October, I am just 
trying to recall, and I am not sure if there were any other 
engagements that took place before I went to meet him 
again because there was some problems that I wanted to 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 150 of 259 
 
bring to his attention that needed support of business of 
MK and VA.  So I am not sure it was before I do that on the 
8 t h because I know on the 8 t h I visited him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which month?  8 t h of which month? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   December. 
CHAIRPERSON:   December. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   December. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay, maybe I am losing you over 
here.  I am trying to understand, we were in October and 
10 
the meeting that takes place in your office, that takes 
place in October and then when you talk about the 8 t h, you 
are talking about the 8 December.  The question that I was 
asking you is – relates to whether there was interaction 
between the period of October, the meeting in your office 
and the meeting that takes place on the 8 December. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, no, I do not remember of any 
interaction. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now, if I …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   So is the position that in terms of 
20 
meetings, you had a meeting, a very brief meeting when he 
came into your office and then the next meeting was on the 
8 December.  Is that the position or were there some 
meetings between yourself and him in between? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   What I am saying, Chair, is that I do 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 151 of 259 
 
not remember if there was any meeting that I had with him 
before the meeting of the 8 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or but there could have been but you 
are not sure, [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I do not recall, because remember, 
Chair, in my space I engage various business people to 
attend to the programmes of the organisation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, okay. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now just to  - after the 8 December – 
and I am going to come back to the period before the 8 
December – after the 8 December the President tells you 
that it is his intention to appoint you as the Minister of 
Finance.  On the 9 December he removes Mr Nene as the 
Minister of Finance and on the 10 December you are sworn 
in as the Minister of Finance and then from that period up 
until the 14 December you are the Minister of Finance, 
when you get removed as the Minister of Finance and then 
get put into the position of Minister of Cooperative 
20 
Governance and Traditional Affairs, is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now in your position as a Minister at 
this stage, presumably you then have to step down as the 
National Treasurer or the Treasurer General of the MK 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 152 of 259 
 
Veterans Association.  Would that be fair to say? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, it does not work like that, I am 
still the Treasurer General of MKV. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So, in other words, you continue to 
occupy two separate posts.  One as the Treasurer General, 
on the one hand, and one as a cabinet minister in two 
different portfolios on the other. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct, it is permissible. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay.   Now on the – so going back 
now to these meetings that you may have had with Mr Tony 
10 
Gupta, you are not quite certain at this point in time how 
many meetings you might have had or whether you had any 
meetings at all.  How much money do you raise during this 
period of time for the MK Veterans Association specifically 
on the Gupta family or the Gupta businesses? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:    What is on record which I can provide 
to the Commission, we had one of the first successful golf 
activity in 2016 and that they came in as one of the four 
main sponsors of that particular event, one of – I just want 
to underscore this, one of the four main sponsors of that 
20 
particular event and then they followed up also with 
another sponsorship as one of the three main sponsors for 
the next golf day because it is an annual event.   
 
So all in all, if we are looking at monetary value, we 
are looking at plus minus 1.2 million that they contributed 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 153 of 259 
 
to those two events respectively. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And when did those two events take 
place if you are able to remember? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, they usually take place around 
our month, we have 10 December MK month so they 
usually take place around December. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Both of them? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, both of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, so they took place in December 
2015? 
10 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, no, the first one – sorry, Chair, 
for not being clearer, the first one happened on December 
2016, the second one, December 2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now, if I understand correctly – and 
there was no golf day organised by, amongst others, the 
Gupta family or Gupta businesses in 2015 or do I 
misunderstand that? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, they did not organise golf day, we 
organise our own golf day.  They came in just as the main 
20 
sponsor.  The responsibility of organising a golf day it was 
the responsibility of my office. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I see.  Okay, so as a sponsor, they 
provided no sponsorship in 2015, is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   2016. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 154 of 259 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   2015. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   And 2017. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   No, no, listen to my question.  In 2015 
did they provide in sponsorship in that year for the golf 
day? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, there was no golf day in 2015. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay.  So the first sponsorship insofar 
as golfing is concerned takes place from the Gupta’s 
perspective, that is either their businesses or the family, at 
the end of 2016, is that right? 
10 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   2016, yes, that is correct.   
ADV HULLEY SC:   And the second sponsorship takes 
place in – at the end of December in 2017.  Do I 
understand that correctly? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And outside of golfing or a golf day for 
the MK Veterans Association, outside of that, they provide 
no other sponsorship, is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Not really, in some – you know, the 
situation of military veterans, more especially those who 
20 
served in what we call the former liberation armies, it is a 
very pathetic one in our country, they are struggling to 
make ends meet.  So from time to time they will come to 
my office requesting this and that and I can tell you, I am 
dead sure that in one of those instances or some of those 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 155 of 259 
 
instances the Guptas helped. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So let me just understand.  So people 
would come from time to time because they are struggling, 
these are members now – or MK veterans that would come 
to the offices because they need some financial assistance 
and on those occasions, you say you are certain that the 
Gupta family would have helped. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Not only financial assistance, there 
are some …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I am sorry, I think he said on 
10 
some of those occasions. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Not only …[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:   [indistinct – dropping voice] 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Okay, sorry, sorry, Chair.  Not only 
financial 
assistance, 
Chairperson. 
 
In 
some 
cases, 
groceries, in some cases building materials, because some 
of – we had to build houses for some of the military 
veterans and it is on record, I am not saying something 
20 
that is a thumb suck.  So I will approach different 
businesses 
to 
assist 
with 
materials, 
to 
assist 
with 
groceries.  So they definitely might have played part in 
some of those but they are not the only ones. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Ja, but when you say they might have 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 156 of 259 
 
are you saying that there is a possibility in the realm of 
possibilities or are you saying they might have in the sense 
that you cannot recall but it is a possibility? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I cannot recall but it is a possibility, 
because I know I mean that is one thing that you can take 
away from some of this business that associated with this 
association.  They are very generous in terms of assisting 
this because they understand that South Africa is waiting 
because 
of 
the 
sacrifices 
that 
these 
members 
did.  
Something 
that 
is 
very 
difficult 
for 
big 
business 
to 
10 
understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I know that this may be relate to an 
important point Mr Hulley but I just want to remind you to 
keep an eye on time and the list of important issues that 
you may be wishing to all cover.       
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you Mr Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now just in terms of that meeting with 
the Gupta family or specifically with Mr Tony Gupta on the 
8 t h of December you – if I understand correctly you 
20 
telephoned the office to find out – you made a telephone 
call to your office to find out what the schedule was for 
that specific date for the 8 t h of December.  Do I understand 
correctly I just want to get a sense of that?    
MR VAN ROOYEN:   There was no one at the office, the 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 157 of 259 
 
office, the staff has already closed.  So I went there on my 
own and I phoned the Gupta residents and I was told that 
Tony is there.  So I went there to try my luck because I did 
not have a scheduled meeting with him and unfortunately 
that meeting could not materialise because he was busy 
with other meetings.      
ADV HULLEY SC:   So you telephoned Mr Tony Gupta from 
the offices of the MK Veterans Association?  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   And in the discussion he must have 
10 
given you some sense that you should come over.  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Chair I do not want to sound to be - 
what is this arrogant and all but that is not what I said.  I 
have said I phoned that residence and the residence 
confirmed that he is available. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, you did not speak to him on the 
phone?   
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and then after somebody had 
confirmed that he was available...[intervenes]  
20 
MR 
VAN 
ROOYEN: 
 
 
I 
did 
not 
even 
say 
it 
Chair...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You then proceeded there.  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes I did not even say, had the 
chance of confirming with him if I can see him.  So I was 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 158 of 259 
 
just trying my luck.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.   
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay so I must have misunderstood 
you I thought it was a scheduled meeting.  It was not a 
scheduled meeting?  I mean scheduled with Mr Tony Gupta.  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No it was not a scheduled.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   That one I was supposed to be on 
holiday with my family so it was not a scheduled meeting.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   Sure.  If we can go back to – because I 
10 
am going to try and bring all of these different issues 
together at a later stage.  Your relationship with Mr 
Mohammed Bobat, just explain to the Commission about 
your history and your relationship with Mr Bobat.  How did 
that arise? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Thank you very much.  Chair 
sometime in the – I think it was early 2019 just before I 
was redeployed to parliament.  I was, before I went to 
parliament, I was the Mayor in my constituency, that is the 
constituency 
of 
Merafong 
and 
at 
that 
stage 
that 
20 
constituency was falling under the North West Province.   
          In North West Province I was the Chairperson of the 
South African Local Government Association, the Provincial 
Chapter in North West.  But also, I was the Provincial 
Executive Committee of the ANC in the North West but also 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 159 of 259 
 
a member of what we call a provincial working committee in 
that province. So I was doing my outreach program in the 
region of Bojanala and if my memory serves me well I think 
I needed something or I needed to see some – I don’t think 
I wanted to see someone, I needed something from the 
reassurance of a hotel which was in the area, in Madibeng 
area where I was doing my constituency work.   
          So I went there to grab something and that is where 
I met Mr Mohammed and of course I got into reassurance 
there and I greeted everyone as usual that is how we were 
10 
brought up as Africans, we greet wherever we go.  So – 
then on my way out I was approached by this gentleman 
and then he in turn introduced himself to me and then he 
gave me his business card and then he told me that what 
he was doing in the financial markets and all that and then 
that is when I started knowing him.   
          I kept the business card up until I had some 
challenges with my studies especially on financial areas 
then I started communicating with him on it but not 
necessarily frequently, when there was a need.  And that is 
20 
how I came across Mr Mohammed or Mr Bobat because 
Mohammed is his first name. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which one is the surname, when I read 
documents sometimes, he is referred to as Mr Bobat 
sometimes Mr Mohammed.  Which one is the surname 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 160 of 259 
 
which one is the…[intervenes]        
MR VAN ROOYEN:   The surname is Bobat. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Bobat? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   So that was some time in 2009 at the 
time if I understand correctly are you saying that in 2009 
you were the Executive Mayor?  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, yes I have indicated yes I was 
the Executive Mayor of my constituency, that is my 
10 
hometown it is in Carletonville, Khutsong.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   And on this occasion of the meeting 
was Mr Bobat provided you with his business card? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct Chair.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   Do you know why it is that he 
approached you or was there any indication as to why he 
approached you?  
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes he – I think he was in consultancy 
because he was meeting some traditional leaders or people 
from the royal family according to him because I never met 
20 
those people.  So he definitely wanted to say maybe I can 
start thinking.  Business people are like that if they meet 
you here that there is a leader around, they will want to 
associate with that leader.  I do not know how many 
business cards do I have in my collection because that is 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 161 of 259 
 
how I made business network, you know.     
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now correct me if I am wrong and if I 
misunderstand your affidavit then of course you will correct 
me. 
 
My 
reading 
of 
your 
affidavit 
was 
that 
every 
subsequent interaction between the two of you, that is 
between you and Mr Bobat was initiated by you.  Is that 
correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   And on each of those occasions it 
would have been because you sought advice from him in 
10 
relation to your studies? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now you mentioned that you contacted 
him on several occasions.  Was it more than once or was it 
more than twice?  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, I cannot remember but it was not 
that frequent. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it several occasions? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   A it is this, must I quantify it? 
CHAIRPERSON:   A number of times.  
20 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Ja, a number of times…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you cannot say how many times.  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   But it was not like something that I 
can say once in a month, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 162 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Once in a while when I needed some 
assistance in my studies…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Like once in three months, once in six 
months, once…[intervenes] 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Something of that nature once in 
three, maybe once in six months.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Ja but it was not a frequent because it 
was based on my – what I was studying at that time and 
definitely as an expert on tax matters and as an expert – 
10 
as an accountant.  I derived from engaging with him on 
issues of taxation.   
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay so your understanding in 2009 
and based on his business card was that he was an expert 
in tax matters?  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, that is what he – that is how he 
presented himself but also in my first engagement - I 
meant after that meeting – in my first interaction with him 
about 
my 
studies 
definitely 
his 
knowledge 
was 
very 
evident.   
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now in your affidavit you will turn with 
me to page 135 of the same bundle that I have given you 
before. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say 155? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   135 Mr Chair. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 163 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   135. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   135.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   That’s is so.  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I am there.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   You say in paragraph 56 that Mr Bobat 
and I did not make regular contact but I can recall once or 
twice when I called him for some assistance with my 
academic studies in finance.  So according to this affidavit 
you met with him or you telephoned him approximately 
once or twice relating to your studies.     
10 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   You had no contact with him outside of 
that, in other words outside of your discussions about your 
studies.  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But also, if in your affidavit you said 
once or twice then that cannot be several times.  I know 
that you did not want to commit yourself to about several 
times but if it is once or twice then that is much more 
limited than a number of times I would imagine.  Is that 
20 
right?   
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Okay yes it is very limited.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so would you say once or twice is 
more accurate in terms of how many times you contacted 
him?  
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 164 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, I think let us…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is more accurate.  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   It is more accurate let us stick to that 
Chair, yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   Then you acquired if I recall correctly 
you were at the time studying for an MSC in finance which 
ultimately you acquired in 2013.  Is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:    That’s is correct but it does not make 
– I think it was not only that because I was also doing 
10 
something 
with 
UNISA 
on 
investment 
and 
portfolio 
management and also economy, I think I did two things 
with UNISA related to finance.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   Sure.  So did – correct me if I am 
wrong but between 2013 and 2015 you had no contact with 
Mr Bobat.  Is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   2000 and? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Between 2013 you have now graduated 
you have got your MSC in finance and in 2015 you have no 
contact with Mr Bobat after that?  
20 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No I cannot guarantee that because 
the reality of the matter is that I started my lecturing 
sessions in parliament it was for some members of 
parliament.  So I am not sure if I – was there any time 
where I needed some assistance from him.  So I cannot 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 165 of 259 
 
definitely say yes.     
ADV 
HULLEY 
SC: 
 
 
So 
I 
am 
not 
sure 
if 
I 
am 
misunderstanding the response.  You say that it was in that 
time that you started your parliamentary, I did not catch the 
word.    
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Look after completing my masters I 
took it upon myself but it is also an organisational duty to 
make sure that we encourage others I mean to follow the 
same route because you know the financial sector is one 
sector that is – we are not that strong on that sector as to 
10 
be correct, we are not that strong as the ruling party.   
          So I took it upon myself to make sure that I 
encourage my fellow comrades I mean to do this course 
and I started providing for free of course some lectures to 
them.  So I do not know during that time maybe I might 
have needed him because you know as you lecture when 
you go broad and you must go deep when you dealing with 
some of this matters.     
ADV HULLEY SC:   So it is possible that you might have 
needed him and when you say you might have needed him 
20 
are you talking about coming to assist in providing 
lecturing or you talking about telephoning him for some 
advice over the phone? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, no I was referring to telephonic 
engagement.  That is why I say I am not even sure if I ever 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 166 of 259 
 
called him you know but I know from time to time I use to 
engage with various experts on tax and on other economic 
matters you know.   
ADV HULLEY SC:   So on the 10 t h of December or rather 
let me correct that sorry on the 9 t h of December of 2015 if I 
understand correctly the announcement has been made 
that Mr Nene has been removed.  The announcement has 
also been made that you have been appointed or you have 
been appointed as the new Minister of Finance and your 
swearing in ceremony is to take place on the 10 t h of 
10 
December of 2015.  If I understand correctly you do not 
phone Mr Bobat to invite him to the ceremony, in fact the 
presidency makes that arrangement.  Is that correct?     
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, I asked the presidency to try – in 
fact I tried to call him from my landline in the office and I 
struggled to get hold of him.  Then I ultimately phoned the 
presidency because they wanted urgently a list of people 
who must come to attend my swearing in ceremony 
Chairperson but it was just a handful.  And you know on 
the 8 t h one of the first things that I did after that meeting 
20 
with the President – because I was obsessed about 
perfecting this new assignment.  So…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You were upset?     
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I was obsessed about perfecting a 
new assignment.  
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 167 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   So one of the first things that I 
thought of is whom can I bring to support me immediately.  
So his – on the 8 t h in fact I have already decided that I am 
going to trace this man because I really need him to come 
and join me.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   So just to get that right your saying 
that you were obsessed with perfecting this assignment 
and by this assignment you are referring to your new 
appointment…[intervenes]   
10 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   My new appointment.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   …as the Minister of Finance?  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct Chairperson. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And… 
CHAIRPERSON:   So in other words, you wanted to do, to 
excel in this portfolio? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   That is in the nature of ANC products.  
When we are given a task we want to excel because – but 
also Chair you know being executives is not a chance play.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So you start to consider in your mind 
who might you get to come and assist you in your new role, 
in your new capacity as Minister of Finance and you come 
upon the name of Mr Bobat and you decide that he is the 
person that you would like to come and assist you.  Do I 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 168 of 259 
 
understand that correctly?   
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, I do.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   And you say that you tried to get hold 
of him telephonically but unsuccessfully? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   So you phoned him from your cell 
phone to his cell phone with the number that you had from 
the business card that you were given six years ago.  Is 
that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:   That number is now stored in your cell 
phone.  Is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, it is still there that is the one that 
I am still even using today.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   And so you phone him and you do not 
get through to him.  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   It was not like phoning onto my 
phone.  I remember I phoned him from my office from 
Luthuli House and did not get him and then because I was 
under pressure of submitting the names of people who 
20 
must be invited.  So I send that to the presidency.   
ADV HULLEY SC:   So you phoning from Luthuli House do 
I understand that correctly?  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   You do not phone him from your cell 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 169 of 259 
 
phone? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I was at the office when this request 
was submitted.   
CHAIRPERSON:   But you used the landline in order 
to…[intervenes]  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   It was the landline, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   It was the landline, yes in fact when I 
am at Luthuli House, I use the landline mainly.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   But I am not sure if I am following you.  
10 
You say you sitting in Luthuli House when you make the 
call from the landline in Luthuli House to try and get hold 
of Mr Bobat?  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   And at the time you trying to do so in 
order to invite him to do what?  What is it that you are 
trying to invite him to do? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I am trying to notify him that I want to 
include his name on the list of people that must be invited 
by the presidency for my swearing in ceremony.  
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay.  So it is not your intention at 
that stage to invite him to join you in any capacity whether 
as a special advisor or otherwise? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No in my thinking I thought that will 
require a bilateral with him first so that is why I insisted 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 170 of 259 
 
that I must meet him first.  I did not think it was going to 
be proper for me to discuss such a matter over the phone.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   No, fair enough.  You do not get hold 
of him so you then pass on his details to somebody at the 
President’s office and ask them to arrange for him to be 
present on the 10 t h of December at the swearing in 
ceremony.  Is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, I included his name on the list 
that I forwarded to the presidency for invitation on – for my 
swearing in ceremony.  
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So you provide them with his name and 
presumably his cell phone number as well?  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, off course.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay.  So in fact, it is the President’s 
office that phones him and invites him to the swearing in 
ceremony on the 10 t h?  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, that is what he confirms with me.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   But you never have a discussion with 
him before that?  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, no about the invitation I never had 
20 
a chance to talk to him.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   About the swearing in ceremony.  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, I am saying about the invitation 
to the swearing in ceremony.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   Correct. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 171 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, no.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   So when he arrives on the 10 t h of 
December you offer him – at some stage and I will get into 
the chronology in a moment but at some stage you offer 
him the post of the special advisor to the Minister of 
Finance on that occasion on the 10 t h of December.  Is that 
right?  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Chairperson what happened is that I 
indicated to him that I have got an interest on him being 
part of my team as my advisor because a field that I was 
10 
deployed to lead will require a person of his calibre in 
terms of his academic qualification.   
          It was purely on merit and I further indicated to him 
that as much as I have identified him we need to follow a 
certain a certain process because remember immediately 
after the meeting on the 8 t h with that obsessions that I 
have explained I had then to go and check how to do it and 
I went through the ministerial handbook because also the 
President in our meeting on the 8 t h that is what he 
emphasised go and familiarise yourself with some of this 
20 
provisions.   
          And of course, among other things the President 
indicated to me that I must go through the ministerial 
handbook.  Now I said to him according to the ministerial 
handbook as an executive I am allowed to appoint people 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 172 of 259 
 
to come and work with me but then this is the process that 
we are going to follow.   
          I am going to introduce you to the DG whom by that 
time had get someone who is very capable.  I hope Mr 
Bobat will remember I said to him his a very good comrade 
of – and he is very, very efficient.  Well I was not aware 
that I am dealing with a hypocrite.  So what happened is 
that I explained to him that there is a process that needs to 
be followed for this appointment to be finally finalised.  
Among other things you shall be vetted because I do not 
10 
even know that – you might say to me you are fit and 
proper because you do not have criminal records and all 
that but there is a due process that must be followed with 
DPSA and the State security to confirm that you are 
suitable for this assignment. 
          And the DG is going to help me to complete that 
process but you also have to – we must make sure that 
very soon you will sign your contract with myself, so the 
DG will be in a position to help with that.  So I will 
introduce you to the DG and that is what happened and 
20 
then he accepted my offer and that obviously made matters 
to consider at least one of my emulators has been 
completed.              
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now at this stage presumably when Mr 
Bobat arrives at this meeting he arrives without any CV; 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 173 of 259 
 
would that be correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   And in fact, other than the business 
card which you got in 2009 you have never seen his CV 
ever.  Is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, I have never seen his CV but I 
know his profile.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   You say you know his profile what 
exactly are you referring to?  
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I am referring to knowing his 
10 
qualifications because he communicated those to me and 
through my engagement with him, I was able to verify that 
he is a qualified person.  And I had no reason not to 
believe him when he told me of his qualifications.  
ADV HULLEY SC:  So when you say you know his profile 
based upon what he had told you, you referring now to the 
period prior to 2015.  Is that correct – sorry 2013 is that 
correct?  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   So on the one or two occasions that 
20 
you and he had discussions which were initiated by you 
and which related specifically to your studies the two of 
you happen to engage in a discussion about his profile.  
That is what you’re saying?    
MR VAN ROOYEN:   That’s is what I am saying, exactly.  
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 174 of 259 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And on those one or two occasions 
when the two of you happen to engage in a discussion 
about his profile, he said certain things to you which 
satisfied you on the 10 t h of December 2015 that this was 
the right man for the job.  Is that…[intervenes] 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct in terms of the experience 
that he demonstrated to me during our engagements, 
definitely.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   And you had not at that stage 
considered anybody other than Mr Bobat.  Is that correct? 
10 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   He was the person the only person that 
you wanted for that job.  Is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Look I am sitting as we speak now, I 
am sitting with a plethora of CV’s in my office and I have to 
be realistic because at times you know when the duty calls 
more especially at a national level you will have to 
prioritise this issue of merit because the severity of the 
task required merit more than any other thing.  So I went 
through 
some 
of 
the 
CV’s 
of 
my 
comrades 
but 
20 
unfortunately, I could not find a CV that came closer to 
what was expected of me or maybe the person to support 
me.       
ADV HULLEY SC:   So you sitting in your office, in which 
office 
are 
we 
referring 
to 
now 
we 
talking 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 175 of 259 
 
about…[intervenes] 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, I am referring to TG’s office.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now the people’s CV’s that you are 
sitting with presumably are people that are from the MK 
Veterans Association?    
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Not only MK Veterans Association I 
mean from the broader society - remember I am a 
community leader I am not only a TG of MK Military 
Veterans Association.   
ADV HULLEY SC:  So if I understand correctly your 
10 
testimony is that within the ANC you are always pursuing 
excellence?   
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   And in the pursuit of excellence with 
the name of a person who has told you that he has a 
certain qualifications, you have never seen his CV, you 
have never verified whether that the information that he 
has given you is correct.  You then offer that person a job 
as a special advisor to the Minister of Finance, that is what 
you’re saying.     
20 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   But also, maybe to add on what you 
are saying as someone who has demonstrated through my 
engagement with him that he understands the subject 
matter.  But also, I knew besides me trusting him not to be 
telling me a lie, I knew that that there was a process that I 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 176 of 259 
 
am going to subject him to which is normally championed 
by DPSA.     
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay.  Now at that stage…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry why did you not want to give 
yourself 
a 
wider 
choice 
of 
people, 
qualified 
people, 
experienced people from whom to choose.  Why did you 
confine yourself to this person with whom – whom you had 
met only once in six years or so, very briefly, in a restaurant 
as I understand the position and you had talked to – to whom 
you had talked once or twice on the phone in six years when 
10 
there must be many people some of whom within the ANC I 
have no doubt who would qualify, experience in relation to 
financial matters who – from whom you could then make your 
choice.  Why did you confine yourself to this person that as I 
see it you might have a different view whose background you 
do not know much about? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Chair I had no time because remember I 
had to – to hit the ground running.  So I had to prioritise 
some positions in my office so as I can hit the ground 
running.  So in my situation I then prioritise the two positions 
20 
because I knew that as I go into National Treasury it is a 
familiar institution there will be people who can also 
compliment these two that they have earmarked.  So it was 
just a matter of prioritising on my side as to what are the – 
the – what are the immediate tasks that I need to do or what 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 177 of 259 
 
are the immediate position that I needed to fill?  So it was 
just a matter of prioritisation on my side that I needed a 
Chief of Staff but also needed a special advisor so that I can 
hit the ground running.  So I prioritise him after looking into 
whatever CV’s that I had at my disposal and I realised that – 
I decided that he is the – he was the best candidate for that 
assignment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You see it is important for me that I should 
hear what you have to say on this because it is a matter that 
is – that concerns me in relation to your choice of Mr Bobat.  
10 
We will talk about Mr Whitley later on.  There must be a lot 
of people who may have been doing the same degree as 
yourself when you a MEC in finance.  There must be a lot of 
people who are your comrades within the ANC who have 
financial qualifications in finance.  There must be – and who 
have experience but also you might have given yourself time 
to talk to maybe Mr Nene or other Ministers and give 
yourself more time even if it is a few days just to make sure 
that not only is the person you choose somebody with 
academic qualifications but also that you choose somebody 
20 
for example with integrity and you do not just rely on what he 
says to you.  You talk to other people.  You do some 
background work before you say I am identifying this person.  
Even if the process will involve security clearance and so on 
but before you say I am identifying this person just make 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 178 of 259 
 
sure that this is not somebody who – who might have certain 
skeletons in his cupboard that are going to embarrass you, 
that are going to embarrass the government, that are going 
to embarrass National Treasury.  First say what are you 
going to lose by waiting a few days just to check these 
things?  So that is part of my concern.  You want to address 
that? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Thank you Chair.  Chair ideally, I will 
definitely take that route and I did not take that route 
because I felt a lot of – I am especially how the financial 
10 
market reacted.  So I had to think quickly on getting a team 
or maybe some people with the necessary knowledge on 
issues of financial markets.  And of course, knowing him as 
someone that I have engaged I never had the reservation 
about his integrity and I still do not have that.  And I never 
had an issue about his fit for purpose and I still do not have 
that.  Because remember we moved – I moved with him from 
National Treasury we went to COPTA.  In COPTA definitely I 
mean but that was after even DPSA has confirmed my own – 
I mean intuition that he is a man of integrity.  So definitely I 
20 
was under a lot of pressure to make sure that I play my part 
in terms of dealing with the turbulences more especially in 
the financial markets that were there at that time.  So that is 
why I completely had to go for them because of their 
background both Mr Bobat and Mr Whitley. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 179 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Hulley. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair.  Now you – you were 
obviously aware in 2015 you were familiar with Regiments 
Capital at that stage, is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And at the time when you appointed Mr or 
rather when you made the offer to Mr Bobat you were aware 
that he in fact worked for Regiments Capital at the time, is 
that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  No it is not correct.  He only brought it 
10 
to my attention when I discussed with him at the Union 
Building and then I – then instructed him he must – if he 
accept the offer he must then resign from Regiments. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sorry I did not catch that bit.  You said 
you only discussed – you were not aware of it at the time but 
he only brought it to your attention at what stage? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  He brought it to my attention that he was 
– he had a relationship – he was working with Regiment at 
that – at that moment. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Okay in other words this is at the 
20 
swearing in ceremony? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  At the swearing in ceremony. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And you were familiar with Regiments 
Capital as – what was your knowledge and understanding of 
Regiments Capital at that stage? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 180 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  It was just I did not have the details 
about Regiments Capital Incorporated besides that they are 
all the – they are also a player in the financial sector. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Were you aware – were you aware of 
some of the rumours that was swirling in the media at the 
time? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes I was aware. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  What were the rumours? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I mean about some implications and 
certain act of malfeasance. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes were those... 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  But I do not have the details but I am 
saying I was aware because I read business newspapers 
from time to time. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So when he told you that he worked for 
Regiments Capital you were aware of those rumours? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And notwithstanding that fact and the fact 
that you were aware of the rumours of malfeasance on the 
part of Regiments Capital you had no concerns about his 
20 
own integrity, is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  No, no because he was not necessarily 
implicated in what was happening – what was said in the 
newspaper about Regiments Company. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  No, no that is fair – fair enough.  What I 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 181 of 259 
 
am asking you is you are aware that Regiments Capital itself 
had been implicated in the media and through rumours in 
malfeasance you were aware of that? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  You were aware that he worked for them? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And you say that the rumours and the 
media reports did not necessarily implicate him. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  No, no, no. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And did you ask him at that stage 
10 
whether he was somehow involved in any of the malfeasance 
that had been attributed to Regiments Capital? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes and then he confirmed to me that he 
is not part of what was said in the newspapers.  But also 
remember what is said in the newspapers were allegations 
levelled against Regiments you know.  So he also confirmed 
with me that – but that was not also my – for my focus and 
my interest then it was on him accepting my offer of 
including him into a team. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So he says to you – you ask him 
20 
pointedly and he says to you, I am not involved in that 
malfeasance.  So does – from what I – you were saying now 
I understand you to be saying he confirms that there is 
malfeasance taking place but he is saying, I am not involved 
in it. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 182 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  No, no that is not what I am saying.  I 
am saying the reports, media reports and he is aware of 
them but I have never been – checked with him to say are 
you involved, are you not involved but he – those reports 
were all over the newspapers so he confirmed that he is 
aware of those reports. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Did you ask him if he has somehow been 
implicated in any of those rumours that are swirling? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I asked him broadly about – because 
thinking of that provision of fit for purpose I ask him broadly 
10 
about him having anything that might impact my obviously 
intention to include him to my team.  Criminal records or any 
judgment against him that are the basic things that I ask 
him.  And then he confirmed that he do not have such. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Okay let us put that issue aside.  That is 
a separate question.  I am talking specifically in relation to 
Regiments Capital.  What do you ask him about his – you 
know that – you know now that he is involved with Regiments 
Capital, he works for Regiments Capital, what do you ask 
him about his involvement in Regiments Capital and the 
20 
allegations, the rumours, the media reports relating to 
malfeasance within Regiments Capital?  That is my question. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  No it was all about what is reported in 
the – on the media and of course he told – he confirmed that 
he is also aware.  And of course, I meant I did not take much 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 183 of 259 
 
interest in pursuing that discussion because he was going to 
resign from Regiments. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was that – let me start by this.  Were you 
concerned in any way about taking somebody as your special 
advisor as Minister of Finance who was coming from an 
organisation about which there were rumours of wrongdoing?  
Were you concerned about that at all? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Definitely Chair that is why I posed the 
question about fit for purpose.  That is to make sure that we 
do not start the process which might backfire. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but I understood you to say what you 
asked him related to whether there were judgments against 
him or whether he had a criminal record and he said no he 
did not have any of that, is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I understood you to say – understood 
you to be in effect saying to me your concern was with 
regard to those issues and not the rumours about the 
Regiments.   
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Correct. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did I understand you correctly?  Did I 
understand you correctly? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I – that was also my concern Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Because I wanted to confirm if – maybe 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 184 of 259 
 
out of that then other things that I do not know of. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  He might be implicated or he might be 
having judgments.  So when I posed that question, I was 
trying to obviously accommodate even what is happening at 
Regiments. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But you see Mr Hulley asked you 
directly to tell me what it is that you asked him about the 
rumours.  If you asked him anything? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  What I asked him about the rumours 
10 
when he said to me he is from Regiments I said are you 
aware of the media publications and he said, no I am aware 
but these are some of the things that I levelled against my 
company.  So then I said, no if – then you accept my offer 
given that you are going to resign. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And he said he would resign? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes, no he was going to resign.  There 
was no – any choice going to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Continue with my advice and then it 
20 
would be official, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  But also Chair even if he resigns – he is 
not going to resign because of what is reported in the 
newspapers. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 185 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  He was going to resign because he has 
accepted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No I understand that.  But from what 
you say I get the impression that despite the existence of the 
rumours of wrongdoing on the part of the organisation of 
which he was part you were quite content to take him 
because he was going to resign from Regiments, number 1.  
Number 2 he said he had no criminal record.  Number 3 he 
had no judgment against him.  That set you at ease, is that 
10 
correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  That is correct Chair but also Chair you 
know I would not use that as a basis for determining 
including someone.  Let us take for an example.  We have … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let me say I am sorry I am interrupting 
you.  I am not suggesting at all that you were disregarding 
his 
qualifications 
because 
you 
have 
emphasised 
his 
qualifications.  I am not saying you disregarded that. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  No, no I just wanted to give an example.  
Because the narrative that suggests that when a company is 
20 
labelled as these corrupt or bla, bla company it is just 
allegations.  Or even a corrupt company when an employee 
from that corrupt company – because some companies 
employ many people who was not even the decision making 
position. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 186 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Does that mean when employee want a 
job from that company and then having all what he takes for 
the new job that I am offering as an owner of another 
company does that mean I should not consider him because 
of the scandals of that company where he was employed 
before? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I will give a typical example. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
10 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  The one that comes to mind relative to 
the financial sector.  In 2013 we had banks – big banks 
including Standard Bank where Mr Fuzile is currently working 
as an Executive the bank implicated in colluding with other 
banks, global banks and manipulated the exchange rate and 
in the process disadvantage billions of customers and of 
course you know they are adversely affected in that situation 
are the poor of the poor.  Billions because this is a global – 
it was a global scandal.  Now because Mr Fuzile after 
coming out of National Treasury or becoming a beneficiary of 
20 
what I termed a revolving door phenomena he went to 
Standard Bank automatically after coming from National 
Treasury.  Obviously if – if I use that particular analysis of 
corrupt companies then I will just say his integrity is also 
questionable.  Why did he decide to go and join a company? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 187 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  So that analysis I do not think it is – it 
was not going to help me to determine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well this is where it may be important 
namely that because the company from which Mr Bobat was 
coming or because of the company of which he was part and 
the fact that there were rumours of malfeasance around that 
company you might have needed to be more cautious and to 
take some time to check whether you might not bringing to 
National Treasury or to your Ministry somebody that should 
10 
not be brought to the Ministry.  You might have needed more 
time to investigate before you could say okay I am choosing 
this one.  Because you do not know who in the company may 
be involved in that malfeasance and who may not be 
involved.  And there may be others – other candidates who 
do not come from a company that might be having those 
types of rumours and in order to protect the Ministry you 
might wish to take somebody who seems to have – to be not 
associated with any entity about whom there are rumours of 
corruption and so on.  That is – that is what I would like you 
20 
to address. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Chair you know I do not think it was 
going to be appropriate for me just because of someone is 
coming from a company where there are allegations not even 
substantiated allegations of corruption.  I do not think that is 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 188 of 259 
 
going to be important for me to firstly deny that person an 
opportunity but secondly use that as my determining criteria 
for his appointment.  Because I was under pressure and I 
knew for a fact that the appointment was not going to be 
finalised by my identification.  He was still going to be 
subjected to a robust process of vetting to a robust process 
of confirming his credentials.  And that anyone was going to 
be subjected to that even if it was not Mr Bobat that I 
decided to identify – anyone was going to be subjected to 
that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  So truly speaking Chair I do not think 
that issue at that time was that much of concern because it 
was not allegations against Mr Bobat.  Not if it was against 
Mr Bobat, I will have definitely treated it differently. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you did not know who at Regiments 
may have been involved, did you in regard to those 
allegations? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  No those allegations were not – were 
not citing him.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  No but I am saying without an investigation 
as to whether he and other people may have been involved 
you would not know whether later on it will turn out that he 
was involved? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Definitely Chair and that is why I 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 189 of 259 
 
employed the principle of trust that I had on him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  And that of course considering his 
qualifications that I prioritise his identification. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course the trust that you were – you 
had on him was based among – was based on the fact that 
you had met – you were meeting this person only for the 
second time in your life. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Ja but we engaged. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no I will come to that. 
10 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Two you had talked him once or twice on 
the phone.  That is all.   
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Hulley. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Now when you 
spoke with him he said that he would resign from Regiments 
Capital but you understood or presumably you understood 
that he held a senior position within Regiments Capital, 
correct? 
20 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes I did. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So the – the fact that he was going to 
resign would presumably – well hopefully ought to have 
provided you with you some – with very little comfort 
because this was a person that was a very senior employee 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 190 of 259 
 
who had been implicated or rather let me rephrase that.  
Whose company had been implicated on your words in 
malfeasance so he was a senior employee within that 
company if I understand correctly? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now … 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are five to four.  One let us clear that 
we can go beyond four o’clock.  Mr Masuku is it fine if we go 
beyond four o’clock? 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Yes it would be fine we were quite keen 
10 
to have… 
CHAIRPERSON:  You would like to finish? 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Mr – Mr Van Rooyen set free after today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  So we can go past four. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  We have no difficulties. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have in mind that Mr Hulley you should 
try and finish by half past four. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chairperson 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  If we can… 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Is it possible that … 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 191 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  We take a break? 
ADV MASUKU SC:  We can finish today? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Oh because you might re-examine is 
that what? 
ADV MASUKU SC:  No, no I will decide whether to re-
examine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh just in terms of… 
ADV MASUKU SC:  But in the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes, no, no I think it is possible. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Yes we will be happy to do that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja it is possible ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  Thank you, thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja we will aim to try and finish here.  Okay.  
The – I am not sure whether we should take a break but if we 
are going to try and finish at half past four maybe we can 
push up to half past four. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And if Mr Van Rooyen indicates that he 
would like a comfort break he will indicate.  Okay I think let 
us continue. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja and then we will see how it – how it 
goes.   
ADV HULLEY SC:  Let us just move over to Mr Mabaso – oh 
sorry Mr Whitley.  If I understand your – your affidavit or 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 192 of 259 
 
your statement correctly you met Mr Whitley for the first time 
on the 11 December of 2015, is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And you met him at Melrose Arch in the 
Sandton area? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  You were present at that meeting; Mr 
Whitley was obviously present at the meeting.  There was a 
certain Mr Malcolm Mabaso that was present at the meeting 
and if I understand correctly Mr Bobat was also present at 
10 
that meeting, is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  What happened is that Chairperson I 
had a meeting earlier at Melrose Arch and then Mr Mabaso 
came with Mr Whitley and – well I knew Mr Mabaso because 
he was working with Minister Zwane but he was also 
frequenting our offices at Luthili House.  So he then bumped 
– not necessarily bumped me but came to where I was in that 
meeting at Melrose Arch and indicated that he is aware that I 
might be in need of support in my office.  So there is a 
gentleman I might want to consider to come into a team.  
20 
And I said let me have an engagement with that gentleman 
first because I do not know him.  So he then gave – allowed 
Mr Whitley then to meet with me.  Then I proceeded with Mr 
Whitley and in that meeting Mr Whitley presented his CV to 
me and then I indicated to him that it is – I am very much 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 193 of 259 
 
impressed of his CV because by then I was looking for 
someone who can come in as Chief of Staff but also with a 
knowledge in the financial sector in the banking sector.  And 
that Mr Whitley had what it takes.  And Mr Bobat of course 
came in – because I informed him on the 10t h that I will be 
having a breakfast meeting at Melrose Arch.  So he came in 
and then he said to me I – he just tendered his resignation 
and then he introduced then to me Mr Wood who was his 
former colleague and that is where I started knowing Mr Eric 
Wood. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So Mr – if I understand correctly Mr 
Bobat comes to meet you at Melrose Arch because you had 
told him the previous day that you were going to be having 
breakfast. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  At Melrose Arch.  So you – on the 11t h 
March – sorry the 11t h December then when you have this 
meeting with these various people you actually having 
breakfast at a restaurant, is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  It was not a restaurant I was hosted by a 
20 
business person because that is one of the following 
meetings that I had to wrap up from, then came here. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Hm. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  So it was not a restaurant it was a 
meeting it was more of a – I think that is more of a meeting 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 194 of 259 
 
boardroom it was more of a boardroom if – but they served 
breakfast there.  There was more of a meeting boardroom. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So you were having a meeting at a 
business – at some premises – business premises at 
Melrose Arch it is not in a restaurant? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  No, no it is not in the restaurant. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Okay so you – what is the name of the 
company that you are at? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  No, no I was hosted by a business 
person. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Mr Bashir Sallo who is a business 
person from Libya and this was one of my outstanding 
meetings I mean from MK engagements. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Just give me the name again? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Bashir Sallo. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Spell that surname for us please? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  S-a-l-e-h that is what I – I am not sure if 
that is the surname but I know it is Bashir Sallo. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Okay.  So you wrapping up with that 
20 
meeting and when that meeting is finished you then 
approached by Mr – Mr Mabaso is that correct?  Do I 
understand that correctly? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  In that meeting I did not wrap it up it 
was somehow disrupted by the presence of Mr Mabaso so I 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 195 of 259 
 
had to entertain this request by Mr Mabaso first. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Okay.  Now this meeting with Mr Bashir 
Sallo is it is a – is it in a boardroom?  We know it is not in a 
restaurant.  Is it in a boardroom or is it in – of a particular 
company or is it in the boardroom of Mr Bashir Sallo 
himself? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I did not ask those details but – because 
he is the one who arranged the meeting so I did not ask 
those details. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now Mr Mabaso approaches you in that 
10 
meeting.  So he – he was not aware that you were going to 
be in this meeting on the morning of the 11t h December of 
2015?  Is that right? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  In my recollection because I never 
informed him about that meeting.  I never informed Mr 
Whitley because I was meeting him for the first time.  The 
only person that I informed was Mr Bobat. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Was Mr? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Mr Bobat. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Bobat okay. 
20 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So Mr Mabaso arrives at this meeting in 
the – which is in the boardroom of a businessman.  How is 
this businessman associated with Mr Mabaso? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  No, no, no association at all. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 196 of 259 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So Mr Mabaso arrives that... is this a 
surprised event, Mr Mabaso just pitches up out of nowhere, 
he slips you out of nowhere?  I am just trying to understand 
how that happens. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes, to me because I did not inform him. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Okay. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  And I did not inform him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did... so you say you did not inform him or 
you did inform him? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I did not.  Chairperson, I did not inform 
10 
him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did not inform him? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So he arrives there and he has Mr 
Whitley with him.  Is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes. 
ADV 
HULLEY 
SC: 
 
And 
Mr 
Whitley 
comes 
there 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sorry, Mr Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And Mr Whitley has his CV with him? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And ...[intervenes]  
MR VAN ROOYEN:  In fact... Chair, let me just indicate.  Mr 
Mabaso indicated that:  “I am aware that you may be as a 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 197 of 259 
 
new president, you may be making some support in your 
office.  So I have someone that I want you to engage with.  
Maybe you might consider him to be part of your team”. 
CHAIRPERSON:  This is now in a telephone conversation 
with you? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  No, no, no.  This is at Melrose Arch in 
the meeting that I had. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I think one of the points that Mr Hulley 
10 
was trying to establish is how Mr Mabaso came to know that 
you were at this boardroom? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I am not sure.  I would be lying Chair.  I 
do not know how did he come to know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you had heard... you had spoken to Mr 
Mabaso when he told you that there is somebody that you 
might to be part of your team.  Is that right?  You had spoken 
to Mr Mabaso before he came to the boardroom.  Is that 
right? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  No, no, no.  I am referring to my 
20 
engagement with Mr Mabaso at that boardroom. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So prior to him coming to the boardroom, 
you... he had... the two of you had not spoken? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 198 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  No, not at all.  Not at all Chair.  Not at 
all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not that ...[intervenes]  
MR VAN ROOYEN:  The only person that I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  ...the previous day? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  The only person that I spoke to is Mr 
Bobat. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  The previous day. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you invited Mr Bobat to this meeting? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes.  No, mister ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  For breakfast, ja. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I said he can come to where he was... or 
no, the way to the office. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Because I was going to Pretoria from 
there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
20 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So at that stage, Mr Bobat knew that you 
might be needing somebody else when you told him 
...[intervenes]  
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes, yes.  I told Mr Bobat that there is a 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 199 of 259 
 
need for me to have a chief of staff because he cannot run 
with the affairs of a junior staff. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.   
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you, Mr Chair.  Now, when Mr 
Whitley 
arrives 
there 
together 
with 
Mr 
Mabaso, 
if 
I 
understand correctly, Mr Mabaso says to you when he 
introduces Mr Whitley, he says to you that Mr Whitley is 
looking for work and he may be an asset to... in government.  
Do I understand that correctly? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So the way in which you introduce him, 
suggests that he is looking for work and may be an asset in 
government.  It seems to imply that he is unemployed at that 
point in time. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes.  No, that is the impression that I 
was left with too. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So when he arrives there with his CV, 
armed with his CV and apparently down on his luck out of a 
job, you have a meeting with him that lasts for, if I 
understood correctly, you said it was a very brief meeting, 
20 
which was, in fact, less than twenty minutes or so. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes, less than thirty... twenty to thirty 
minutes because I had to go through his CV and then also let 
him know... I mean, just to check his profile too.  And that is 
what I did in that meeting. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 200 of 259 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And at the end of that, you then appoint a 
person whom you understood was actually unemployed at 
that point in time.  Do I understand that correctly? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes, but the person that I have also 
checked whether his profile is okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sure.  These two positions... let us just 
consider these two positions.  You have appointed a person 
as your special advisor, that is Mr Bobat and he reported the 
following day a person who happens to be your chief of staff.  
That is Mr Whitley.  What salaries do you offer them? 
10 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  The issue of their salary Chairperson is 
not necessarily my... could be... is dealt with through the 
provision. 
 
Because remember, there is a cabinet guidance on how 
these people should be remunerated and it is given effect 
through the process of DPSC and that process in the main, 
is an administrative process. 
 
And that is why the DG will then throw his other HR 
streams will come and that will be determined in the contract 
to that was going to be finalised between myself and them. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  But you certainly understand that these 
positions entail or the salary that would have accompany 
these position would be in the excess of a million rand? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  You understood that? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 201 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes, I understood that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What does a chief of staff do? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  He is the chief of staff in the office.  He, 
obviously, looks at my accommodation things.  He looks at 
HR issues within the staff of the minister.   
 
He looks into the liaison between the minister’s office 
and obviously stakeholders.  It is a long list of things that he 
does. 
 
But in the main, the chief of staff’s responsibility is to 
make sure that... you can say you are a human capital 
10 
related issues within the office of the executive he is taking 
care of including that of the executive. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you, Mr Chair.  Now, I want to 
wrap up those issues shortly.  I want to just deal with one of 
the complaints that had been raised in relation to the 
appointment of the special advisor and the chief of staff and 
that relates to the process governed by 12A. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe before you do that Mr Hulley 
because I think that is the procedural or issues or issue 
20 
relating to process.   
 
Again, Mr Van Rooyen, I am concerned about the 
minister meeting somebody that they do not know.  Just 
having a meeting of about twenty to thirty minutes, looking at 
his CV only and offering that person a job as his or her chief 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 202 of 259 
 
of staff without taking anything at all about this person.   
 
It, to me, the speed with which you made these 
appointments or you offered jobs to these two people or the 
manner in which...  
 
The way in which you went about it is of concern 
because I would have thought that with regard to Mr Bobat, 
that somebody that is going to be a special advisor to a 
minister and particularly, minister of finance. 
 
I would have thought that it should be somebody in 
respect of you doing proper background checks have been 
10 
made, not just in terms of knowing the job and experience 
but also the type of person that you are taking.   
 
And so in regard to both of them, it is people that, it 
seems to me... well, certainly in regard to Mr Whitley, it is 
somebody that you do not know.  Somebody that you do not 
know. 
 
With regard to Mr Bobat, it is somebody you know 
slightly, I think.  You met him once briefly at a restaurant six 
years ago.  You talked to him on the phone once or twice and 
then you invite him to your swearing-in-ceremony and you 
20 
offer him a job. 
 
So it just seems to that that is not what one would 
expect a minister to do in appointing people to such 
important positions.   
 
I say these things so that you know what is going on in 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 203 of 259 
 
my mind.  You have already addressed them in some way but 
I am just giving you a chance in relation to Mr Whitley to say 
whatever you might wish to say about this concern that I 
have. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Chair, your concern will... is my concern 
and will forever be my concern.  But from where I am seated, 
I think I did what I could do to satisfy myself about the 
profile of the two individuals. 
 
And I know, and that is why I am taking comfort from, 
that this process was not complete.  This was just an 
10 
identification process, subjecting them to a more robust 
process 
of 
vetting 
them 
and 
also 
verifying 
their 
qualifications. 
 
But also, it could have been any other person because 
what impressed me is what was in their CV’s.  And usually 
when I am giving a chance to lead because I can use my 
experience when I was the executive major. 
 
I mean, I appointed same position.  My advisor and my 
chief of staff, these are people that I did not know but 
because of their... what was contained in their CV’s, I gave 
20 
them a chance, you know.  And they never disappointed. 
 
But I am not saying there are no risk attached to my 
approval.  But I fully agree with you that you are concerned.  
It is my concern too.  And that is why I did whatever that I 
did. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 204 of 259 
 
 
But because of limitation of capacity on my side, I might 
have not done it thoroughly.  But also Chair, remember I was 
trying to also to add value into a very turbulent situation.   
 
And I had also relied on the process that was going to 
follow, me just to confirm if I had the right people.  So 
ideally, 
according 
to 
the 
section 
that 
has 
just 
been 
mentioned 12A. 
 
They were going to be subjected to that particular 
process and definitely that was going to give me the results 
of my determination and it did that because when went to 
10 
COGTA, I received those reasons, you know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Hulley. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you, Mr Chair.  Just to move onto 
the 12A, the Section 12A process.  My reading of your 
affidavit, correct me if I am wrong.   
 
My reading of your affidavit was that as far as you were 
concerned, you are entitled to appoint both Mr Bobat, as well 
as, Mr Whitley and it was the responsibility of the Director 
General, who was Mr Fuzile, to ensure that the appointment 
was made.  
20 
 
So he did not have any say in it and once you had made 
up your mind that these were the people that have to be 
appointed, it simple had to be implemented.  Do I understand 
that correctly? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I... understand that correctly Chair but 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 205 of 259 
 
that is the wrong interpretation of the provision of the Public 
Service Act.  The Public Service Act is clear.  That is on my 
shoulder.  I am the minister.   
 
So identification is subjected to that process of the 
contract vetting.  And who helps me in that regard?  It is the 
DG. 
 
I cannot be going to lower departments when I have the 
accounting officer who is my chief advisor.  I think, now Mr 
Fuzile according to his role, because he is my chief advisor. 
 
So in terms of giving that affect, it is not me as the 
10 
minister who will run around and check but definitely, the 
buck stops with me. 
 
There was no way in which he was going to affect 
those... the appointments or any accounting officers, even 
the COGTA if the findings were otherwise. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Let us forget about COGTA for the time.  
Let us just focus on what happens at National Treasury or... 
and as in your position as the Minister of Finance.  Once you 
decide that you are going to appoint your Special Advisor, Mr 
Bobat and your Chief of Staff, Mr Whitley.  My reading of 
20 
your affidavit is that that was final.  
 
It had to be implemented.  There was no need to go... to 
first seek out the security clearance.  That was my reading of 
your affidavit but correct me if I am wrong. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  You know English, Chair, it can be very, 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 206 of 259 
 
very tricky at times.  Where exactly in my affidavit do you 
read that?  Because Chairperson, as I have explained.  I was 
guided by the provisions of the Public Service Act, Section 
12A. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you say if that was his reading, you say 
that reading is wrong of your affidavit? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Extremely wrong. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Extremely wrong Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you.  Now... just... if you turn with 
me page to 128 of the... of your statement.   
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I found it. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So, I want you to turn... if you look at 
paragraph 38 in that... on that particular page, you say there 
roughly... if you read from about line 12 from the bottom: 
“Mr 
Fuzile 
derides 
with 
cynical 
contempt 
my 
decision...” 
 
Have you got that? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I am trying to find that. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Count about one... twelve lines from the 
bottom. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  In fact, it is eleven lines. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes, yes. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 207 of 259 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   
“Mr Fuzile, you say, derives with cynical contempt my 
decision to appoint a special advisor and the chief of 
staff to my office, even suggestion that I had acted 
illegally in making these appointments because, 
according to him, I was not entitled to do so without 
his signature.   
His understanding of the powers of the minister is to 
appoint the special advisor and the chief of staff is 
unimpressive for someone who has paraded himself 
10 
as a paragon of virtue and professionalism.   
Simply put, I made the appointment as I was entitled 
to do.  His job as the accounting officer was to 
ensure 
that 
my 
decision 
to 
appoint 
them 
was 
implemented.  I refer specifically to Section 12A of 
the Public Service Act 1994 which makes it clear that 
the power to appoint special advisors lies with the 
relevant executive authority. 
And in case of a national department, the executive 
authority 
is 
the 
minister 
responsible 
for 
the 
20 
department...” 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  What about that?  
ADV HULLEY SC:  That was my understanding. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Yes, that is the correct understanding. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now you will say that it was your job to 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 208 of 259 
 
make the appointment and his job to ensure that he simple 
provided 
his 
signature 
to 
that... 
to 
ensure 
that 
the 
appointment was made.  That is why I read it. 
ADV MATHIPA:  With respect Chair.  This is not what is 
written here. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
ADV MATHIPA:  It is not what he has just read. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I think Mr Hulley, you must put to the 
witness what your understanding is of what you have just 
10 
read or what has... depending on what point you want to 
make. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Well, what I make of it is that according 
to Mr Van Rooyen, he was the one that was entitled to make 
the appointment, which he had done, and it was Mr Fuzile’s 
job as the Accounting Officer to ensure that “my decision to 
appoint them was implemented...”  And he... so, in order to 
do that, he simple had to sign off. 
ADV MATHIPA:  No, ...[indistinct] [mic not switched on]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Switch on your mic, ja. 
20 
ADV MATHIPA:  That too is incorrect.  There is nothing 
about simple sign. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
ADV MATHIPA:  He never said in that affidavit that he had to 
simple sign. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 209 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MATHIPA:  Why is... he must put it... put the correct 
version of what is in the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, Mr Hulley. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Perhaps I misunderstand Mr Chair but “I 
was not entitled to do so without his signature”.  That is what 
he says. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry?  Just read again Mr Hulley. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  He says, if we go back to the top where I 
was reading from.  Mr Fuzile there writes ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, I think just reads where there is 
mention of signature? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  He says in the next sentence: 
“I was not entitled to do so without his signature...” 
 
That is what the... that is what is being put.  Or rather, 
that is what he is attributing to mister... sorry, to Mr Fuzile. 
 
He then goes on to say his understanding ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on one second. 
“Mr Fuzile derides with cynical content my decision to 
appoint a special advisor and the chief of staff to my 
20 
office, even suggesting that I had acted illegally in 
making these appointments because, according to 
him, 
I 
was 
not 
entitled 
to 
do 
so 
without 
his 
signature...” 
 
So what is the point you make about the signature? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 210 of 259 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  You want to put to the witness? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Well, let me break it up into two Mr 
Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  If I understand you correctly Mr Van 
Rooyen.  You say that you and you alone were entitled to 
make the appointment.  Would that be fair? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  That is fair. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And you are saying that Mr Fuzile’s 
10 
responsibility was simply to ensure that it had happened as 
the accounting officer.  Is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  No, that is not correct.  You are not 
reading what I have written here.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, let me put this.  Maybe it is not about 
the signature Mr Van Rooyen.  In this... I think a few lines 
below that, you say: 
“Simple put.  I made the appointments as I was 
entitled to do so.  His job as the Accounting Officer 
was to ensure that my decision to appoint them was 
20 
implemented...” 
 
I guess if I am to give you my understanding of what Mr 
Hulley is suggesting, is that you are saying, once you had 
made the appointment, Mr Fuzile as the Accounting Officer, 
his job was to make sure that that... that your decision was 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 211 of 259 
 
implemented, in namely, they were appointed and so on. 
 
That is my understanding of what Mr Hulley seeks to 
establish from you.  What do you say to that? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Chair, let me explain the process.  I 
identify but as I identify, a process is not complete.  What is 
going to complete the process?  Is to subject, firstly, through 
the help of Mr Fuzile, I will sign the contract with them 
because it was simple administrative their part. 
 
Through the help of Mr Fuzile, they would have to be 
subjected to vetting.  Through the help of Mr Fuzile, their 
10 
qualifications and background checks must be completed.  
 
So that is what I meant by implementing because I was 
not going to do that on my own.  Mine was just to identify.  
And then if there was going to be an issue about any of the 
two, then it was going to come back to me again.  Identify 
other people.  That is what I mean Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Hulley. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you, Mr Chair.  Perhaps I am 
misunderstanding 
but 
what 
do 
you 
understand 
about 
appointment?  What does that mean according to your 
20 
understanding? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Appointment, it means the whole 
process that I have outlined.  It means, identifying someone 
and obviously, taking that particular person through a certain 
process to confirm his suitability for the position that you 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 212 of 259 
 
have identified him or her for. 
 
And 
then 
the... 
that 
is 
the 
complete 
process 
of 
appointment.  Maybe should I have explained it in that 
fashion in my response. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  If we can move on then.  Once again, my 
understanding, 
having 
read 
through 
your 
affidavit. 
 
I 
understood that you were of the view that there was no need 
to go through a vetting process. 
 
Because, if I understood correctly, you were saying the 
10 
vetting process is something that takes... and the security 
clearance is something that takes a long time.   
 
And you suggested that because of the urgency of the 
matter, the appointment had to take place immediately but 
the vetting and the security clearance was something that 
could take place afterwards. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is very clear Chair that you do not 
appoint someone who... without the vetting.  That is the aim.  
That provision is very clear.   
 
But practically, what is happening is that people get 
20 
appointed and some of them, they are not even vetted for a 
very long time because of challenges that at our state 
security agency is having. 
 
I can just give you a recent example which is relevant 
also to National Treasury.  Are you aware that the DG of 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 213 of 259 
 
National Treasury now, he is a DG with a criminal record? 
CHAIRPERSON:  [No audible reply]  
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I mean, I know your obsession about the 
integrity and all of that.  This is what is happening.  The DG, 
Mr Mogajane, as we speak, is having a criminal record of 
driving... I think it was related to driving, reckless driving, 
something of that kind. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, what... what part of what you said in 
your affidavit is that there are other ministers who appoints 
special advisors, maybe other staff, I am not sure, also 
10 
pending them obtaining security clearance because you said 
there used to be a backlog with the state security agencies. 
 
So people were not going to wait until that process was 
finalised.  So people would start working, pending the 
outcome of this state security clearance.   
 
That is part of what I read in your papers.  Well, I 
certainly know that when the Commission started, we 
experienced ourselves lots of delays with security clearance 
for investigators and so on. 
 
Because with the state security agency, it is a matter 
20 
that we dealt with publicly at the time to say the security... 
the state security agency was taking long to finish the 
process. 
 
So that part, it is something which you have said and I 
did not understand Mr Fuzile to raise any issue about the 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 214 of 259 
 
fact that there would be some delays with the state security 
agency.   
MR VAN ROOYEN:  No, Chair.  Mr Fuzile came here and 
then lied of what is happening practically. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.  I am saying.  I do not 
remember that he challenged that part of what you say, 
namely, there would be delays in getting security clearance 
from the state security agency.  That part, I do not remember 
that he challenged that part. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  No, he did Chair.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  He did? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I think he only changed when I supplied 
my answering affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  He raised the issue of getting them 
doing duties ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  ...without security clearance.  That is 
why I am saying Chair.  You know, it pains me to see people 
taking advantage of the Commission because Mr Fuzile 
20 
literally did that. 
 
He understands exactly the challenges that we are 
facing in government.  He understands exactly that people 
are working there without being vetted. 
 
But still he comes here and say people were allowed to 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 215 of 259 
 
work without being vetted and contradicting himself in the 
process because he said they were not vetted, they were not 
entitled 
to 
have 
so-called 
restricted 
or 
confidential 
documents. 
 
But he gave those documents to them, you know.  So.  
But I am not there Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  I think, let us focus on the question 
posed here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  Of vetting, you know.  That vetting is 
still a problem and I do not think it is solved as we speak.  
And of course, I know some appointments had to be reversed 
after people have worked in the department for some years. 
 
Some people even exited the department without having 
them vetted.  Their terms of office come to an end without 
being vetted but I am not sure since I left if that particular 
problem has been addressed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.  Mr Hulley. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  We ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  The ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I have gone beyond half-past four.  Shall 
we try and finish by quarter to five? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you, Mr Chair.  The... I am just 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 216 of 259 
 
going to try and run through some of the other themes before 
I finalise it and wrap it up with one final proposition, pulling 
it all together Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  There was a meeting with the staff on the 
11t h of December of 2015.  That is with the senior staff.  You 
will recall that meeting.  It took place at approximately 
quarter past eleven.  Is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I cannot recall the exact time, Chair, 
but definitely the day is correct. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now there was a question about – 
during the course of that meeting there was a question 
about whether you, according to Mr Fuzile, he had 
indicated it appeared to him that you did not really know 
Mr Bobat and you got the different roles reversed.  You 
suggested that Mr Bobat would be the Chief of Staff and 
that Mr Whitley would be special adviser.  Do you recall 
the meeting? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   At which meeting because he seems 
to be confusing these meetings.  At which meeting?  Which 
20 
meeting are you referring to, through you, Chair? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   That was a meeting where you came to 
introduce Mr Bobat and Mr Whitley.  Do you recall the 
meeting?  This takes place at National Treasury now. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I do not recall that meeting because 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 217 of 259 
 
there was no such a meeting.  Let me explain what 
happened.  On the 10 t h, Chair, I invited through the 
Presidency Mr Bobat and then that was during my swearing 
in and then I helped – you know it was – I am shocked by 
this 360 degree about turn of Mr Fuzile’s attitude.  I am 
shocked but I am not surprised because all this political.   
 
I explained to Mr Fuzile that look, I have identified 
this guy to come in and help us, my adviser, please start 
the process, if possible let us finalise the contract so as he 
can then start doing certain things but start the process 
10 
with DPSC or as you know it and he agreed.  That was on 
the 10th  And then he agreed and he never questioned 
anything,  He never even said maybe I am wrong or I am 
right, you know, he just agreed that I would give effect to 
it, but cordially, there was no – this arrogance and you 
know, display of disrespect.   
No, there was no such, the respect was mutual and 
was very professional and I had all the confidence that I 
am having one of the best DGs, I mean to be produced by 
our system, unaware of this other  
20 
side that I never knew, you know?   
 
So this happened on the 10 t h and the 11 t h the Bobat 
came in after my engagement with him and our client 
meeting and that is when I introduced Mr Bobat – Mr 
Whitley to the DG, I have identified this other person of 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 218 of 259 
 
coming in as 1.03.14 he can help me with the office and 
other things, you know, while I am still settling, you know?  
 
So it is not true that I only introduced Mr Bobat on 
the 11 t h.  Mr Bobat was introduced to the DG, the former 
DG on the 10 t h.  It was only Mr Whitley who was introduced 
on the 11 t h. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   No, I think you are actually missing the 
point, there is a meeting with a senior management at the 
National Treasury which includes most of the DDGs, the 
Deputy Director Generals.  Now the question is not whether 
10 
you were introducing Mr Bobat to Mr Fuzile, you are 
introducing Mr Bobat and Mr Whitley to the other people 
that were at the meeting. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Oh ja, no, you are right.  If that is 
what you wanted me to answer, I missed the point. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay.  Now during the course of that 
meeting it seems that according to – certainly according to 
Mr Fuzile and Mr Mogajane they both state that you did not 
seem to – you were uncertain of the identities of these two 
people.  In respect of Mr Fuzile he says that you mixed up 
20 
the different roles that they were going to be playing and in 
respect of Mr Mogajane he says that you kept saying uh, 
uh, uh, to use his language, you could not get the name of 
Mr Bobat when you tried to mention his name. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   And God help us all.  Chair, what are 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 219 of 259 
 
you saying – maybe I should check what is the leader of 
evidence saying about Mrs Macanda? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, do you want to repeat your 
question, Mr Hulley? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   The long and the short of it, Mr van 
Rooyen, is that you did not seem to know these two 
people, you did not know which role they were going to 
play and in some instances, you did not seem to know their 
names. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   That is not true. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And in fact, Mr Whitley himself says 
that you seemed to have mispronounced – he also 
remembers something to that effect, in his case he says 
you seemed to have mispronounced their names. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, that is not true, the only time that 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry …[intervenes] 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Mr Whitley. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Does he not specify – does he not say 
Mr van Rooyen seems to have mispronounced Mr Bobat’s 
20 
name or …[intervenes] 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Sorry, Mr Bobat’s name.  Sorry, I said 
their names. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   It is Mr Bobat’s name specifically.  
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 220 of 259 
 
Pardon me, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did see that in Mr Whitley’s affidavit or 
statement? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Sorry, Chair, for interjecting, no, I did 
see that.  The reality of the matter is that, you know, I have 
been 
addressing 
Mr 
Bobat 
as 
Mo 
in 
our 
previous 
communication. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As who? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Mo. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mo, for Mohamed? 
10 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Abbreviating Mohamed, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mohamed, oh, okay. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes.  So I think the only time – and I 
think he did not even – not only in that meeting, why he 
want a whole name to be cited, he will – that is a Minister, 
my full name is Mohamed, not Mo, you know?  So it is just 
to make sure that people do not maybe stick just to Mo 
without understanding that he is Mohamed.  I think that is 
the only correction that I can – that I know he used to 
effect in our engagements with various stakeholders, you 
20 
know?  So it is not like I did not know his surname, I did 
not know his name, it is just that I was referring to him in 
our previous engagement as Mo, you know?  Okay, 
because that is how the Mohameds that relate to me, I call 
them, you know? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 221 of 259 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   But is it correct that on the 10 
December of 2015 at the swearing in ceremony when you 
met with Mr Bobat he had indicated to you that he was 
trying to get hold of you and he could not get through, is 
that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, that is not correct.  That is not 
correct.  Chairman, may I please – because there is 
something 
that 
was 
raised 
about 
the 
evidence 
corroborating, which is not true. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja.  Just deal with it. 
10 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   If you look into the evidence of both 
the former DG and the current DG and the lady, Ms 
Macanda, on that matter, Ms Macanda does not agree with 
them, she does not agree with them.  So it is not true that 
she corroborated them.  It is not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On the issue of whether …[intervenes] 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   So you can see this is just a story that 
was – yes, that went wrong.  You know? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are now referring to Mr Fuzile’s 
evidence and Mr – and current DG’s evidence that you got 
20 
the roles of the two wrong. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   The names. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or the names wrong.  Okay. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   But also, the evidence of Ms 
Macanda. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 222 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja and you are saying Ms Macanda’s 
evidence does not corroborate what they say? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Not at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, okay.  Mr Hulley? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chairman.   Then I just 
want to deal with you about the email that was sent to – 
that was sent to Mr Wood.  I just want to understand the 
context.  You were aware that that email as a fact had 
been sent to Mr Wood.  I am talking now about the email 
that had been sent by Mr Bobat to Mr Wood and Mr Essa. 
10 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   What was the email all about, if I may 
ask? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Well, let us just look at the bundle. If 
you can just bear with me?  The email is at page 33 of 
bundle PA, Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want to say what it was about 
that might …[intervenes] 
ADV HULLEY SC:   This is the email that attached the very 
sensitive – or according to Mr Fuzile, attached the very 
sensitive document that was supposed to go off to cabinet. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   If you want to see it, Mr van Rooyen, we 
can let you see it first but if you are happy to deal with it 
…[intervenes] 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, I am happy, I am happy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 223 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   What was the specific question about 
the email? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   You were aware that that email had in 
fact gone off, if I understood correctly. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, I must indicate, Chair, maybe I 
should 
give 
a 
background 
of 
how 
these 
things 
are 
processed.  I think there was a submission that was 
required of me as a Minister.  So I then said to the DG 
please share this information with us so as I can enrich. 
CHAIRPERSON:   With whom? 
10 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   With myself so that I can reach 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, you asked the DG to share the 
information with you? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   But, of course, it will be through my 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Your Chief of Staff. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   My Chief of Staff. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   You know, because they had to work 
on – I think it was a speech. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Or my submission, a presentation to 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 224 of 259 
 
parliament, I am not sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR 
VAN 
ROOYEN: 
 
 
So 
usually 
what 
happens, 
if 
documents are not classified – but that document was not 
classified, there is nothing that stops me or even the DG to 
solicit input from expert to enrich that document and it is 
not true what the DG said to this Commission that National 
Treasury does not consult stakeholders.  No, it is wrong, in 
fact it is even wrong in terms of the legislation that are 
governing 
at 
National 
Treasury 
as 
well 
as 
other 
10 
departments of government.  Because we rely on inputs 
from stakeholders to come to determinations.  We do not 
operate from a vacuum, you know?  And I can cite example 
of problems that have been championed by National 
Treasury that clearly demonstrate that a National Treasury 
engage 
stakeholders, 
even 
the 
Minister. 
 
Engage 
stakeholders 
before 
they 
make 
submissions, 
even 
themselves.  Before they come to parliament in some 
cases, they share information with stakeholders even 
before they come to us to present – when I was still in the 
20 
finance committee – to present and they will tell us, this is 
the inputs that we have solicited, the stakeholders.  So it 
is not correct that National Treasury does not engage 
stakeholders, it is a wrong impression of our democratic 
government. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 225 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it might be a question of at what 
stage what process happens.  I cannot imagine that in a 
government department or any government department the 
position would be.  As long as a document is not marked or 
is not classified as top secret or is not classified you can 
share it with anybody.  I do not imagine that that would be 
correct.  Is that what you are suggesting?  That as long as 
it is not classified it can be shared with anybody outside of 
the department? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Well, Chair, if there is an emphasis of 
10 
not sharing then it will be indicated either through the 
communication channels or either through whatever means 
but ideally what is preferred in government and what is 
promoted, is marking this document as they originate, you 
know?  You do not release a document where you do not 
have an intention of sharing it and you do not mark it, you 
must mark that document.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, what about this because this is 
what I would think.  I would think that within a department 
the people who work there may have an idea that even 
20 
when a document has not yet been marked or classified it 
must still remain within the department and then there may 
be certain people within the department who may have 
authority to say we can share it with so and so but not with 
so and so, specific people and then you might come to a 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 226 of 259 
 
stage where it is classified, then at that stage you say you 
share it with nobody except maybe cabinet, minister, 
deputy minister only.  So I suspect that there must be 
stages of any document.  Would it not be like that to say 
the DG might decide, I can share it with the DG of another 
department but I am not going to share it with my brother 
who works in the private sector even if he is my brother 
because of the content of the document. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   In that situation I think the DG will 
notify the other DG that this is between the two of us 
10 
because it is not marked because if it is marked then it 
gives clear guidance on the word go from any person who 
lay his hands on that document that this is not for public 
consumption, you know?  But in this case, we have a DG 
who did not even indicate in the email that no, this 
document, this information that I am sharing should not be 
– he should not solicit input from any other person besides 
internal, you know?  
 
But also, you know, what is interesting in the 
submission of Mr Fuzile, he claims that people were not 
20 
vetted and they were not fit and proper but he went on 
without being worried of sharing what her termed a 
confidential document.  In fact, he does not even say it is 
confidential, he says top secret, you know?  So really, 
Chair …[intervenes] 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 227 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But he says – he says and you would 
have heard him because he was here when he said this, he 
said the minister had arrived with these two people, 
special 
adviser 
and 
Chief 
of 
Staff 
and 
now 
I 
am 
paraphrasing what he said, as I understood it, whether we 
liked or not we had to work with them.   So I had to work 
with them pending whatever process.  That was my 
understanding of the point he was making. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Which is wrong, Chair, because a DG 
– well, I am not going to separate DG of National Treasury 
10 
and other DGs, a DG is a DG in government.  A DG is a 
chief adviser of the minister.  There is no way – not unless 
he was there to set me up, you know, and something that I 
was not aware of because if it was any of that, he could 
have said to me - you know, at some stage I even called Mr 
Fuzile my comrade because I think he was so good in 
terms of deceiving me in terms of who he is, you know, 
because I called him my comrade, so – but that is neither 
here nor there, the key issue here is that as an accounting 
officer, you know, immediately that he has found that the 
20 
minister did something wrong, I mean, you should be 
worried because then you did not do your work because 
your work is to advise the minister.  You cannot come and 
use this thing of a political cloud as a reason for allowing 
the minister to do wrong thing, then National Treasury was 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 228 of 259 
 
in trouble.  That National Treasury was in trouble there, 
Chairperson.  If really that was this attitude. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But, of course, Mr van Rooyen, Mr 
Hulley referred us to paragraph 38 of your statement where 
you make it quite clear that his job was to implement your 
decision.  That does not seem to me to reflect an attitude 
of flexibility on your part in regard to this point, it appears 
that your position was, DG, you implement, I have made 
the decision, you implement.  That is the impression I get. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I am sorry, Chair, you still have that 
10 
impression even if I went to town to explain what I meant 
by implementing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, I accept that, you explained, 
but I am just saying as you make the point that you have 
just made namely, he should have come to you if he 
thought the minister had done something wrong.  I am just 
saying let us remember that there is this point that you 
made but I am not forgetting the explanation you gave 
earlier.   
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Maybe I made a mistake by not 
20 
indicating that in my discussions with him, this what I 
emphasised 
on, 
please 
to 
complete 
the 
process 
or 
implementation, take these people through this process.  It 
is not implementation of, you know, a military command. 
No, it does not work like that, Chair, because if I am going 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 229 of 259 
 
to work in a department without the support of the DG, the 
department will collapse and I am not thumb sucking here, 
Chair, I have sour relationships between ministers and DGs 
collapsing 
in 
departments, 
you 
know, 
or 
holding 
an 
important progress of the department at ransom, you 
know?  So I had a clear understanding of how I should 
relate to this person that I looked at as my comrade, you 
know? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Mr Hulley? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chair, we are almost 
10 
finished.  If we can just make one or two additional points 
just to confirm.  According to Mr Whitley, you – the meeting 
that took place on the morning of the 11  December of 2015 
when you invited him to join as the Chief of Staff, Mr Essa 
was present at that meeting as well as Mr Eric Woods.  
Now you have confirmed Mr Woods’ presence.  Is it correct 
that Mr Essa was also present on that occasion? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, I do not remember Mr Essa, I 
remember having a quick engagement with Mr Woods as he 
was introduced to me by Mohamed.  I do not remember 
20 
seeing Mr – because, remember, I did not have a meeting 
with these gentlemen, I had a meeting with Mr Bashiri and 
then there was Malcolm coming, but the only person 
otherwise I was expecting to come and maybe to talk to me 
before we go to Pretoria it was Mr Bobat.  
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 230 of 259 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Mr Chair, there is some very important 
question that has arisen that has been drawn to my 
attention.  I need to take an instruction on it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   It is quite important. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And I would like to chat with my junior 
as well as Mr Fuzile’s …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I have some questions for Mr van 
Rooyen.  I do not know whether while I ask him some 
10 
questions …[intervenes] 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Not at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then give you that chance or not. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   If I can do it while you are busy asking 
questions? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.  Mr van Rooyen, if I 
recall correctly, the Public Protector’s report, that is Ms 
Thuli Madonsela’s report, seemed to suggest that prior to 
20 
you appointment as Minister of Finance you – or the cell 
phone records suggested that you had been in the vicinity 
of the Gupta residence of Saxonwold quite a number of 
times, is that correct? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   That is correct, Chair. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 231 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   And that is what I confirm also in my 
statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  No, I ask that because earlier 
on I understood you to say you were only able to remember 
that you met Mr Tony Gupta, that is Rajesh Gupta, at the 
office when he popped in and on the 8 December which 
seemed to suggest to me that you might have met with him 
only twice before your appointment.  So you are saying 
yes, you were in the vicinity of the Gupta residence a 
10 
number of times prior to your appointment, is that correct?  
Or in the residence, I just want you to clarify. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes in the residence, Chair, but what I 
have said is – because I think the question was any phone 
call. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   That happened between the two 
dates. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, oh, okay, we were talking about 
[inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
20 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   So then what I said here – what I 
responded to is that I do not remember of any. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Besides those two. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 232 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   And that does not imply that there was 
no any phone calls but as I have responded in my 
statement, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   It went beyond just what is recorded 
in the Public Protector report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   There were other meetings even 
beyond that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But are you talking now about the period 
prior to your appointment or are you including after your 
appointment?  Are you saying …[intervenes] 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, I am talking after my appointment 
when I say even beyond. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, alright. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But before your appointment, how many 
times did you – would you say you may have visited the 
20 
Gupta residence? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Chair, I will be lying, I cannot 
remember from the top of my head. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would it be fair to say many times or 
several times?  Would that be fair or would that not be 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 233 of 259 
 
fair?  I just want to get a picture. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   You see, that qualification, Chair, is 
giving me a problem, but definitely it was not like a 
frequent thing, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   It was not like a frequent  - not unless 
there is something that needed me to …[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   …needing their support but it was not 
like, you know …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe like five times, four times? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, I really cannot remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You cannot say. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I cannot say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But a number of times? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Ja, a number of times.  Okay, alright.  
Whenever you went there did you always meet with Mr 
Tony Gupta or did you meet other members of the Gupta 
family? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, at some stage he introduced me 
20 
to some members of their companies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Because remember, I had to work with 
their companies to finalise sponsorships and all that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 234 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you ever meet Mr Ajay Gupta? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, no, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You never met him. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I never met him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And Mr Atul Gupta, did you ever meet 
him? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, no, I have never met Atul Gupta. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So would it be fair to say the only 
member of the Gupta family that you met was Mr Tony 
10 
Gupta? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   It was Tony, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Is it correct that you only met Mr 
Tony Gupta for the first time when he came into your office 
at Luthuli House as you indicated? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you said that was in October 2015. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, October 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  You could not remember the date 
earlier on and I do not expect you necessarily to remember 
20 
it now but are you able to say maybe towards the end of 
October or early October or mid-October? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You cannot say. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I am unable to say. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 235 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine but it was October. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Now the matters that you 
discussed 
with him, were they confined to how his 
companies or their companies or he could assist your 
members or did you discuss other businesses or other 
issues or even political issues? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Chair, part of my mandate besides 
just looking for financial assistance or assistance in kind is 
also to ensure that I assist businesses of military veterans 
10 
who have partnership with other businesses.   
 
So I know one of the things that I was discussing 
with him was how to support some of our military veterans’ 
companies.  In fact, it went to an extent of just on the brink 
of sealing a deal of some of our guys in all the nine 
provinces, distributing, getting their companies distributing 
their 
publication. 
 
Because 
remember, 
they 
had 
a 
publication and of course they were going to be empowered 
with vehicles and all that. 
 
But that will be as a start-up for them to run their 
20 
own distribution entities.  So we discuss also options of 
supporting companies of military veterans. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You know, Mr Duduzane Zuma said when 
he testified before me that Tony Gupta is his big friend.  
Was Mr Duduzane Zuma with Mr Tony Gupta at any of the 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 236 of 259 
 
stages when you met with Mr Tony Gupta? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, no, no, at no stage did I meet 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was not there. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I meet Duduzane not with Tony Gupta, 
I meet Duduzane …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, separately. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Ja, it is other platforms. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And on the 8 December, that is now the 
day on which you were to meet with the former President in 
the evening, as I understand your position, you said you 
went to the Gupta residence, is that right? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Yes, I wanted to have a session 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You wanted to …[intervenes] 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   If I remember well, Chair, I had a 
pressure from certain members …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry/ 
20 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I had pressure from certain members 
of assistance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   So I wanted to check if I can be 
assisted – to asset, yes. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 237 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  But did you say you actually did 
not meet him even though you did go to the residence, 
Gupta residence? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, it never happened.  
CHAIRPERSON:   I never happened. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Because he was held up in a meeting.  
I think I waited for some time there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Do you remember whether it was in 
the morning on the 8 t h when you went there or in the 
afternoon? 
10 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I might be midday or just after lunch. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Around that time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So ultimately that whole day you did not 
meet him. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I mean, after that failed meeting then 
20 
I …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and did he speak to you at some 
stage to say I heard that you came to see me but you had 
to leave without seeing me.  Did he phone you to talk 
about that? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 238 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Look, Chair, I cannot remember 
exactly but I think it would be obvious that when – if I 
happened to meet him after. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I might have raised that.  But I cannot 
clearly remember if I did it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  But you say nobody – or rather, 
you say he never spoke to you about your possible 
appointment as Minister of Finance? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, no, not at all, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   He never discussed that? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Not at all, he never – remember, even 
when I was there I was not even aware. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   That I will be assigned. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   To be executive. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I was still, I mean, in that darkness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Of what is exactly going to happen, 
you know? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes.  Let me – I will come back 
to that, with regard to Mr Mabaso, how long had you known 
Mr Mabaso by the time he introduced Mr Whitley to you? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 239 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I think when Minister Zwane started 
as a Minister because I was already in Parliament, so – 
and I was the Whip of Economic Transformation Cluster, 
and the Committee of Minerals and Energy in terms of our 
study group and Regiment it falls even currently still like 
that it falls under that cluster that I was the Whip of, so of 
course when we engaged, but also not only that Chair, I 
was also in the party’s strategy committee in Parliament 
and 
that’s 
a 
committee 
that’s 
holding 
executive 
accountable.   So when we engage with Ministers that’s 
10 
how we get to know those who support them and then I 
think it started when Minister Zwane was then confirmed as 
a Minister, that’s when I started knowing him, as we 
interact in Parliament or as we interact in ANC platforms or 
in any other way. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would that have been in 2015?  I have a 
suspicion that ...[intervenes]  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, no it is not 2015. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   ...Minister Zwane may have become 
Minister of Mineral Resources in 2015 but I may be 
20 
mistaken, maybe 2014. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No maybe – was the first – I am just 
trying to think, no I think he became the Minister before 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well if I recall correctly ...[intervenes] 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 240 of 259 
 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No I think he became the Minister 
before ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   If I recall correctly when he became 
Minister of Mineral Resources, he was replacing Minister 
Ramathlodi and I think he was being minister for the first 
time, Minister Zwane. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Okay no that is possible Chair but 
what I am trying to narrate is that I started knowing him 
through his working with Minister ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so you would have known him 
10 
maybe the same year, 2015 
or the 
year before or 
something like that, not for many years. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, no, no not the year before, it 
happened ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   In 2015. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:    My introduction to Mr Mabaso it was 
it happened immediately or maybe after Minister Zwane. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Was confirmed as a Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
MR VAN ROOYEN:    Because then we had to interact, I 
mean to obviously get assistance from the Ministry for our 
work. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, now I think you said that on 
the 8 t h, after the President had informed you that he 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 241 of 259 
 
intended appointing you as Minister of Finance and to 
remove Mr Nene, you began to think about who you would 
bring on board to assist you, is that right? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   On the 8 t h after my engagement with 
the President? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and the engagement you said was 
in the evening, is that right? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:    Yes it was in the evening. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Now in your own mind did you 
decide at that stage that one of the people you should 
10 
bring on board was Mr Bobat? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   It did not happen immediately Chair I 
had to check ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, to check ja, but he was one of the 
people ...[intervenes]  
MR VAN ROOYEN:    That was at my disposal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   So definitely that is when I realised 
that I don’t have anything at my disposal then that’s when I 
thought of him. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, is there anybody that you shared 
this 
information 
with 
once 
you 
had 
an 
intention 
to 
appointment Mr Bobat, is there anybody that you shared 
this information with before making the officer to Mr Bobat? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, not at all. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 242 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   You did not share it? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Not at all, that is why even I was 
hesitant even to share it with him over the phone. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I am saying that is why I was – I said 
it was not going to make sense for me to share.   If I 
managed to get hold of him, I was not even going to share 
that with him over the phone. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   And that is why I waited for that 
10 
moment at the Union Building for me to discuss with him 
about my intention. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes, 
is 
there 
anybody 
that 
you 
approached on the evening of the 8 t h of December and 
maybe in the morning of the 9 t h, or during the day on the 
9 t h, is there anybody with whom you shared your – to whom 
you said I need people who can assist me, I need an 
advisor, I need a Chief of Staff, is there anybody that you 
spoke to and said you wanted to be assisted on this issue? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No, no it only happened up until I 
20 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   After the swearing in? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:  After the swearing in. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   That is when ja. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 243 of 259 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But after the swearing in when you made 
the offer to Mr Bobat you had not shared your intention 
with anybody had you? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:    No, no, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You had not? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:    Not at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And obviously because you had not met 
Mr Whitley you could not have talked to anybody about 
intending to appoint Mr Whitley. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And you only met Mr Whitley the 
following day, namely the 11 t h, the following morning, Mr 
Whitley? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I met him on the 11 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On the 11 t h in the morning. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:    Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, now what I find strange, and I 
would like you to comment if you may, is how it is possible 
that Mr Enoch Godongwana already on the 9 t h tells Mr 
Fuzile that he was going to get a Minister who would come 
20 
with two, no maybe he did not say two, but will come with 
advisors that he did not know.   Now I am saying that 
because you did not come with one person, you can with 
two people, a special advisor and a chief of staff, and we 
know that with regard to Mr Whitley you actually did not 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 244 of 259 
 
know him until the 11 t h ,  and with regard to Mr Bobat we 
know that you knew him very slightly as I understand the 
position, so I ask myself the question how would Mr Enoch 
Godongwana have known about this ahead of it happening 
if you were the only person who had the names of people 
you wanted to appoint and who knew you were going to 
appoint advisors and arrive with them at National Treasury.  
How would somebody else have known that?    
Are you able to say anything about that? 
MR 
VAN 
ROOYEN: 
 
 
Chair 
I 
am 
looking 
at 
Mr 
10 
Godongwana’s affidavit because I was expecting to hear 
something that I don’t know, that simply suggest that I am 
equalling your position.  I don’t know how did Mr Enoch 
Godongwana, because what he says in here, he is 
speaking of speculations and rumours but also, he is 
speaking of the meetings of the NEC, what they were 
discussing there about a possible reshuffle. 
 
So as to how that made him to be such confident 
that this is what happened I am still waiting to hear from 
him, because truly speaking I really don’t know.  I really 
20 
don’t know Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but you understand where you are 
coming from.   He says upon arrival at National Treasury 
you are going to come with – maybe I am being inaccurate 
here, but I think he says, if I recall correctly, to Mr Fuzile, 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 245 of 259 
 
according to Mr Fuzile, you are going to going to get a 
Gupta Minister, let’s leave out the question of a Gupta 
Minister or not a Gupta Minister, he says you are going to 
get a Minister who is going to come with advisors that he 
does not know, and here you come to Treasury with two 
people, certainly Mr Whitley you do not know, you have 
just met, and Mr Bobat as I said you know slightly.   
 
That suggests to me that the information about who 
you are going to come with, who you are going to have as 
your advisors was known somewhere else, other than by 
10 
yourself. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Chair I cannot because I am not part 
of wherever Mr Godongwana got that information, so I 
really cannot answer for Mr Godongwana. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no, no I understand that.  The 
reason I am putting these things to you is to get the benefit 
of your comment because they are in my mind to say how 
did he know and that of course arises because there is the 
suggestion that you may have been given these people by 
the Guptas, you see.  That is the context. 
20 
 
But let me put – let me also put this other factor 
before you and you can comment if you are able to.  I 
heard Mr Jonas’s evidence last year, and he spoke about a 
meeting that he had at the Gupta residence and that 
meeting took place on the 23 r d of October 2015, you 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 246 of 259 
 
remember you said Mr Rajesh Gupta came to your office in 
October 2015.   
 
Mr Jonas said he had a meeting at the Gupta 
residence with one of the Gupta brothers, he was not sure 
which one, as well as Mr Duduzane Zuma and Mr Fana 
Hlongwani but the investigations that have been done by 
the Commission suggest that only Tony Gupta may have 
been present in the house at the time in terms of the Gupta 
brothers, Mr Athul Gupta seems to have been out of the 
country, Mr Ajay Gupta seems to have been in the Sandton 
10 
office and Mr Duduzane Zuma and Mr Hlongwani confirmed 
that Mr Tony Gupta, or Rajesh, was in the house, but they 
deny that he was part of the meeting but they say he 
popped into the meeting and wanted to say something to 
Mr Duduzane Zuma and left but Mr Jonas evidence is that 
his meeting actually was with the Gupta brother that was 
there and he says in that meeting the Gupta brother who 
was there told him that Minister Nene was going to be fired 
as Minister of Finance. 
And we know that indeed in about six weeks time Mr 
20 
Nene was fired as Minister of Finance, and one of the 
things that he says there he said to him, they said oh, they 
said to him according to Mr Jonas Mr Nene was going to be 
fired because he was not working with them, with the 
Gupta family and they wanted Mr Jonas to work with them 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 247 of 259 
 
as Minister of Finance, they wanted him to take the 
position of Minister of Finance and they said to him the old 
man likes you and he understood that to be a reference to 
President Zuma, and he says they said to him when he 
becomes Minister of Finance they could supply him with 
personnel including advisors and there you come to 
replace Mr Nene after he has been fired and you come with 
advisors, a special advisor and a chief of staff.  One you 
don’t know, you have just met, the other one you know 
slightly and Mr Enoch Godingwana has known before you 
10 
even met Mr Whitley that you are going to come with as he 
put it advisors that you don’t know. 
That seems strange and add to that Mr Themba 
Masego’s evidence, which he gave before me, that in some 
time during the second half of 2010 he met with Mr Ajay 
Gupta at the Gupta residence and one of the things Mr 
Gupta told him is anyone who does not want to work with 
us, any Minister who does not work with us, we will get the 
President, I can’t remember whether he said to deal with 
him, but basically it was we will report that person to the 
20 
President and the President would act, and of course Mr 
Masego, he was not a Minister, he refused to cooperate 
with them and he was fired, not fired, he was transferred 
from one position out of the Government Communication 
Service and when I look at the evidence that has been led 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 248 of 259 
 
so far before me his transfer seems to be very unusual.  
The President, Mr Zuma, says he never gave instructions 
that he should be fired or transferred.   Mr Masego says 
well my Minister told me President Zuma said by the time 
he comes back from outside the country I must be gone 
from this position. 
So there are all these things.  I know that you did 
not appoint yourself okay, as Minister of Finance, but I am 
mentioning these things to you in order to see what I am 
looking at as I listen to your evidence and as I listen to Mr 
10 
Fuzile’s evidence, and wanting to answer the question, 
what are the chances that maybe without your knowledge 
you were appointed, maybe at least in part because of any 
inference from the Gupta family. 
You might not be able to say anything to some of 
these things that I am putting to you but I am just letting 
you know what is going on in my mind.  If you have 
something to say you are free to say it. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Chair indeed I am not that much taken 
aback by your perplexity on how these developments have 
20 
been, but the reality of the matter is that all these things 
they 
should 
be 
as 
you 
know 
the 
appointments 
and 
dismissals or absorption of people those are procedurally 
processes, so if there is any deviation on those definitely I 
think 
that 
should 
be 
the 
focus 
of 
this 
particular 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 249 of 259 
 
Commission, but truly speaking I am equally surprised, how 
did it happen because the root of the matter is that the 
President 
is 
the 
only 
person 
who 
is 
empowered 
to 
appointment Ministers so there is no way in my submission, 
that is something that I have put in my submission, that 
that could have been done by any person. 
But also I am just a bit concerned that anyone can 
then consider such particular allegations or making such 
particular claims, to be claims that can be used to accuse 
any other person without checking the processes that was 
10 
followed to give effect to certain appointments, but coming 
to my situation Chair as to how I appoint people that I 
didn’t know. 
Look this issue of – it might not have been even Mr 
Bobat or Mr Whitley, it could have been any other person.  
I didn’t use the issue of knowing someone as my guiding 
principle.  What is driving my decision on this matter, what 
drove my decision on this matter is maybe that I see in the 
– of course on their profiles and ultimately in their CV’s.  
That’s the only thing, and that is something, that is the 
20 
very same approach that I could have used in appointing 
any other person. 
Of course, I am fully considerate of the limitations 
that you have raised, but as I have said I definitely believe 
in the process that was going to follow to finalise those 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 250 of 259 
 
appointments. 
So I did not use the issue of knowing or not 
knowing, as the basis, otherwise if I am to follow that Chair 
because I don’t – I didn’t want to, usually I want to speak 
to the provisions of the National Development Plan, we 
need to capacitate the State so we cannot capacitate the 
State with cronies and friends, we need merits and that is 
what 
make 
me 
to 
take 
a 
decision 
on 
those 
two 
appointments. 
And I can tell you now Chair if I continue to serve in 
10 
National Treasury, I was definitely going to check what is 
happening with these other positions, because at the end 
of the day it is all about service delivery you know. 
And that is the same thing that I did in COGTA, I 
arrived in COGTA, I checked and I retained, where it was 
not possible, I did not retain but in the main I retained 
because there was quality there you know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Mr Hulley? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Chair there is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You have one question more? 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Ja, I just want to chat with you about a 
Mr Bashir Sallo that you met with before your meeting with 
Mr Whitley.   Where did you meet Mr Sallo previously, how 
did you get to know him 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   I got to know Mr Sallo if I remember 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 251 of 259 
 
well it was at a meeting with our office, that is how I got to 
know him. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Because I am reading here about 
reports in the media which suggest that Mr Sallo was the 
...[intervenes]  
ADV MASEGU:   Sorry Chair he is reading from the media.   
My client has not seen what he is reading.  He cannot read 
from the media and putting questions that he is reading 
from the media to a client who has taken an oath to give 
evidence before this Commission. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Hulley? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you Mr Chair.  Mr van Rooyen 
has mentioned a person, insofar as reading from media 
reports 
is 
concerned 
there 
is 
no 
reason 
why 
the 
Commission should not receive media reports, obviously it 
will have to be made available, but I would like to find out 
from Mr Van Rooyen if he is aware of these media reports 
relating to Mr Sallo. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Mr Sallo, remember on the 11 t h of 
20 
December he has a meeting with Mr Whitley, before that 
meeting according to Mr van Rooyen he actually has a 
meeting with a businessman, he identifies the business as 
Mr Bashir Sallo, so I want to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes what is the point about Mr Sallo? 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 252 of 259 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Well according to the media reports 
that we reading it seems that Mr Sallo was identified as a 
financial backer or the right hand man of Mr Muammar 
Gadaffi, were you aware of that at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but why is that relevant? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Well we want to just explore that with 
him, he had a meeting with him, he had a meeting 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but to what end, to what end, if you 
meet somebody who seems to have known Gadaffi and so 
10 
what? 
ADV HULLEY SC:    Well want to ascertain what was the 
relationship between him and the – and Mr van Rooyen in 
his capacity as the Treasury General of the NK Veterans 
Association. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And how will that help us in looking at 
the 
issues 
we 
are 
looking 
at 
here 
about 
his 
own 
appointment and the appointment of the advisors? 
ADV HULLEY SC:    No, no, just we ought to explore it in 
the context of – the larger context of what we are dealing 
20 
with Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:    Thank you Mr Chair.   Then if I could 
just wrap it Mr Chair, what we know what the – some of the 
issues that the Chairperson has raised with you in relation 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 253 of 259 
 
to the evidence of Mr Ncebesi Jonas is that in October of 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I will let you ask one question to wrap 
up ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I am putting what our argument will be 
Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Mr Ncebesi Jonas says that he is 
offered the post of the – offered the post of Minister of 
Finance on the 23 r d of October of 2015, we know from your 
10 
testimony that in October 2015 you in fact meet with the – 
meet with Mr Gupta, Tony Gupta.  We know also that on the 
8 t h of October, sorry, the 8 t h of December of 2015, you 
meet with the President in the evening in which the 
President tells you that he wants to appoint you as the 
Minister of Finance, on the same day you meet with Mr 
Tony ‘Gupta. 
 
We know also ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry which same date does he meet 
with Mr Gupta? 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Sorry on the 8 t h of December he goes 
to the Gupta residence and the last aspect of that 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well he said he wanted to meet him but 
did not meet him. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 254 of 259 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   He said he wanted to meet with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:    But we know that he goes to the 
Gupta residence.  The last aspect relates to an issue that 
emanates from the Public Protector ’s report.  I understand 
from my learned friend that he may have an objection to 
that.  I just want to deal with the witness in relation to a 
statement that he made to the Public Protector. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes we have got to wrap up, just one 
point and just try and wrap up. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:   In your letter to the Public Protector 
that you wrote on the 24 t h of March 2017 you apparently 
said the following to the Public Protector.    
“During the period between the 4 t h of December 
2015 to the 11 t h of December 2015 I was in Durban 
with my family.  I was not a Minister at that stage, 
so I did not have VIP protection.  On the 7 t h of 
December I flew from Durban to Johannesburg at 
13:55 for MKMVA meetings where we also met with 
the Gupta family.” 
20 
That was what you said to the Public Protector.   You said 
that you had also met with the Gupta family?  
MR VAN ROOYEN:   No I do not remember what you are 
referring to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You don’t remember whether your 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 255 of 259 
 
statement included anything like that? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   You see the challenge Chair is that 
this is one of the things that was brought last night and I 
have never had the chance to go through it, now I am 
expected to respond to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the Public Protector ...[intervenes]  
ADV MASEGU:   And with respect Chair it is quite unfair.  
Mr Hulley knows that in order for our client to assist him, I 
do not think he understands his role as an evidence leader 
for the Commission with respect.   He is not here to cross-
10 
examine the client, he is here to elicit from my client 
information that will assist you to get to the truth.   Now 
these questions that are meant to trick him into some story 
are not fair.  He should be allowed to engage with the 
Public Protector in full so that we know exactly what the 
full extent of the engagement entails.  It is not just that 
letter that he is reading.  He met with the Public Protector, 
he engaged with the Public Protector, who knows what was 
said behind it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Hulley? 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Mr Chair of course the witness is at 
liberty to tell us if there’s any further aspect of that that he 
wishes to say.  The point is that I am brazen with you, he 
can of course confirm or deny that he has told the Public 
Protector that he met with the Gupta Family, it is a simple 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 256 of 259 
 
issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say Mr Van Rooyen you cannot 
remember what you may have written in the letter to the 
Public Protector, or statement or letter, I am not sure what 
it is? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:    You know Chair I just wanted to 
locate more especially the issues of the dates and all that, 
so that is why it doesn’t bother for me to be giving this 
information Chair, but with the Public Protector of course, I 
have said it, I have met the Guptas, and the issue if it is 
10 
about meeting the Guptas as a Minister then that is 
something else, you know, but what I am saying is that 
Chair I will give a fair and a detailed response, but he must 
give me a chance to look into that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   And I have never denied meeting the 
Guptas so it should not be an issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well one option is that Mr Hulley if 
there is anything outstanding, he could be requested to – 
you could put questions to him through his lawyers in 
20 
writing and he could be requested to respond by way of an 
affidavit.    That is another option.  Mr Masegu would you 
have any problem with that? 
ADV MASEGU:   No absolutely not, I think that will be fair.   
ADV 
HULLEY 
SC: 
 
 
Thank 
you 
Mr 
Chair, 
that 
is 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 257 of 259 
 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That may be another option in the light 
of the late hour.  Okay alright, Mr van Rooyen thank you 
very much. 
ADV MASEGU:   Sorry Chair I just have one question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh in re-examination, alright. 
ADV MASEGU:   Thank you Chair.   Just one question 
arising from the question you asked Mr Van Rooyen 
relating to the appointment of persons he did not know.    
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV MASEGU:    Mr van Rooyen is there anywhere in the 
regulations, in the practice, in the law that requires you to 
appoint people that you know the position of a special 
advisor? 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Chair as I have elaborated well of 
course Chair you have raised your concern which I fully 
accommodate, usually what is guiding me is I mean it is a 
merit aspect, more than any other thing and maybe that is 
what is overshadowing my observations on other things, 
but the reality the legislation is very clear, South African, 
20 
fit for purpose, relevant qualification, no criminal records, I 
mean those are clear guidelines.  The issue of knowing in 
fact if we promote that I am worried we might even be 
bordering on nepotism of cronyism.  Remember there is a 
serious accusation now that one has employed a niece in 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 258 of 259 
 
one of the State-Owned Enterprises. 
ADV MASEGU:    Chair thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you Mr Masegu.  Thank you very 
much Mr van Rooyen for coming to put your side of the 
story and to answer questions, there may be a request for 
you to deal with further questions by way of affidavit, I am 
sure that you will attend to that if such a request arrives, 
but thank you very much for coming to give evidence today.   
You are excused. 
MR VAN ROOYEN:   Thank you very much Chair, it has 
10 
been a long wait and of course with its own consequences, 
but it is fine, we understand it is part of the game, but I 
must also indicate Chair I really want to wish you well in 
unearthing the truth, because I think it is a very tedious 
process and that is why I am assisting, I don’t think we will 
realise any justice if it is only focusing on these short 
terms, on these narrow terms of reference.   My wish is 
that you should be given an expanded mandate to dig 
deep, more especially on the relationship of what can be 
done with our democratic state. 
20 
 
Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  We are going to adjourn 
now and we will start at ten o’clock tomorrow. 
 
We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
11 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 248 
 
Page 259 of 259 
 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 12 AUGUST 2020 
