 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
BRAAMFONTEIN CHAMBERS 
 
 
 
10 
 
11 MARCH 2020 
 
 
 
DAY 221 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 2 of 124 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 11 MARCH 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is this how it is going to be throughout or is it going 
to improve?  It will improve?  Okay alright because it looks very dark, 
closed behind.  It is like we are in the dark.  Only the furthermost parts 
of the hall seems to be – have enough lighting.  Okay alright we will – 
we will continue and hopefully during the course of the day the lighting 
will improve.  Before we start I just want to take this opportunity to 
express my sincere thanks and appreciation to the Johannesburg 
Municipality for making this venue available to the Commission from 
now up to the end of the year.  We appreciate this very much.  We wish 
10 
that we had been able to get this venue from the beginning they made it 
available to us without us having to pay any rent and therefore as the 
commission we will save packs of money.  So I just want to place it on 
record that we really appreciate the co-operation that they have 
extended to us and for making this facility available to the commission.  
Thank you very much.  Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson in the next few days perhaps the 
next eight days we will be hearing evidence about PRASA. Before I get 
into that Mr Chairperson … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I think there is possibly the sound does not 
20 
appear to be as clear as it should be and it probably has nothing to do 
with how far you are from the microphone but it is not as clear as it 
should be.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson I am just wondering if I – is that 
much better it sounds a bit better from here? 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 3 of 124 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is – that is better. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay so maybe it does require raising your voice a 
bit. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But let us try and I take it the technicians will be 
working on the problem.  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson may I deal with a set of housekeeping 
matters?  In regard to the exhibit relating to the evidence that is going 
to be led they all start with SS.  We have taken the liberty of dividing 
10 
the exhibits into a number of categories and if I could just go through 
that with you Mr Chairperson?  The first category is SS1 and this deals 
with legislation that some of the witnesses intend referring to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on one second Mr Soni.  Why do we have this 
here?  Why is this here?  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The most important piece of legislation for this 
session Mr Chairman is the legal succession to the South African 
Transport Services Act which is the first document in SS1.  The second 
document in SS1 is the (indistinct) of the PRASA board and the third 
set of documents are the relevant provisions of the PFMA to which 
20 
some of the witnesses refer.  We thought we would just collate them so 
that you would have them ready when witnesses refer to them.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I see the lever arch file marked on the spine Exhibit 
SS1 that is the legislation exhibit.  SS2 that is documents.  SS3 
pleadings.  Is that the file you are talking about? 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 4 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is the file yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So the SS1 effectively contains 3 sets of 
documents Mr Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then Mr Chairperson I will explain the need 
for this.  There are a number of judgments that take on and added 
significance for this session of our sittings and we have taken the 
liberty of including four of those judgments because reference will be 
made to them during the course of the testimony especially of the third 
10 
witness who is going to be called before you.  The judgments are Mr 
Chairperson the judgment of the Gauteng Local Division in the matter 
of PRASA versus … 
CHAIRPERSON:  One second Mr Soni.  I picked up yesterday that it 
seems that with regard to some of the lever arch files there seemed to 
be no index to the contents of the lever arch file and I am trying to look 
at the one I have now just to check whether it has an index and whether 
the index is one that I can follow?  I see that you – there is an index 
but it does not tell me what pages I get the – bundle and judgments and 
pleadings and bla, bla, bla.  But I see that later on – two pages later 
20 
there is what is referred to Index Exhibit SS1 and it says, Annexure 
PM1 from the affidavit of P S Molefe page 1 to 14.  And then number 2 
then Act number 38 of 2008 pages 41 to 45.  Now I think it does not 
look like there is an index for the entire file or does it exist somewhere 
it is just that it is not here?  It is much better if I can look at an index 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 5 of 124 
 
at the beginning. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it tells me where to find what document then I 
can go straight there. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Rather than looking at small indexes or small 
components of the file. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if you have got small indices for various 
components of the file it should be easy to produce an overall index 
10 
because it is a question of just piecing that together. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Consolidating all the indexes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But that is much better. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Than if I - if you refer me to anything or if I want to 
look at any document I go to the controlling index and it tells me where 
exactly to find the relevant documents. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairman would you give us an opportunity to 
20 
attend to that in the next break or two? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  Ja if that can be dealt with in the course of 
the morning. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It should be available in due course.   
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 6 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is for the file that we need today. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Okay so you can continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Mr Chairman the judgments and the 
relevance of the judgment will come out in… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh I am sorry you know what?  Oh well you might 
have to – I see the next exhibit index SS2 that it is as from page 1 as 
well so it might not be as easy as we thought it would be. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because it looks like for each item the index starts 
from 1 again. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it should not be – should not take long. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It should not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And Mr Chairperson I should also say that when 
you look at the index to SS2 you will see a reference to PM5, 6, 9 and 
15.  What we decided is to remove them from Mr Molefe’s affidavit and 
put them in a general bundle so that all the witnesses could refer to the 
same bundle and there is no need then to have Mr Molefe’s affidavit 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 7 of 124 
 
present all the time.  I will Mr Chairperson – perhaps I should take this 
opportunity to say the importance of especially the first two judgments 
is that scathing remarks are made about the procurement processes at 
PRASA and the fact that… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Soni I think you had begun to tell us 
what the evidence starting today into next week will cover when I 
intervened.  I think initially I think after that you – you continued on the 
basis that maybe you had said what you wanted to say but I missed it 
because something else was in my mind.  You might wish to just 
capture again what the evidence will cover. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  During this period starting today up to – is it 
Thursday next week? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairman the – the evidence relating to the 
capture of PRASA or state capture of PRASA however one wants to 
describe the situation that exists there will be led in two stages.  What 
that evidence will show in essence Mr Chairman is the following: 
First two individuals where the principle beneficiaries through entities 
20 
in which they had an interest of lucrative contracts that PRASA 
concluded with different contracts.  One of those persons who benefited 
Mr Chairman is directly or indirectly from these contracts is Mr 
Chockalingam popularly known as Roy Moodley.  Between July 2000 
and I am just sketching all the evidence that will be led Mr Chairman.  
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 8 of 124 
 
Between July 2007 and June 2009 an entity directly linked to Mr 
Moodley Royal Security Propriety Limited paid some R64 000.00 a 
month to Mr Jacob Zuma until just about the time Mr Zuma became 
President of the country in May 2009.  The total amount that was paid 
by Rail Royal Security invested in Mr Zuma in monthly instalments is 
more than R1.5 million.  The exact amount being R1 560 486.32.  Then 
from 2010 Royal Security began receiving contracts from PRASA and 
had so far been paid more than R471 million by PRASA.  Now the 
importance of stressing 2010 Mr Chairman is related to the previous 
point I made and that is that… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second.  There seems to be some 
interference with the door behind me.  Ask somebody we need to 
(indistinct) and make sure there is no interference.  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The point I was making Mr Chairman is you have 
the payments starting in 2007 ending in 2009.  2010 the Royal Security 
starts receiving contracts and up to now R471 million has been paid to 
the Royal Security.  Then Mr Chairman Mr Moodley and Mr Zuma 
reportedly have been to a number of social functions together.  This 
has been in the media (indistinct).  He was on TV July – the Durban 
July where Mr Moodle appears to have hosted Mr Zuma.  And there are 
20 
anecdotal incidents to reports one them where Mr Zuma allegedly won 
R15 000.00 at a Durban July where he was hosted by Mr Moodley.  
Then Mr Chairperson perhaps the one that is of significance or the 
commission is an entity called Siyangena Technologies Propriety 
Limited which has received payments from PRASA exceeding R4 billion 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 9 of 124 
 
Mr Chairman.  It reportedly paid more than R500 million to entities in 
which Mr Moodley has an interest.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that – is that now separate from the R400 and 
something million that Mr Moodley’s entities. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Obtained by way of tenders from PRASA? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And the R471 Mr Chairperson is purely Royal 
Security.  This is the company which paid. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.so this is to a separate company where just – or 
companies one of them being Headway Trading. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But those details will be in the next session where 
we will present it all (indistinct). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Lucky Montana whom you will hear quite a bit 
Mr Chairman was PRASA’s CEO at all relevant times relevant to these – 
the conclusion of – and implementation of the contracts and I stress 
that Mr Chairperson because the evidence will show it is not only the 
conclusion but thereafter the – the indulgences granted – extensions 
granted in respect of those contracts.  And he played a central role in 
20 
the – the award of – of that contract through Siyangena.  The validity of 
the contracts that I have been referring to Mr Chairman in regard to 
Siyangena has been challenged in the courts.  Not – I must stress not 
the Royal Security contract but the Siyangena contract and there is a 
contract that was entered into by prodigy with PRASA and on – in 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 10 of 124 
 
respect of Mr Moodley’s role in regard to that contract of which two 
witnesses will testify of who tried to force PRASA or employees of 
PRASA to agree to pay the amount owing to Prodigy and made certain 
remarks about the power he held.  That will be the evidence that – that 
the witnesses will give.  Then the other individual Mr Chairman who has 
benefited directly or indirectly from PRASA contracts is Mr Makhenza 
Mabunda the person who worked with Mr Montana when he was 
previously at the Department of Public Enterprises.  Mr Mabunda’s 
Siyaya or S entities have been paid more than R1 billion by PRASA for 
providing – purportedly for providing certain consultancy services.  He 
10 
also – this is Mr Mabunda Mr Chairperson received an amount of more 
than R80 million in respect of a locomotive contract that PRASA 
concluded with a third party and apparently the payment was and we 
are going to get the evidence from the master was for facilitating that 
contract.  So that Mr Chairman is in substance what the – the nature of 
the evidence we lead to show that PRASA was in fact captured and who 
the capturers were and who the enforcers of the contract – of the – the 
capture were.  Now at the time the contracts from which Mr Moodley 
and Mr Mabunda benefited were awarded whilst Mr Montana was the 
CEO another important figure in this mix is Mr Sfiso Buthelezi who was 
20 
the Chair of the Board.  And the importance of that position Mr 
Chairman will come in when Mr Molefe gives his evidence.  He is the 
Chairperson of the PRASA’s board between August 2014 to July 2017.  
And that is an important part of how – why he will describe Mr 
Chairperson what he found in regard to these matters and what he did 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 11 of 124 
 
and was prevented from doing.  Then Mr Chairperson in July 2017 in 
regard to the R3.5 billion contract that I have referred to that is the 
locomotive contract Justice Francis in the Gauteng Local Division set 
aside that contract on the basis that it had – there were – it was tainted 
by corruption and fronting and in a scathing judgment which we will be 
referring to he – he made some very adverse comments about Mr 
Montana and the person called Mr Daniel Mthimkhulu whom you will 
hear about as well.  That decision was taken on appeal to the SCA.  Th 
Justice Lewis in the judgment of the SCA was equally scathing about 
the role Mr Montana and Mr Mthimkhulu how especially Mr Mthimkhulu 
10 
engineered the processes despite the fact that he no engineering 
qualifications and that becomes important Mr Chairman.  How he 
engineered the processes to ensure that there was only one outcome in 
regard to that claim.  The Siyangena contracts Mr Chairperson as I 
have said are valued at about R4 billion.  They are also the subject of 
review – a review before the Gauteng … 
CHAIRPERSON:  So there is Siyaya and Siyangena? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that right? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Siyaya is Mr Mabunda. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Syangena linked to Mr Moodley. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then this (indistinct) is a third party that Mr 
Mabunda is a beneficiary of that and we need not deal too much with 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 12 of 124 
 
that except what the courts have said about how PRASA manipulated 
processes in regard to that contract and when one reads the review – 
the review papers in the Siyangena Matter Mr Chairperson the – the – 
one sees a similar pattern but we will come to those details.  And the 
regard to the Siyaya Matters Mr Chairman and they take on a slightly 
different significance.  They are the subject notwithstanding that about 
R1 billion has been paid they are the subject of arbitration proceedings 
and those amount to the amounts claimed are in the region of about R6 
– just a little more than R60 million and you will see how the former 
chairperson of PRASA’s board attempted to secure payment for Siyaya 
10 
and in the course had to intervene in that.  So that Mr Chairperson is 
the – the evidence that will be led puts – based on documents in our 
possession in effect cannot be disputed.  Now at the outset Mr 
Chairman I pointed out that you will be leading evidence in two stages.  
In the – in the stage which we are busy now for the next eight days the 
evidence that we will be leading will be the following: 
The evidence will focus on the interactions between two individuals at 
PRASA in particular the role Mr Montana in facilitating PRASA’s capture 
especially by Mr Moodley and Mr Mabunda and by certain persons – 
and certain other persons who used entities for gain lucrative 
20 
contracts.  And Mr Chairman just so that it is not said that well either 
you blame Mr Montana you as the CEO the evidence will show his hand 
in each of these.  Some of it is in handwriting in fact the first witness 
will show in respect Prodigy contract Mr Montana’s clear hand in the 
matter.  And that evidence will be led – that is the evidence which will 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 13 of 124 
 
be led over the next eight days.  May I now Mr Chairman just so that 
you have an idea of what you can expect over the next eight days is 
summarise very briefly the witnesses and what their evidence is?  Mr 
Chairman as I understand it I am not required to identify the witnesses 
at this stage but if you want me to I will. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you can – it depends you know if there are 
certain issues of safety and security that make it not appropriate to 
mention their names until they arrive here and so – so you would know 
best. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes there are no safety issues Mr Chairman so I 
10 
will name them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The first witness is going to be Mr Tiro Holele and 
the next witness is Mr Jacob Rakgoathe.  The thrust of their evidence 
deals with a meeting they had had with Mr Moodley in 2000 – in about 
February 2017 where Mr Moodley wanted payment to be made for an 
entity in which he had an interest and in respect of that he fed through 
the two employees.  I do not know why he would (indistinct) in this 
matter.  I want to say to you that there – I am one of the 15 top 
decision makers in this country, those were his words and there are 
20 
going to be major changes coming and you better be on the right side 
of the fence.  Now fortunately Mr Chairperson nothing came of that.  
And when I say fortunately from PRASA’s point of view money was now 
paid that evidence is relevant for a number of issues and the first one 
is Mr Molefe will testify he will be the third witness that when he 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 14 of 124 
 
became the Chairperson of the board in July 2014 he heard of Mr 
Moodley and saw Mr Moodley there and he says “when you walked 
around people would say, that is the owner of PRASA” pointing to Mr 
Moodley.  And he would be in and out of the offices of different 
managers walking around with them.  In fact Mr Molefe keeps saying 
this on every occasion and I have consulted with him.  You would think 
he was one of the top managers at PRASA.  So I am just trying to show 
the influence that Mr Moodley has.  So that is the purpose of leading 
these two witness on that very narrow point.  The next witness and 
perhaps the principle witness in regard to State Capture is Mr Molefe.  
10 
And Mr Molefe’s role Mr Chairman when one looks at it effectively is 
quite important because it comes in after… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think your voice is going down. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It comes in after this period when Mr Montana and 
Mr Sfiso Buthelezi were in effect in control of PRASA and especially in 
the procurement processes.  And he will deal with that and the 
concerns he had and what he did to reverse some of the decisions that 
were taken.  But what his role is, is that from 2014 – we think 2017 he 
20 
and his board tried to steer the PRASA ship in a different direction.  
More importantly Mr Chairman he tells you how – or he will tell you how 
State Capture at PRASA and we do not need to go in (indistinct) 
appeared to operate.  He will tell you how Mr Moodley on several 
occasions tried to capture him as he puts it.  He will also tell you that 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 15 of 124 
 
he then had a fallout with Mr Montana because Mr Montana would not 
rectify the manner in which he operated and which the court – the 
courts were later critical of and the Public Protector as Mr Molefe would 
say.  Now when one goes past that the next – the next thing happened.  
Mr Montana hands in his resignation against this backdrop that I have 
described the board accepts the resignation and then – then President 
Zuma calls a meeting between the then Minister, Minister Dipuo Peters, 
Mr Molefe, Mr Montana and the Minister in the Presidency at which he 
(indistinct) to get Mr Molefe to persuade his board to reinstate Mr 
Montana.  Mr Molefe will say he was surprised that the Head of State 
10 
would want to interfere in this but when he looks at it as a whole he 
understands what the big picture was. 
CHAIRPERSON:  This is a situation where – that attempt was made in 
regard to Mr Montana who had resigned.  He had not been dismissed? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He had resigned. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the board had accepted his resignation. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is so.  So you quite right and it was important 
to emphasise that.  It is not as if the board was taking drastic action.  
This was a mutual separation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you might – you probably are not being accurate 
when you say it was a mutual separation.  As I understand it if it was 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 16 of 124 
 
resignation. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Montana made the decision. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Unilaterally. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That he was leaving PRASA. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes sure.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The board just accepted his decision.  It is unlike a 
situation where there is a problem and the parties reach an agreement 
10 
let us part ways.  He made his own decision to leave PRASA. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the board accepted that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Absolutely yes Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And that decision too is important.  Mr Molefe will 
also say Mr Chairman that one of the things that concerned him and he 
will reflect on it when he is giving evidence and I am sure there would 
be exchanged between you and Mr Molefe hopefully I will try and 
resolve most of them first.  That given the bad publicity surrounding 
20 
PRASA for a number of years even before the time Mr Montana decided 
to resign and I say that Mr Chairperson because the Public Protector 
too has investigated PRASA from a complaint – a set of complaints 
starting in 2000 – which she received in 2012 and she finalised her 
report in 2015.  And it is scathing and we will reflect on that report.  
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 17 of 124 
 
But what Mr Montana – what Mr Molefe will say is this.  Given the fact 
that our constitutions demands accountability from everyone.  He is 
surprised that Mr Montana was allowed to remain at the helm of PRASA 
over such a prolonged period and – and at the end of the day one 
needs to look for a better reason than his just intolerant.  He will also 
say Mr Chairperson that when he got – when he and his board started 
putting things right for example in regard to the Swifambo contract 
which Mr Montana – Mr Molefe took to court and had reviewed and set 
aside and he also took the Siyangena matter to court but it eventually 
had to come back to court because of certain matters which we need 
10 
not entertain this.  But when they did investigations as described by the 
Public Protector and for example laid charges the HAWKS did nothing.  
He had to take the HAWKS and that matter is a 2017 (indistinct).  The 
appeals to Parliament.  Parliament too did nothing.  In fact they were 
hostile to Mr Molefe and his board whenever they appeared there.  Of 
course I need to add this just to give some balance.  They stuck on one 
fact that the forensic investigations that Mr Molefe’s board had in – the 
forensic investigators had – that Mr Molefe’s board had engaged having 
been told to do so by the Public Protector that that had turned out to be 
costly and I will put the figure on the table the figure that is available 
20 
at the moment is about R300 million.  And that has been in the public’s 
space as well.  But we will deal with the separation of the relevant 
issues as to whether it was necessary to – to investigate and if so then 
put a limit on the amount of investigations.  But not to stop the 
investigations and gives us the view that there was not the bona fide 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 18 of 124 
 
reason to act with his board in the (indistinct). And finally conclude Mr 
Chairperson’s Molefe that since Mr Montana left as the CEO that is in 
July 2015 we are now nearly – we are in March 2020 nearly five years 
later PRASA has not yet had a fully appointed CEO it only had acting 
CEO’s and that too – another witness will tell you Mr Chairperson has 
been eliminated and replaced by an administrator.  Secondly Mr Molefe 
will also say that from the time his board was effectively dissolved 
because their (indistinct) was not extended PRASA has not had a 
permanent board only had internal board then until December and that 
board too – that board was in fact formerly dissolved by the Presidency.  
10 
And he finds this disturbing in view of the number of matters including 
the matter that came up a few weeks ago where the Siyangena matter 
was before the High Court and PRASA was not represented until the 
very last minute and would have incurred a – expenses of about R6 
billion had the matter gone undefended as it were and it was only at the 
last minute that the matter was in fact was postponed and – but of 
course PRASA has paid the costs effectively – means you are in 
everybody’s (indistinct) Mr Chairman.  Then Mr Chairperson we have 
two important witnesses that their evidence is going to be condensed 
quite considerably. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  One second Mr Soni.  Can I just check that everybody 
is able to hear me and to hear Mr Soni well.  I see some of the people 
shake their heads, others agree and those who are far cannot hear.  
Does that include me or only Mr Soni?  Can – even me?  You can hear 
me?  Okay but you cannot hear Mr Soni?   
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 19 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I will speak a lot louder. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Try and speak loud so that they can – everybody 
can hear.  Okay thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  We have Mr Chairperson the head of PRASA’s 
legal section and general manager in that section who had complained 
that they – when they tried to intervene in contracts in which Mr Molefe 
appeared to – oh Mr Montana appeared to have an interest.  For 
example in the Prodigy contract steps were taken against them in fact 
both of them were dismissed.  They will give details of that.  We do not 
need extensive detail but it goes on to show Mr Chairperson that that is 
10 
the manner in which Mr Montana ran PRASA.  They came back only 
through the intervention of Mr Molefe.  They came back but the culture 
that Mr Montana started at PRASA has now returned after the short 
intermission as it were during which Mr Molefe and his board tried to 
put PRASA on a better wicket.  They will also say Mr Chairperson that 
whenever not whenever when decisions are taken about legal matters 
they are excluded.  They believe deliberately so that no dissenting 
voice can be heard about those decisions.  Now there is one aspect of 
their evidence which is quite disturbing Mr Chairperson and it is this.  
That I have told you that the Swifambo Contract has been set aside.  
20 
The Siyaya matters and the Siyangena matters are the subject of 
litigation where the review proceedings or arbitration proceeding.  But 
very recently the Department of Transport had a meeting with 
representatives of Siyaya and Siyangena where they were saying but 
why are we defending these matters we must save legal costs.  But 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 20 of 124 
 
they will give that evidence.  And a disturbing thing Mr Chairperson is 
and I say this because there is the heart of State Capture.  We know 
that the rule of law and the principle of legality are central values in 
our constitution.  Where there is a legal dispute in terms of Section 34 
of the Constitution anybody who has an interest in the matter must take 
it or ought to take it off.  And that is what PRASA has done in these 
matters.  What they are trying to do is bypass all this constitutional 
mechanisms and (indistinct).  And these as I say Mr Chairman are not 
small sums of money.  The arbitration is a R60 million and the 
Siyangena matter is totally if same remedy is issued as was issued in 
10 
this Swifambo matter then the R4 billion that has been paid might well 
have to be returned or parts of it.  But one does not know what the 
purpose is of these mechanisms bypass the legal process.  And Mr 
Chairperson we submit that their evidence is quite crucial of that.  They 
also say Mr Chairperson and another disturbing matter and Ms Ngoye 
who is the head she filed two affidavits.  In an earlier affidavit she filed 
she says that a move has been made by people outside the Department 
– outside legal at PRASA.  She will enter into a contract between 
PRASA and the DBSA for R1 billion and DBSA’s role effectively will be 
to run PRASA’s infrastructure probe effectively it will then distribute 
20 
these lucrative contracts and the question really that we would need to 
(indistinct) how it is.  Is it a mechanism to ensure that those in PRASA 
who scrutinise these matters are kept out that space – that crucial 
space which affects the public interest?  Then Mr Chairperson we have 
the evidence of Ms Kweyama who is the last chairperson of a board at 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 21 of 124 
 
PRASA.  That board was dissolved in December 2019 and what she will 
say is that the reason her board was dissolved is that the Minister 
wanted a particular individual namely Mr Mpondo to be appointed the 
CEO and the board wanted a proper process before a decision was 
taken and what effectively happened was the Minister became 
inpatient. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that the Minister of Transport? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The Minister of Transport Mr Mbalula. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At the moment.  Mr Mbalula okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And the – the – sorry I just lost my train of thought 
10 
sorry Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes well you were talking about the dismissal or 
disbandment or dissolution of the board that was chaired by Ms 
Kweyama and you were saying that she is going to give evidence. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To the effect that the reason why she – her board was 
dissolved and you were going to proceed with that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That he became impatient and as is the want of 
people who exercise public powers especially is that it should – was 
why should I wait for you I am just the dissolving the board.  But the 
20 
dilemma he then faced Mr Chairperson is he does not have a CEO 
because the board would not participate and I just need to say I would 
refer you to the relevant provision of the board charter which says that 
the Minister appoints the CEO on the recommendation of the board.  
But if there is no recommendation no appointment can be made.  So 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 22 of 124 
 
what the Minister does – what Mr Mbalula does is the following.  He 
dissolves the board.  He does not appoint Mr Mpondo as the CEO 
rather he appoints him as the Administrator.  Now Mr Chairperson we 
have included the – the relevant statutory provisions relating to PRASA 
and no provision is made for an (indistinct).  But I just put one 
difficult… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes so – so Ms Kweyama will say the Minister wanted 
him – wanted the board to appoint Mr Mpondo as CEO and the board 
did not seem to be keen to say the least. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the Minister was the right person to appoint the 
CEO but in terms of the relevant statute he could only appoint a CEO if 
there was a recommendation from the board and according to Ms 
Kweyama the Minister – when the Minister realised that the board did 
not seem to be keen on appointing Mr Mpondo he dissolved the board 
and then appointed Mr Mpondo as Administrator of PRASA.  But you 
say that in law there is no provision for the appointment of an 
administrator in regard to PRASA and you saying that the function of an 
administrator would include the functions of a CEO maybe go much 
beyond that I do not know but it would include the functions of a CEO.  
20 
Is that what you are saying? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And if I could add the following Mr Chairperson. In 
terms of the PFMA every public entity if it has a board that is the 
accounting authority.  Now the statutory provision provides for the 
Minister to appoint a board.  If there is no board there is accounting 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 23 of 124 
 
authority.  So effectively Mr Mpondo wears two hats.  He is the CEO on 
the one hand because he is in charge of the day to day operations but 
because there is no board he is effectively the accounting authority.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well – but if you are correct that as a matter of law 
there is no power even to the Minister to appoint an administrator at 
PRASA then – then the administrator has no power to do anything.  It 
has no power to make any decisions at PRASA and all the decisions 
that he could possibly make are not lawful 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is if – if your – your – or submission that there is 
10 
no law provided giving the Minister such power.  That would be the 
effect. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of that, that – and there is somebody who purports to 
exercise power that does not exist in law?  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now if I could go back to the two legal advisors.  
They gave such an opinion to the administrator and in retaliation he 
suspended one of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is – so that would be the – that – is that Ms 
Ngoye? 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  He suspended Mr Dingiswayo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Dingiswayo. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Who is on suspension at the moment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  For – following upon that advice that he gave. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  He does not say that … 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 24 of 124 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it following the course… 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Because of this but what he says is, you are 
undermining my position. 
CHAIRPERSON:  By raising that point? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That he does not have any legal power to – to 
exercise – there is no legal authority to exercise any power as an 
administrator.  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But if – if this had happened prior to the 
promulgation of this commission’s evidence then one could understand 
10 
but when it happens while this provision – this commission is sitting it 
is a very worrying commentary the respect that our authorities have for 
the rule of law and for constitutional principles Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ebersohn finally – our final witness is going to be 
Mr Zackie Achmat.  Now he is a voice from Civil Society.  He comments 
quite instinctively in his affidavit but the importance of his evidence Mr 
Chairperson is this.  He is one of the leaders of an organi – an NGO 
called #UniteBehind.  They have been involved both with and against 
PRASA in the courts.  For example in the Siyangena matter they are 
20 
with PRASA against Siyangna.  But in other matters for example 
against the HAWKS and so on the – there they are with PRASA against 
– against the HAWKS for not doing their job.  Now he has taken – he 
has researched this and he makes two points Mr Chairman which I 
submit are very vital.  That as a public body they were entitled to look 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 25 of 124 
 
at our public representatives to fix up matters.  So in February 2018 
UniteBehind sent a submission to Parliament on State Capture at 
PRASA.  Parliament undertook to conduct that inquiry.  It has reneged 
on that and it has not happened to this day three years later.  And 
again his point is if you had done what you are paid to do as 
Parliamentarians maybe PRASA would not be in this sorry state and we 
would not be saying things about PRASA today.  But finally I need to 
make this point about Mr Achmat’s evidence.  Mr Chairperson at some 
level those of us who – who are involved in investigations into State 
Capture or in discussions in State Capture and so on we deal with this 
10 
on the basis that the State Capture is there.  What Mr Achmat does is 
he tells you the direct effect this has on men, women and children. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I wanted to say – I forgot to switch off my cell phone.  
So may I remind everybody to do so.  So it just rang at the wrong time.  
So yes please proceed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But – but the value of his evidence is he is not 
talking as from afar afield.  He is saying, I take the (indistinct).  I look 
at what happens.  We have been fighting this for the last six years or 
so nothing has happened.  Nothing good has happened in fact if 
anything the situation has deteriorated.  And in that sense everybody 
20 
has failed.  Most vulnerable members of our society.  That our 
democracy (indistinct) Mr Chairman cannot continue.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Going back to the issue of the administrator, the 
appointment of the administrator for PRASA do you know how far the 
litigation is that one has heard about? 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 26 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  It is before the courts brought by 
UniteBehind which challenge the Minister’s power to make that 
appointment.  That Mr Chairman unfortunately is a matter in the 
Western Cape High Court.  I have not enquired but I know it is still in… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes exchange of affidavits.  Okay.  It will be 
interesting to know how far it is to getting a date if possible whether we 
– it is a situation where all affidavits are in and the date might be 
allocated at any time. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Quite so yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It just might be important to know. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson then that is going to be the totality 
of the evidence and some of the evidence that is going to be led during 
this sessions.  Because in… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no thank you.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  May I then just again allow you to navigate 
through the rather bulky bundles that have been presented to you and if 
I could just orientate you towards those Mr Chairperson.  SS1 is the 
legislation and of course there are two very important provisions there 
20 
that is the legal secession had because that will determine the powers 
of the Minister in regard to the appointment of a – of an administrator 
and not having a board.  And secondly the board charter which as I say 
has a specific provision which I will refer you to at the appropriate time 
Mr Chairman that there is – that the Minister appoints the CEO on the 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 27 of 124 
 
recommendation of the board.  And then of course the relevant 
provisions of the PFMA and the one that is important is 49 and 50 that 
the board is the accounting authority of PRASA.  And then of course I 
have dealt with the two judgments regarding Swifambo and then they 
need to take you to the third judgment Mr Chairperson.  It is a judgment 
that Ms Molefe is well qualified to deal with because it is his taking the 
Minister to court.  The Minister at that time Minister Dipuo Peters 
because she dissolved the board without good reason and the High 
Court set aside that decision and the comments you have made about 
the importance of the board.  And then the fourth decision there is 
10 
PRASA bringing Mr Molefe effectively bringing an application against 
the HAWKS to investigate the Swifambo and the Siyangena matters and 
as I say nothing has been done.  The significance of that though Mr 
Chairperson is the – the HAWKS in their first response to this very 
serious charge that you are not doing your job they challenge Mr 
Molefe’s locus standi to bring the application.  And Judge Davis in a 
rather scathing judgment says:  it is a pity that organs of state would 
waste state money to deal with proliferable matters rather than getting 
to the source of the matter.  It is clearly a scathing indictment of the 
way the HAWKS have purport to exercise their powers.  Then Mr 
20 
Chairperson it is – I suppose the (indistinct) there are two matters that 
we will refer to at different parts.  I am not going to take you through 
everything but I merely make this point Mr Chairperson one of things 
we want to say is yes we know what the Swifambo court said about – 
about irregularities, corruption and fronting as well.  But what we want 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 28 of 124 
 
to show with these others and they include their criticism of Mr 
Montana would these is the role that Mr Montana gave in it.  And then 
SS4 Mr Chairperson is a general reference bundle because Mr – for 
example Mr Achmat had mentioned certain documents which some of 
the implicated parties and it said they want copies of and we have 
included one of those in this reference bundle.  And then PRASA’s 
Policies and Procedures just in case you want to look at them Mr 
Chairperson.  Then in the affidavit of Mr Achmat he refers to the role of 
Mr Arthur Fraser whom we all know from the SSA and he says that Mr 
Fraser worked through Researching Risk – Researching Risk was his 
10 
company through which he offered security services to PRASA 
notwithstanding that being in the security services of the state it was 
his duty to provide that in his capacity – in the capacity he occupied at 
that time.  So that is the Researching Risk Report and then there are 
disciplinary proceedings against Mr Zide relevance of that will come at 
a later stage Mr Chairman.  Then we have a Liquidators Report.  We 
are not going to present it to you Mr Chairperson and I should explain 
we had intended it to show the benefits that Mr Mabunda received.  The 
Liquidators Report refers to a number of – of the people and on further 
consideration we thought we should present that as when – sorry at the 
20 
time we present the money flow matters relating to PRASA so that we 
could just articulate and isolate those persons.  But if other persons 
are mentioned they would be given an opportunity and we would show 
them why we are presenting them.  So those are the documents that 
are befor you Mr Chairman and those are – that is the summary of the 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 29 of 124 
 
evidence that will be led. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I take it that all implicated persons have been served 
with Rule 3.3 Notices and the period of fourteen days has lapsed? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that correct? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson I have a document here I just want 
to make two points.  There is one person who was not served and a 
company he is associated with that is because he is from Zimbabwe 
10 
and he has moved back to Zimbabwe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So – but everybody else who is implicated has 
been served. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And – and… 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you have not been able to find any way of 
communicating giving notice to the particular person and his company? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And he is not at the centre of things which is the 
effort that was put in was on the basis that how relevant is that 
evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay.  So you ready to start with the first 
witness? 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 30 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  We are ready to meet our first witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are at eight minutes past eleven and we due to 
have the tea break at quarter past.  Maybe we should start so that the 
oath is administered and maybe some preliminary issues then we take 
the break. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then he continues after. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Yes Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Please administer – well you want to tell us 
the name of the witness you calling? 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Tiro Holele. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you want to spell that for the benefit of the 
transcribers? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  T-i-r-o  H-o-l-e-l-e. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Please administer the oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the records? 
MR HOLELE:  Tiro Holele. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the prescribed oath? 
MR HOLELE:  No I do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on your 
20 
conscience? 
MR HOLELE:  Yes I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give will be the 
truth; the whole truth and nothing else but the truth, if so please raise 
your right hand and say, so help me God. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 31 of 124 
 
MR HOLELE:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Maybe we should take the tea 
adjournment or do you think maybe you could – you could use this five 
minutes left? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  For preliminary issues? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  There is one issue Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Currently the witness deals with a meeting relating 
to Prodigy and Prodigy’s legal representative is here.  Mr Chairperson I 
10 
know you asked much earlier if the representatives at that time nobody 
was here but he would like to place himself on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes let him place himself on record.  He will come – 
you will come to that – to the podium there.  
ADV RAVINDRA MANIKLALL:  Good morning Judge. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning, good morning you are not new in this 
commission. 
ADV RAVINDRA MANIKLALL:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV RAVINDRA MANIKLALL:   Good morning Judge it is Maniklall 
20 
initial is R. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV RAVINDRA MANIKLALL:   Judge I represent actually two parties 
in this proceedings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 32 of 124 
 
ADV RAVINDRA MANIKLALL:   First party my learned friend correctly 
pointed out is a service provider by the name of Prodigy.  I commonly 
refer to Prodigy in proceedings.  And Judge these – this party is 
subject involved in litigation with PRASA.  That is currently before the 
courts.  That is why I will not take it any further than that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV RAVINDRA MANIKLALL:   But being – reserve the rights to apply 
for Leave to Cross-Examine subject to Judge. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV RAVINDRA MANIKLALL:   Discretion in the matter. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No that is fine. 
ADV RAVINDRA MANIKLALL:   Yes.  That is the first party. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV RAVINDRA MANIKLALL:   Judge the second party that I represent 
is one my learned friend did spend some time on and that is Mr 
Moodley. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV RAVINDRA MANIKLALL:   And Judge with the same – without 
taking too much of your time essentially Mr Moodley denies the 
allegations that have been made.  He said he will make the necessary 
20 
application in due course for Leave to Cross-Examine these witnesses 
that makes the allegations and he will easily dispel the notion that my 
learned friend set forth in the address which is obviously arriving from 
what the witnesses say in their affidavits.  But Judge. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 33 of 124 
 
ADV RAVINDRA MANIKLALL:   It would be premature for me to 
address you on that until we listen to the witness’ evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no that is true. 
ADV RAVINDRA MANIKLALL:   That is for the record Judge. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you very much. 
ADV RAVINDRA MANIKLALL:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Soni.  I think we may just take the tea 
adjournment. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And discuss when we come back.  We are going to 
10 
take the tea adjournment and we are going to resume at half past 
eleven.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise.   
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   ...SS10, exhibit SS10 it starts at 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 
and 11. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe they must match this first so that we don’t 
forget, so that we don’t forget.  And now the – I see that this file has 
got SS5, SS8, SS9, there’s no 6 and 7, is that somewhere else? 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes and that’s because we are unlikely to refer to 
those today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, I think it might be better if they were under one 
exhibit and then we have A, B, C, D, E because it helps when we admit 
it helps if what they say is what they see. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 34 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And on the spine of the file. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I think when my mic is on yours should be off I 
think, I think that’s, ja, otherwise there is echo, and when yours is on 
mine would be off, and we will do it like that.  I don’t know whether that 
would be the same with the witness, but you will need yours to be on 
when you are asking the witness and his will need to be on because he 
will be answering, any other thing two could be on without any problem, 
I am  hoping that somebody is going to whisper to you just now as I feel 
10 
what the position is and you will let me know in due course. 
 
Now with regard to this lever arch it has got these exhibits, 
these statements that they are marked under different – as different 
exhibits and the file is not a controlling file and would it be easy to 
make this as EXHIBIT – or it can’t be EXHIBIT S5 and then A, B, C, D 
because you already have this, okay, maybe for other – okay switch 
yours off, maybe you want – or the other lever arch files somebody 
needs to attend to that, it is the way we have been doing them all the 
time, what is written on the spine of the lever arch file should be 
indicating the controlling exhibit and then if necessary you can have A, 
20 
B, C which are inside the lever arch file, that makes it easier so your 
junior counsel should be able to attend to that in regard to the others.  
I guess we just have to use this as is because we don’t have time to 
change but all the others ...[indistinct] should be made to try and align 
them with how we have been dealing with the others, ja.   
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 35 of 124 
 
 
The lever arch file I think – ja it’s complicated, it is a question 
of identification, when I ask somebody to go and look for it I must be 
able to say it is a lever arch file marked so and so but here it says 
EXHIBIT SS5, EXHIBIT SH and so on and so on, which are exhibits 
inside, that’s fine, but so if I say EXHIBIT SS5 it is not 5 it’s an exhibit 
inside but of course the important thing is not the file for admission, it 
is the contents but for identification it helps if one says on the spine 
this is the file.   
 
I think we will just deal with each exhibit as it comes, maybe 
we will find a way of sorting it out later, let us deal with them as they 
10 
come, so we will admit each exhibit as need arises, and not everything 
at the beginning. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As it pleases.  Mr Chairman I apologise, I came 
into a process which I was told operate in this way. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no that’s fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And obviously it’s not the case. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It’s not the case yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Chairperson I have also been told that the 
facility that existed at the previous venue exist here, in other words all 
our mics can be on at the same time, that’s what I have been told. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well the way it is – my voice is when yours is on 
does not appear to be what one expects, but let’s continue I am sure 
they will be doing what they may need to do, but I will put mine off 
while you are talking and while the witness is talking and when I put it 
on – I don’t know whether it is the same, what is your feeling when I 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 36 of 124 
 
speak with my mic on and mine being on and when yours is off, is it like 
the same.  Ja, I think I see somebody else behind who corroborates you 
so maybe the problem is just me.  Yes, okay if the technician say it is 
fine if all three are on at the same time ja, I am told that it is fine, okay 
we can keep them on then.   
 
Okay, you may proceed.  Switch it on. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr  Holele where are you employed at the 
moment? 
MR HOLELE:   I am ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, let’s identify the statement first so that 
10 
where it ...[indistinct – echo on recording] let him confirm that it is his 
statement and then you take it from there. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  Mr Holele you have made a statement in 
relation to the evidence you are about to give today. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Do you have the statement in front of you? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes I do Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now that statement is marked SS10, am I correct.  
MR HOLELE:   Yes sir. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   EXHIBIT SS10. 
20 
MR HOLELE:   Yes sir. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now you have read the statement? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, I must just get to it.  Yes?  Yes continue. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 37 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As it pleases.  You confirm the correctness of 
what is contained in here sir? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes I do Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now I want to ask you where do you work at the 
moment? 
MR HOLELE:   I am the Acting CEO of Autopax, a wholly owned 
subsidiary of the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And in your previous positions in PRASA or any of 
its subsidiaries what positions did you hold? 
MR HOLELE:   Various roles Chairperson, I have been a General 
10 
Manager in the Office of the Group CEO of PRASA. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Just at that point when you say the Group CEO 
whom are you talking about, the identity of the person? 
MR HOLELE:   Mr Lucky Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who? 
MR HOLELE:   Mr Lucky Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay, thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I think your voice is falling and I think like the 
Chairperson I was having difficulty.   If you could closer to mic 
...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, just try the best you can. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR HOLELE:   General Manager in the Office of the Group CEO, Mr 
Lucky Montana.   I have been ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And ...[indistinct] as you – he is asking his questions 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 38 of 124 
 
but you face me, I think that’s going to help me to hear what you are 
saying. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes I will do that.  And I have been General Manager for 
Corporate Affairs in PRASA at some point.  I have been Group Chief 
Strategy Officer and I have also been a manager, an executive manager 
at Intersite Asset Investments which is another subsidiary of PRASA 
looking at the property and other related assets, and I have been then 
back again to Corporate Office as Group Executive in the Office of the 
Group CEO a few years ago, until recently and now I am Acting CEO at 
the PRASA ...[indistinct – recording faulty] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I wonder whether you need to lower the mic, ja, I 
think maybe it might have a better chance of capturing what you say, 
okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now Mr Holele in your statement from paragraph 
5 to paragraph 7 you refer to an affidavit made by Ms Ngoye and an 
affidavit by Mr Dingiswayo. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes I do Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I want to return to those matters in a little while, I 
want to start off though your evidence with what you say in regard to 
the meeting that you, Mr Rakgoathe, and Mr Moodley had, are you 
20 
aware of that? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes I am.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Let’s start off when was that meeting held? 
MR HOLELE:   The meeting was held Chairperson in 2017 at the 
beginning 
of 
the 
year, 
I 
think 
it 
could 
have 
been 
around 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 39 of 124 
 
February/March.    
ADV VAS SONI SC:   How did that meeting come about? 
MR HOLELE:   I was called by I think the MD, Managing Director of 
...[indistinct]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Who was that? 
MR HOLELE:   Ms Nerishni Shunnugan and she asked for a meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe it would be good if we can give spellings for 
names that might not be familiar in terms of spelling for the 
transcribers.  Yes, you can give it if you are able to. 
MR HOLELE:   Nerishni I think it is ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  N-e-r-i-s-h-n-e and Shunnugan is S-h-u-n-n-u-g-a-
n. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes I was called by Ms Shunnugan, and she requested a 
meeting and because at that point now I was Chief Executive in the 
office of the Group CEO and she requested a meeting to ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry, but it is going to be important, at that time 
who was the Group CEO. 
MR HOLELE:   At that time Mr Linke Kajubede ...[indistinct] was the 
Acting Group CEO of ...[indistinct]  
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Does that mean that this is long after Mr Montana 
left? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes sir.  And so Ms Shunnugan asked for a meeting and 
we discussed you know the issues relating, the issues between PRASA 
and Prodigy and I agreed to them. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 40 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now just tell us who was Prodigy? 
MR HOLELE:   Prodigy was a service provider, providing training for 
employees on I think customer related services matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Can I find out whether the transcribers have no 
problem hearing what the witness is saying?  I am just concerned that 
we go on for quite some time only to find out later that they are 
struggling. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They can hear, okay, alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright, so let’s get to the meeting now, you are 
10 
called by Ms Shunnugan and you agree to the meeting? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes Advocate. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Did you go alone from PRASA side? 
MR HOLELE:   No I did not. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Who went with you? 
MR HOLELE:   I asked Mr colleague Mr Jacob Rakgoathe who is in the 
legal section to accompany me to the meeting. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Is there any particular reason you asked him to 
accompany you? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes Chairperson there is, because I knew that there was 
20 
you know this dispute between PRASA and Prodigy I felt it prudent to 
just get somebody to accompany me to that meeting and given that I 
could get somebody from the legal section of the company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe just tell us what the issue was between 
PRASA and Prodigy. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 41 of 124 
 
MR HOLELE:   If I recall Chair I think there were really two, the first 
was generally a dispute regarding the validity of the contract, but on 
this meeting it was about payment that Prodigy felt was due to Prodigy 
and PRASA was in dispute regarding that payment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What was the payment which was the second issue, 
was the payment in relating to a different contract or in relation to the 
same contract, the validity of which was being challenged by PRASA? 
MR HOLELE:   It was in relation to the same contract Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now you go to this meeting whom did you expect 
10 
would be representing Prodigy at the meeting? 
MR HOLELE:   I expected Ms Nerishni Shunnugan to be representing 
Prodigy. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And where was the meeting to take place? 
MR HOLELE:   In the PRASA building and in the small boardroom of the 
Group CEO. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Was there any discussion about what the venue 
of the meeting should be? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, Ms Shunnugan wanted the meeting to be outside of 
the PRASA building. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Outside PRASA? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes outside PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Did she indicate why? 
MR HOLELE:   She said something to the effect that it was for my own 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 42 of 124 
 
protection. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   For your protection? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Did you ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry, I’m sorry there was a minute or two when I 
could hear you very clearly, I don’t know what has happened but 
otherwise there is some difficulty, just repeat why she wanted the 
meeting to be outside of PRASA? 
MR HOLELE:   She said for my own protection. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh your own protection. 
10 
MR HOLELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What did you understand that to be? 
MR HOLELE:   It was bizarre, it was a bizarre statement Chair and I 
said no the meeting will take place in the PRASA building. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And why did you insist on the meeting being held 
at the PRASA building? 
MR HOLELE:   For the reasons that you know I have spelt out Chair 
that it is a sensitive matter, it is a matter in court, it is a matter in 
dispute and it just it would have been improper for me to have a formal 
20 
meeting of the business on a matter like this outside of the business. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I wonder whether – you see I can hear  you Mr Soni 
much better and I am struggling to hear the witness, I wonder whether 
if he is sitting elsewhere that would change, improve anything.  Okay 
let’s see how it goes and then if need be we could – maybe much 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 43 of 124 
 
further because I can hear you well, but let’s try again. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I must confess Mr Chair I am also having some 
difficulty with hearing ...[indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let’s try and see after the intervention and see 
if there is any improvement. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Quite ironically she thought that if the meeting is 
held outside PRASA you would be protected, but you thought if the 
meeting was held at PRASA you would be protected. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you ask why she was saying you needed 
10 
protection for this meeting? 
MR HOLELE:   No I did not.  It5 was just enough reason for me 
...[indistinct] that it be in the building. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and have you had any dealings with her before? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes I had Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Many dealings? 
MR HOLELE:   Not many no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR HOLELE:   I mean they were just about the building and with the 
programs owned ...[indistinct] and the program was introduced. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes and previously she had never talked about 
you needing any protection? 
MR HOLELE:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  There is some improvement at least from my 
side. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 44 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   In fact it is better from my side. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, let’s see. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now you go to this meeting expecting to see Ms 
Shunnugan? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Who appears at the meeting on behalf of 
Prodigy? 
MR HOLELE:   So Mr Rakgoathe and ...[indistinct] walk into the 
Boardroom and Ms Shunnugan was not there the person w ho was there 
instead was Mr Roy Moodley. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Did you know Mr Roy Moodley? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes I do. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   How did you come to know him? 
MR HOLELE:   I knew him through you know him being a service 
provider at PRASA and especially through the Prodigy work, he had 
been you know in the business, ...[indistinct] at the graduation function 
you know and the graduation. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I am just going to ask you this, in an affidavit that 
Mr Molefe made he says that people referred to Mr Moodley as the 
owner of PRASA, I would just like you to comment on that? 
20 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, I think generally he was known to be a very 
influential person. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was known as an influential person. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes generally amongst senior people especially. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   This is at PRASA. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 45 of 124 
 
MR HOLELE:   Yes at PRASA, at PRASA, no at PRASA, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that a view that you share that he was influential 
at PRASA? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, I do Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Why did you think he was influential at PRASA? 
MR HOLELE:   He was just you know through various contracts he 
would be there, he would be in the building, from time to time and just 
the manner in which he surrounded, he was known to be an influential 
person. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Well I want to get more details about that, did 
10 
you – to your knowledge were there any decisions that were taken at 
PRASA which he influenced in any way? 
MR HOLELE:   I wouldn’t have direct knowledge about that Chair, but I 
knew that through this contract, you know he was involved in it, in and 
around the contract, I knew that he at the security company and just 
the know the manner in which would interact with the business, very 
forceful. 
CHAIRPERSON:   (laughing) what was it, must employees wait around, 
what was he doing that made you think he was influential at PRASA, he 
was only a service provider wasn’t he? 
20 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was an outsider to PRASA? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes he was an outside to PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR HOLELE:   You know the context at the time was such that ja he 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 46 of 124 
 
would you know he would be in the building from time to time, and he 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Did he claim to be the owner of PRASA? 
MR HOLELE:   No I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   As far as you know. 
MR HOLELE:   No I have never heard him make such a claim. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did he claim to be influential within PRASA, is it 
because maybe people heard him say he is influential, anything like 
that ...[intervenes]  
MR HOLELE:   Not directly to me no Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  How often would he be around at PRASA 
more or less? 
MR HOLELE:   Well from time to time you would see him Chair, from 
time to time and like I said you know I saw him at a very you know I 
think the launch of the programme or the training and at the graduation 
function at ...[indistinct] Hotel, and ja, so he asked us in front area. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was he ever or did he often, was he often at a 
function or based in PRASA where he was not supposed to be? 
MR HOLELE:   Well remember it is a public institution Chair, so it 
would be difficult to say no he is not supposed to be there. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but it might be a public institution but I can’t 
just walk in there and sit in the boardroom. 
MR HOLELE:   No, no, not in the regards but he will be having 
meetings, which is normal in that regard as a service provider so that 
would be normal but I am saying that’s how you come to you know oh 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 47 of 124 
 
you see him at the graduation function. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   If I could just ask for a summation of things, 
compared to other service providers was he more prominent. 
MR HOLELE:   Oh yes, much more prominent. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, and was there anybody else who was as 
prominent as he was? 
MR HOLELE:   No I can’t recall. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But when you say he was prominent are you simply 
talking about his frequent presence at PRASA? 
10 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, his presence there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR HOLELE:   And not you know like I said presence in the symbolism 
of power you know ...[indistinct.  You know at the graduation he would 
be also there in front, you know, You notice him you know it is that kind 
of symbolism of authority. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am trying to understand because you’re saying as 
far as you know he didn’t claim to be influential generally speaking I 
guess.   
MR HOLELE:   But not directly to me. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not directly to you? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, but you thought that other people not as 
understanding that he was influential and ...[indistinct] in a way he was 
the owner of PRASA.  I was trying to understand how people came to 
give him those labels. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 48 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:    
MR HOLELE:   Because like said Chair because of the manner he 
carried himself and I mean the meeting that we speak about 
...[indistinct – audio faulty] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR HOLELE:   But that which I then also come know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ye, okay,  Mr Sonic 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   In fact it is the very first time in this meeting that 
he formally tells you about the power he holds. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But let’s have that come from you.  Tell us about that 
meeting, you were expecting somebody ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...and he was there and what happened.    
MR HOLELE:   So I was expecting Ms Nerishni Shunnugan, I entered 
the meeting with Mr Jacob Rakgoathe and we walked into the 
boardroom and Ms Shunnugan wasn’t there and Mr Moodley was 
seated, present in there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At that time did you know Mr Moodley to be 
associated in any way with Prodigy? 
20 
MR HOLELE:   Yes I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Had he had a position at Prodigy? 
MR HOLELE:   I didn’t really know at that time what his position was. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR HOLELE:   But he was associated with Prodigy. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 49 of 124 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   When you saw him there did you immediately think 
he would be the person representing Prodigy by virtue of what of the 
association you thought he had with Prodigy. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes Chair, yes, I knew that but I was still shocked that 
Ms Shunnugan was not there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Ms Shunnugan. 
MR HOLELE:   Shunnugan, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Had she told who was going to represent Prodigy at 
the meeting? 
MR HOLELE:   No it was meant to be a meeting between PRASA and 
10 
her. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
MR HOLELE:   She did not tell us that she was not ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   What was her position at Prodigy? 
MR HOLELE:   I think she was managing director. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay and as far as Mr Moodley was concerned 
you didn’t know whether he had a formal position at Prodigy or not? 
MR HOLELE:   No I didn’t know Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you knew he had an association with Prodigy. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, and then the meeting started, did you ask 
about why the MD wasn’t there? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes I did actually, I remember I did ask where Nerishni 
is and he said no she is in another meeting somewhere. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just repeat that. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 50 of 124 
 
MR HOLELE:   He said she is in another meeting somewhere else. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR HOLELE:   So he is representing Prodigal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, tell us about the context of the discussion at the 
meeting. 
MR HOLELE:   So we exchanged pleasantries Chairperson, morning, 
morning sir, you know how are you and I think at least I was taken 
aback so you know I needed to compose myself a bit and we exchanged 
pleasantries and then we said yes we are here and he said well guys 
you know that PRASA owes us money and you know I have come to 
10 
request that you make the payments that are due to Prodigy.  Did you 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   At that stage how much were they claiming was due 
to them from PRASA. 
MR HOLELE:   I think it was about R24million or so, ...[indistinct] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so he said that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Did he mention a figure at the meeting? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, he would have mentioned the figure I think, ja. 
AUDIO ENDS – NO ADJOURNMENT  
 CHAIRPERSON:   We are now back.  Looks like there might be 
20 
challenges with the technicians but they are being attended to and we are 
grateful that arrangements have been made for us to be able to continue.  
Yes, thank you Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Thank you so much.  Mr Holele you were now 
telling us what happened at the meeting with between you and 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 51 of 124 
 
Mr Mkwewe and Mr Audrey. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, Chairperson so as I have said you know we greeted 
and eventually got to the purpose of the meeting and Mr Moodley said he 
was here to resolve the matter of the payment that is due to Prodigy, 
more or less about 24 million rand and ja it needed to be done.  PRASA 
needed to pay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And what is your what was your attitude to the 
stance that there is legal dispute that you must pay. 
MR HOLELE:   So we made it clear, I started and told him that, but 
Mr Moodley we are in court.  PRASA and Prodigy are in court regarding 
10 
this matter regarding this matter and regarding the validity of the contract 
and as we know the court process is underway, and at that point I 
signalled to Mr. Rampathi, you know who is legally trained to take over 
that conversation. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And what did he say? 
MR HOLELE:   No, Mr Rampathi then affirmed it in legal language that 
look if – if you are so insistent, your lawyers must speak to our lawyers to 
explore if you, because clearly it looks like you are looking for some 
settlement.  Your lawyers must be in touch with of our lawyers for the two 
parties then you know to explore the matter further.   
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And on whom was the initiative to do those 
exploratory processes? 
MR HOLELE:   Well we, it was then from us because Mr Moodley was 
insisting on payment.  It was said in court, so Mr Rampathi then affirmed 
that the only other make way if this thing would relooked differently as if 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 52 of 124 
 
we were to put forward some settlement proposal but in a legal fashion. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So, it was up to now Prodigy and Mr Moodley to 
make that bow. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   So, I am sorry.  So, Mr Moodley said he was there to 
resolve the issue of payment, is that right? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But was he negotiating, no compromise, or was he 
demanding that the whole amount that they believed was due to them be 
paid? 
10 
MR HOLELE:   No, he was demanding the whole amount to be paid. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay.  Your – your – your microphone. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What was Mr. Moodley’s reaction to your assertion 
or Mr Mkwewe’s assertion that, well to get your lawyers to make a 
proposal to our lawyers? 
MR HOLELE:   It was like we had not said anything before, Chair, 
disregarded what was said and he kept on accepting the demand for the 
payment. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And how did you respond to that continued demand 
for payment?  When I say you, I am talking about you and Mr Rampathi. 
20 
MR HOLELE:   We kept on insisting that we are in court.  Any other 
matter would have to be a proposal from his lawyers to our lawyers. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And was it getting into a heated meeting, or was it 
friendly, cordial? 
MR HOLELE:   Very calm.  Very – very calm but both parties resoluting 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 53 of 124 
 
their position. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Eventually [intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sounds like it was not negotiations it was you pay no 
we will not pay, you pay no we will not pay, is that right? 
MR HOLELE:   I think that would have taken about fifteen minutes of that 
to and fro. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That to and froing. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And anybody – was anybody’s temper then raised 
as a result of these resolutions sessions. 
10 
MR HOLELE:   No, the – the temper was no temper was raised.  But a 
firmness came up.   
CHAIRPERSON:   A what came up? 
MR HOLELE:   A firmness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes.  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And how what happened next then of any 
significance? 
MR HOLELE:   Mr Moodley in a very stern voice looked at us and told us 
that look guys as you know, no not as you know, let me know that I am 
one of the top fifteen decision makers in this country and you may have 
20 
known or you may have heard, you may have seen, you may have read 
big changes are coming.  You better be on the right side of those 
changes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now when he talked about big changes did, he 
mention anything about what to make his nature of those changes would 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 54 of 124 
 
be? 
MR HOLELE:   No, he did not Chair.  But then it was clear that he was 
talking governmental changes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   By the way when was this meeting? 
MR HOLELE:   February, March 2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:   February, March 2017. 
MR HOLELE:   2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now in your affidavit you say that he mentioned 
and impending cabinet reshuffle. 
10 
MR HOLELE:   Yes.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Is that what you have said? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes.  He said in Government.  It was essentially saying to 
us that you would have read that, and you would have heard that big 
changes are coming in Government. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So, you said that he would have said or did he say 
that? 
MR HOLELE:   He said that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ja. 
MR HOLELE:   And – and – and  he went further to say you know that at 
20 
the top – the top of the country. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Of the whole country. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe before you proceed when he said big changes 
are coming, you say in your understanding was that he was talking about 
changes in Government or did he say that himself? 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 55 of 124 
 
MR HOLELE:   He said changes in Government at the top. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At the top. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, and we understood that very clearly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And what was your understanding to what that was? 
MR HOLELE:   To me at the cabinet level. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At the cabinet level. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But he did not mention the cabinet himself or did he 
also mention it? 
MR HOLELE:   No, he said – he said at the top in Government. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   The top.  Ja.  Okay, in Government.  Okay.  Did you 
ask him any questions to get more details about these changes? 
MR HOLELE:   No, Chair.  We were just sitting there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you were surprised. 
MR HOLELE:   Ja, we were surprised. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now well this following up from what this is based 
on.  When he said he is one of the fifteen top decisionmakers in the 
country.  How did you react to this? 
MR HOLELE:   We reacted to it, Chair [intervenes]. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Let us – let us talk about you. 
MR HOLELE:   Look we just kept quiet.  We just listened. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  What was your internal reaction? 
MR HOLELE:   Well, it was – it was fear. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Fear? 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 56 of 124 
 
MR HOLELE:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Did you believe him? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say you believed him? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Why did you believe him? 
MR HOLELE:   As I said earlier Chair because of you know the posture 
that was taken because of the talk of how important he is and now here 
he was – he was just confirming all of that – that knowledge. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  He said that big changes are going to be 
10 
happening in, at the top of Government. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And what else did he say? 
MR HOLELE:   And then he said, and you must be on the right side of 
those changes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  And what did you understand that to mean? 
MR HOLELE:   Well I understood it to mean whatever the changes at the 
top of us we do not want to be on the wrong side of whoever may come 
in. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR HOLELE:   To be in charge. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR HOLELE:   And in this case at Ministerial level. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At this stage who was the Minister of Transport? 
MR HOLELE:   It was Minister Dipuo Peters. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 57 of 124 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Yes, thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And this was early March 2017 it was the beginning 
of 2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry two thousand and? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes 2017. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Can I ask you this, he talked about big changes in 
Government did he say anything about any possible changes that passed? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, he did. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What did he say about it? 
10 
MR HOLELE:   He basically said and then when those changes happen, 
and the young man will come back. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And what did you understand that to mean? 
MR HOLELE:   We understood it to mean Mr Montana would recur as 
group CEO. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Why did you associate his returns to the young man 
would come back to Mr Montana. 
MR HOLELE:   It was just the context, Chair.  So basically, and 
remember me as an official when essentially those were threats that were 
being made.  And it means you know when he comes back you had better 
20 
not entertain it and so and he did this, the young man will come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, did he say when the big changes that you was 
talking about happened the young man would come back? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And your understanding was that the changes he was 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 58 of 124 
 
talking about included a change in terms of the Minister of Transport. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now I just want to raise with you something, if you 
know that it is in the first week of March 2017, that Minister Dipuo Peters 
dismissed Mr Molefe’s Board.  Are you aware of that? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, I am. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Did this meeting take place before that dismissal or 
after that? 
MR HOLELE:   This took place before that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now, when Mr Moodley said when big changes happen 
the young man would come back which you understood to be a reference 
to Mr Montana, what was your reaction to that? 
MR HOLELE:   Well, my reaction to impair like I said firstly was that in 
the conversation we kept quiet we did not say anything.  We just listened 
to it.  We just sat there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What was your understanding as to Mr Montana’s 
departure from PRASA.  Was it your understanding that he had left of his 
own accord, he had resigned or was it, was the understanding that he had 
left against his will or had been dismissed? 
20 
MR HOLELE:   Firstly, factually Chair, my understanding was that he had 
left of his own accord, he had resigned.  But, of course as an Executive I 
knew that there were conflict at that level of the Board and was 
monitored. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So when Mr Moodley said the young man will come 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 59 of 124 
 
back when those big changes happen did that surprise you bear in mind 
that your understanding was that he had left of his own accord?  Or not 
really or is it something that you did not take a reflect to think about? 
MR HOLELE:   It did not surprise me that he would say something like 
that.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And why did it not surprise you? 
MR HOLELE:   Like I said because of the posture or influence and power 
you know that he conducted himself with that we have come to know.  So, 
he was basically saying like I have said we must be on the right side of 
all of these things and yes so it did not surprise me. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, do you know on which side he was going to be 
when that happened? 
MR HOLELE:   Say that again Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you know on which side he was going to be when 
the big changes happened? 
MR HOLELE:   Which side Mr Moodley? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Moodley.  Did you know on which side he was going 
to be and whether it was the same side that he wanted you to be or 
different sides? 
MR HOLELE:   No, it was clear that I needed to be on his side and 
20 
Mr Raphati were needed and continuing to refuse to pay for it meant that 
we are against that side. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now you did not agree to pay Prodigy at that 
meeting, sir? 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 60 of 124 
 
MR HOLELE:   No, we did not. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Were you willing to then risk being on the wrong 
side of the changes that he had fore scheduled in that meeting? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, I was. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And why is that so? 
MR HOLELE:   Because it was a simple matter and here is a legal 
dispute.  The matter is in court.  The papers are before court.  We 
certainly had, would not have had the way forward given the fact the 
payment. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now dealing with, were were there any changes 
10 
that came through after the meeting? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What was that change? 
MR HOLELE:   Well as - as [intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry before that, how did your meeting with 
Mr Moodley end? 
MR HOLELE:   Was just that a dead end.  A stalement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was a stalement.  
MR HOLELE:   Ja, just a stalement because we kept on going back and 
forth and we struggled to then find our conclusion to even look at things, 
20 
like we have exhausted the effects of ...[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Were there any arguments advanced by 
Mr Moodley to try and persuade you to pay or was it just a situation that 
he was just demanding that you pay and you were saying no there is, we 
are in court we won’t pay now and there was no motivation, new 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 61 of 124 
 
arguments that you had not heard or anything like that. 
MR HOLELE:   No, Chair, there was no new arguments. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And there was motivation why it would be a good thing 
for you to pay? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, I mean he just insisted that you know the payment 
must be done.  It was just this insistence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but what I am asking was whether in support of that 
insistence he told you anything other than that what appeared to be a 
threat? 
MR HOLELE:   No.  No. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   In other words, it was simply a question of, I, Roy 
Moodley say to you pay therefore you must pay.  Not because the money 
is due, not because your defence is forgery or what? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, of course it was those kinds of, I mean the key one 
then, which is what they are arguing that PRASA owes them this amount 
of money.  These invoices are due and payable.  You know beyond that 
nothing – nothing more. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I guess that from his point of view the money was 
due to to ...[intervenes].  
20 
MR HOLELE:   It was due and pay for yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now in relation to the change that Mr Moodley had 
forecast at the meeting did anything happen to indicate that his forecast 
was correct? 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 62 of 124 
 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, Chairman, it happened. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What happened? 
MR HOLELE:   Indeed, a sharpening of Cabinet happened and Mr Dipuo 
Peters was removed as our Minister of Transport and Mr Joe 
Maswanganyi was appointed as Minister of Transport. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Right about how long after the meeting? 
MR HOLELE:   Like I say it was merely a  couple of weeks towards the 
end of March. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And when that happened did it strike you that here 
is a person who had already forecast? 
10 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, it did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You say a couple of weeks I am sure that the actual 
date can be found of the announcement of the change so that should be 
looked into but you are confident that few weeks? 
MR HOLELE:   Of course. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just a few weeks. 
MR HOLELE:   Ja, just a couple of weeks back that is why I am saying a 
meeting would have happened between end February beginning March.  
Around February, March. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Yes.  Okay.  And you think the cabinet reshuffle 
20 
was sometime in March also? 
MR HOLELE:   It was the end of March or something like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Chairman the witnesses Mr. Molefe and 
Mr Akhmed will tell us that it happened at the end of March.  
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 63 of 124 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   It happened in March.  Ja.  Okay.  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now can I just ask you something slightly different 
and go back to the issues you raise in your affidavit, which I say I was 
going to refer you to.  Now in relation to Prodigy to Mr Dingswayo’s 
affidavit there is attached a document which I would like you to look at.  
It is BM(3). 
CHAIRPERSON:   GM(3). 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry MMD(3). 
CHAIRPERSON:   MMD(3). 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  It is an annexure to Mr Dingswayo’s affidavit. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say the annexure to Mr Dingswayo’s affidavit? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And it appears at that the top end of page 43 
Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There are dividers marked one up to eleven. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes Chair it is the one that is marked three. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then there is, and the one that is marked three 
when I opened on it that is page 54.  It is very much behind 
...[intervenes].  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No.  It should be page 43.  Sorry Mr Chair, maybe I 
did not find ...[intervenes].  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it in the same bundle? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It is SS(8). 
CHAIRPERSON:   SS(8). 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:    And what is the annexure? 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 64 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Annexure MMD(3). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I have got it. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Have you got that Mr Holele? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What is that document? 
MR HOLELE:   The heading, the subject is Piloting of Centre of 
Excellence Model in Learnership Implementation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think just repeat that I do not know what was 
happening maybe you are little further from the microphone. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Just repeat what it is. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes.  The subject is Piloting of Centre of Excellence 
Model and Learnership Implementation. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And from which Firm is that document? 
MR HOLELE:   It is from Prodigy. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   This is the same Prodigy we have been talking 
about? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, we need not look at the whole document but 
you will see right at the top, sorry on the right hand corner there is 
20 
handwriting, there is manuscript inscription on that document.  Do you 
see that? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And that is addressed to whom? 
MR HOLELE:   Tiro and Mpefo. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 65 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And who is Tiro? 
MR HOLELE:   It is myself. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Did you see this document at the time about the 
time it was sent to you? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What does that document say? 
MR HOLELE:   If I recall I am not just going to, I am going to read  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  Yes.  No – no - no sorry what does the 
inscription say? 
MR HOLELE:   The inscriptions should I read it ? 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  Yes. 
MR HOLELE:   It says, 
“Tiro Mpefo the proposal from Prodigy is accepted.  
We should enter into a partnership with Prodigy 
Business I think it is Solutions Property Limited.  We 
need a formal MOU at I think it is to that – to this 
effect please prepare a letter for my signature in 
accordance I cannot read this my signature.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   Receipt, is that not receipt and confirm? 
MR HOLELE:   The signature ...[intervenes].   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Our acceptance of the proposal from Prodigy. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, I just could not see that signature and receipt and ja.  
But that is what it says Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, there is a signature there.  Whose signature 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 66 of 124 
 
is that? 
MR HOLELE:   That is Mr Montana’s signature. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And whose handwriting is that? 
MR HOLELE:   It is Mr Montana’s handwriting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There is a date appearing there, but the year does not 
appear.  Six.  What would be the year? 
MR HOLELE:   I think it would be 2010 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was the same date as the date of the letter from 
Prodigy. 
MR HOLELE:   Ja.  It looks like it.  Yes, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   The letter is addressed to Passenger Rail Agency of 
South Africa.  Care of  Mr Mpefo and Mr L Montana.  Is that right? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it is from N Shamagun Director of Prodigy 
Business Services? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, in essence what does this letter contain in 
respect of price? 
MR HOLELE:   I think if I recall the letter.  The letter was proposing a 
partnership between Prodigy and PRASA and I think at the back of the 
20 
proposal was that Prodigy had arranged, had managed to secure funding 
from I think the transport SICA and to be in partnership with PRASA for 
the funding of this of the learnership. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, Mr Montana’s note would suggest that he was 
telling you to accept the proposal. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 67 of 124 
 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Was this proposal then accepted?  In other words, 
did you action it what he asked? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, Chairperson 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well – well that sentence on the inscription says the 
proposal from Prodigy is accepted like he was accepting it and then he 
wanted certain things to be done to give effect to the acceptance to that 
sentence.  Is that your understanding? 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, Chair 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And as the Chairperson has pointed out that 
10 
acceptance is made on the very same day that the proposal is date. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now is that what gave birth to a series of Prodigy 
contracts?  There will be evidence about that?  I am just asking you to do 
the best of your knowledge. 
MR HOLELE:   Yes, Chair that is exactly what happened.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson I just want to point out that 
Mr Dingswayo will deal with that when he comes to this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And of course, he will deal with the issues relating 
20 
to the resistance to payments. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, coming back to another matter you raised in 
your affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I see we are at one.  But if we are not going to take 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 68 of 124 
 
long we could try and finish with him so that after lunch we deal with the 
next witness.  But it depends how long you think you will still be. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   May I be guided by you.  The thoughts I want refer 
the witness to is to where he says, “I can read the affidavit and I can 
confirm what is there.  It would be unfair to both to you and the witness 
by saying why do you confirm it.  I have to take into effect  a few minutes 
but more importantly if you look at paragraph 7, and I want to deal with 
the manner in which Mr Montana dealt with Mr Holele. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But how much time do you need? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I would say at least twenty minutes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, I think if it is going to take twenty minutes let 
us take the lunch adjournment and then you can continue.  We will take 
the lunch adjournment now and we will resume at 2 o’clock.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS  
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Soni, let us proceed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Holele, you might remember we have finished 
now with the meeting in February and March ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one moment Mr Soni.  When the lights were off 
there was a light that came there that helped with the lighting here.  
20 
The technicians must try and see whether that light- it is that one right 
at the top cannot be used so that we have better lighting. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or even this side.  I do not see Commission staff 
here.  Maybe send an SMS through and then the technicians must just 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 69 of 124 
 
see whether we can have another light that will give us better lighting 
in this area.  Yes okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am told it is being attended to.  
 
Now Mr Holele can I now take you to paragraph 6 of your 
affidavit where you refer to the affidavit of Ms Ngoye and Mr 
Dingiswayo.  Now Mr Dingiswayo’s affidavit we have already dealt with 
because that was that ledger the Prodigy ledger you remember.   
MR HOLELE:  Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay.  Now ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Where do we go now? 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  At paragraph 6 of Mr Holele’s affidavit, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of Mr Molefe’s affidavit? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, Mr Molela ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Holele. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Holele’s affidavit, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  By the way, what page was that or under what 
divider was that? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Under SS10. 
CHAIRPERSON:  SS ... (intervenes) 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  10. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  N? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  10. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  I think what you should do after this is to 
make sure that the dividers that are marked SS are more visible. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 70 of 124 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  They are overshadowed by the red dividers.  SS10. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am just devising a solution in my mind Mr 
Chairman and I think I know what I am going to do is ask that they be 
placed at the top of the document rather than on the side. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Because on the side what you have is the 
Annexure numbers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And that is what is confusing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yeah. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But as soon as we finish with today, I would do ... 
(intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  What paragraph on Mr Holele’s, 7? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Paragraph 6 Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So, we have dealt with MR Dingiswayo’s affidavit 
and you might remember Mr Holele, I referred you to that letter from 
Prodigy that Mr Montana asked you to act upon.   
MR HOLELE:  Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Right.  Now I want to deal with the affidavit of Ms 
20 
Ngoye.  I find I think there are two references to you.  Mr Chairperson, 
Ms Ngoye’s affidavit is SS7.  I have given your (indistinct) an indication 
of where I will be taking Mr Holele and obviously yourself Mr 
Chairperson. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 71 of 124 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let us admit it now that you are going to refer to 
it.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The affidavit of Ms Onica Martha Ngoye and it is 
Annexure will be admitted and marked Exhibit as SS7. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please Mr Chairperson.  Chairperson, may 
I just make this point so when you are considering matter you will know 
that in fact there are two affidavits by Ms Ngoye. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  This is the second one, the one made in February. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  She made one in September last year. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am going to come to that in a moment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But for now, I am dealing with the February 2020. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But they are all in the same file? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  They are all in the same file. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay, thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Thank you.  Mr Holele, can I ask you to then 
20 
please turn to page 282 of that affidavit?  There on the top right-hand 
corner in the red numbers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You just have to keep on saying of Exhibit SS7, so 
they read out the transcript we will know which bundle we are talking 
about. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 72 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  The SS7 page 242.  Have you got it Mr 
Holele?  Now you will see there in paragraph 16.4 Ms Ngoye says; 
 
I was summoned to a meeting ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Did you say page 242? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  282. 
CHAIRPERSON:  282.  Okay, thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And it is paragraph 16.4 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have got it. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So, she says she was summoned to a meeting with 
representatives of Strawberry Worx.  Who is Strawberry Worx or who 
10 
was Strawberry Worx? 
MR HOLELE:  Strawberry Worx is an outdoor advertising company 
Chairperson that had a contract to do PRASA’s outdoor advertising 
work.  They will- the advertising right. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  She says at this meeting was a Mr Maraj and Mr 
Ashveer Dwarikapersadh and Mr Selvan Moodley.  Do you know who Mr 
Selvan Moodley is? 
MR HOLELE:  Yes, I do Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Who is he? 
MR HOLELE:  He is the son of Mr Roy Moodley. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  He is Mr Roy Moodley’s son? 
MR HOLELE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And was he associated with Strawberry Worx? 
MR HOLELE:  Yes, he was Chair. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 73 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now to the best of your knowledge, was Mr Roy 
Moodley associated with Strawberry formerly? 
MR HOLELE:  No, I do not know.  I know Selvan. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  He says, one of the people at the- or Ms Ngoye 
says, one of the people who was at the meeting was you. 
MR HOLELE:  Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And you recall this meeting? 
MR HOLELE:  Yes, I do Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay.  So (indistinct) from point out- pointed out 
that you were at the meeting, what she says and tell the Chairperson 
10 
whether you confirm what Ms Ngoye says in this affidavit  because that 
is what you have done in paragraph 8 of your affidavit. 
MR HOLELE:  It reads;  
 
There I was given instructions by the representatives of 
 
Strawberry Worx on how I ought to manage the advertising 
 
portfolio and how I was expected to take instructions from 
 
them. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Just hold on one minute.  You were present at this 
meeting? 
MR HOLELE:  Yes, I was Chair. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  What was your reaction to that?  But firstly, did 
that happen? 
MR HOLELE:  Yes, it did. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  What was your reaction to it? 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 74 of 124 
 
MR HOLELE:  It was quite shocking Chair but it was- this one was a 
really conflictual meeting. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Excuse me? 
MR HOLELE:  A very conflictual meeting.  So, this was real tense and 
tough meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well maybe let us go back.  How did you come to be 
in this meeting? 
MR HOLELE:  Because of my role Chairperson as you know Group 
Chief Strategy Officer I played- I would be involved in a whole range of 
different issues that really went to the heart of PRASA strategy.  So, 
10 
the Advertising Portfolio in PRASA would be covered by under the 
secondary mandate as given by the Legal Succession Act.  And the 
Legal Succession Act says that the assets that PRASA applies, it must 
exploit to generate revenue so the Advertising Portfolio was quite 
central to that.   
 
So as Head of Strategy I would especially where there were 
difficulties I would generally- I would generally just be there.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Now Ms Ngoye says she was summoned to the 
meeting. 
MR HOLELE:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were you there because you had also been 
summoned or you were invited to the meeting and ... (intervenes) 
MR HOLELE:  No, I- this one I do not recall Chair.  Chance are that Ms 
Ngoye herself would have invited me to this meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay, but you were there ... (intervenes) 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 75 of 124 
 
MR HOLELE:  I was there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  From the time that she was there up to the time either 
the meeting ended ... (intervenes) 
MR HOLELE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or when she left, you left with her. 
MR HOLELE:  Yes.  Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  You may continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then what happened next according to Ms 
Ngoye? 
MR HOLELE:  I was even told that they have the power to remove the 
10 
  
portfolio from Intersite and had intended to do so because I 
 
clearly did not know what I was doing. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Just hold on there for a- where was Ms Ngoye 
based at that time? 
MR HOLELE:  She was the CEO of Intersite Asset Investments 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what was this meeting about? 
MR HOLELE:  So, there was litigation between Prime Media and 
PRASA.  Prime Media had taken PRASA to court for having- for the 
award of the advertising contract. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Through Strawberry Worx? 
MR HOLELE:  Through Strawberry, no, through- I think the other 
company was Provantage.  And Strawberry Worx was in partnership 
with Provantage or something like that.  But they were all in- or these 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 76 of 124 
 
were the new entities that were managing the advertising portfolio.  
Prime Media had lost out on that contract.   
 
So, there was litigation between Prime Media taking PRASA to 
court.  Now this meeting was about Strawberry Worx unhappiness with 
how Intersite was firstly managing the portfolio and how it was 
managing the litigation that was the purpose of this meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am interested in the point of the litigation- well 
firstly they said that they had the power to remove the portfolio from 
Intersite because Ms Ngoye did not know- allegedly did not know what 
10 
she was doing.  What was her response to it? 
MR HOLELE:  Ms Ngoye is a very feisty person. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is a very? 
MR HOLELE:  Feisty person and she took it on and the meeting- she 
fought like a bull.  It was just conflict.  She took great exception to 
those assertions.    
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And what did she say there at the meeting?  
CHAIRPERSON:  One second.  I think you may be standing too far from 
your mic. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am sorry. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And before lunch there had been a lot of improvement 
that from the witness’s side but there are challenges now again.  It may 
be that it has got nothing to do with you, maybe somebody needs to do 
something to the mic.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I will just … (intervenes) 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 77 of 124 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just try again, ja. 
MR HOLELE:  Well she took exception to this assertion and I- if I recall 
I think she said she does not take instructions from them.  But she took 
exception as well from her- this professional credibility that here she 
was being told that she does not know what she was doing. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And that a client was going to tell PRASA how it 
should have- how it should oversee the clients work. 
MR HOLELE:  Yes, and she took great exception to that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then you say that the second issue was that 
Strawberry Worx apparently was unhappy with the way PRASA was 
10 
handling the litigation.  Now Ms Ngoye deals with that in paragraph 
15.5.  What happened in that regard? 
MR HOLELE:  I think the demand by Strawberry Worx was that the 
lawyers should be changed.  The lawyers who were presenting PRASA 
in this litigation should be changed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And who were the lawyers who were representing 
PRASA then? 
MR HOLELE:  It was Hogan Lovells. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now then I think just dealing with that point ask 
you to turn to the next page at paragraph 15.6. 
20 
MR HOLELE:  Records. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ngoye then describes what happened as a result 
of Strawberry’s unhappiness.  What does she say happen?  If you look 
at halfway down that paragraph, “however in May or June 2013”. 
MR HOLELE:  Should I read this? 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 78 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR HOLELE:  However, in May or June 2013 the portfolio was moved 
from Intersite to PRASA and Hogan Lovells were promptly  
removed 
from the brief by the special legal advisor in the  
office of the Group 
CEO Ms Melanie Naidoo and replaced with a different firm.   
The last attorneys who handled the matter was Maraj Attorneys who 
incidentally happened to also be attorneys of record of Strawberry 
Worx. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Can I just ask you to go back to paragraph 15.4. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So just before that Mr Soni.  So, the meeting that you 
10 
were testifying about a few minutes ago included Strawberry Worx and 
Mr Selvan Moodley who you said is Mr Roy Moodley’s son.  Is that 
right? 
MR HOLELE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And at that meeting these people including Mr Selvan 
Moodley were demanding that the law firm that PRASA was using at the 
time … (intervenes) 
MR HOLELE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Should be fired and another firm should be appointed 
for PRASA.  Is that right? 
20 
MR HOLELE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And Ms Ngoye resisted that. 
MR HOLELE:  Yes Chair. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 79 of 124 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But now when you read the 15.6, she says in June 
2013 the portfolio was moved from Intersite which is where Ms Ngoye 
was in charge.  Is that right? 
MR HOLELE:  Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To PRASA and then Hogan Lovells were removed as 
attorneys for PRASA.  Is that right? 
MR HOLELE:  Yes, that is what she says. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then in their place the Maraj Attorneys were 
appointed and they happen to be attorneys according to Ms Ngoye of 
also of Strawberry Worx. 
10 
MR HOLELE:  Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now at 15.4 in the second line Ms Ngoye says that 
there was a Mr Maraj present.  Is this same attorney that replaced 
Strawberry- I mean that replaced Hogan Lovells? 
MR HOLELE:  I imagine it would be.  Chair, I cannot recall the 
characters but I imagine it would be him. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Anyways … (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Either it may or may not be depending. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ms Ngoye will come and say. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, she would testify to that.  Okay. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then can I ask you … (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you- are you able to say that she will say it is the 
same attorney? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 80 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then can I ask you to turn to page 284 at 
paragraph 15.8?  Oh sorry, can I ask you to turn to page 285 at 
paragraph 15.10?  And then the enclosing sentences of that paragraph 
she talks about a meeting.  It says she asked for a meeting with all the 
relevant parties relating to Mr Montana, Strawberry Worx and so on is 
present at the meeting where Ms Zinde, Ms Naidoo, Mr Holele, Mr 
Montana and myself.  You see that? 
MR HOLELE:  Yes, I do. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  You recall that meeting? 
MR HOLELE:  Yes, I do. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay.  Now what happened at this meeting? 
MR HOLELE:  The- if I recall the matter was meant to be- the matter of 
this conflict was meant to be discussed and the meeting deteriorated 
very fast because Mr Montana asserted that Ms Ngoye and especially 
me should have followed his instructions to actually remove the 
advertising portfolio from Intersite.  And that this problem would not 
have arisen if I followed that instruction.   
 
And I actually if I recall the instruction was given when I was 
at some point Acting Group CEO and Mr Montana was away for one 
thing or the other.  And I was given this instruction through I think 
20 
Strawberry Worx or through Ms Ngoye that this thing had come up and I 
need to remove the portfolio.  I think Mr Montana actually called me 
and I did not because Intersite is a separate company.  It has a board 
and I was simply Acting as Group CEO so we did not do it at the time.  
So, this reflects- this point that is made here by Ms Ngoye reflect that 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 81 of 124 
 
detail that had we followed that instruction, we would not be sitting in 
this meeting with this problem. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And it indicated that he was unhappy- Mr Montana 
was unhappy that you and Ms Ngoye had not carried out his instruction. 
MR HOLELE:  Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then I then ask you to look at paragraph 15.13 at 
page 268, it is on the following page. 
CHAIRPERSON:  286. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  286 yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It is paragraph 15.13 Mr Chairperson, yes. 
 
Now as a result of all of this Ms Ngoye says that Mr Montana 
thereafter dismissed Mr- oh sorry, suspended Mr Martin Chauke.   
MR HOLELE:  Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And it was all over the fact that you and Ms Ngoye 
had not carried out his instructions. 
MR HOLELE:  Yes.  The details regarding this is that at this meeting 
there was some misunderstanding on the part of Ms Naidoo of email 
communication between Mr Chauke who was the actual then Portfolio 
Manager, highly experienced skilled advertising professional employed 
20 
by PRASA.   
 
Mr Chauke was communicating with the PRASA lawyers Hogan 
Lovell- I will not to call it details.  He was communicating with the 
PRASA lawyers around strategy in this litigation.  Ms Naidoo 
misunderstood whatever that communication was and informed Mr 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 82 of 124 
 
Montana that Mr Chauke was actually strategizing with the lawyers of 
the opposition and he had gotten it wrong. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And he suspended Mr Chauke. 
MR HOLELE:  Yes.  Mr Chauke had to be suspended that same 
evening. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But Mr Chauke had had nothing to do with defying 
his instructions. 
MR HOLELE:  Yes.  But if he was being accused of working with the 
lawyers of the opposition, it was read in that context that he was part 
of this defiance. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now Ms Naidoo was his personal lawyer- I mean 
was the lawyer in Mr Montana’s office at the time.  Am I correct? 
MR HOLELE:  Yes Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now can I now ask you to keep on SS7 but turn to 
page 46?  Chairperson this now is the first affidavit that Ms Ngoye 
admitted, the one from September 2019. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  You say page 46? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Page 46, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now if I could just ask you to look at the first full 
20 
paragraph on page 46.  Have you got it?  46 yes.   
MR HOLELE:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Have you got it? 
MR HOLELE:  I have got it. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 83 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ms Ngoye in her capacity as Legal Head Risk and 
Compliance decline to clear the letter the DBSA soon after this is 
issued and served, received this advice from the legal department 
Ngoye was put on special leave together with Tiro Holele an Executive 
responsible for Strategy in the office of the CEO.  You recall this? 
MR HOLELE:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now this obviously happened after Mr Montana. 
MR HOLELE:  Yes Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay.  But I just want to point out that effectively 
it looks like the same culture demands when a decision is resisted, 
10 
then the person is put on suspension or dismissed. 
MR HOLELE:  Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Let us just finalize your affidavit now Mr Holele.  
And in paragraph 7 of your affidavit you say you want to inform the 
Chairperson of three incidents involving yourself.  And you put them out 
as 7.1, 7.2 then 7.3 
MR HOLELE:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now … (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on one second. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry, that is now SS10 page 2, Mr Holele’s 
20 
affidavit.  Into the record SS10 Mr Holele and paragraph- page 2. 
MR HOLELE:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So, you say that on a number of occasions there 
were verbal abuse from Mr Montana towards you. 
MR HOLELE:  Yes Chair. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 84 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then you say that in 7.1 Mr Montana accused you 
of leaking information to the Public Protector. 
MR HOLELE:  Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Was this during the period when she was 
compiling a report which later emerged as the “Derailed” report? 
MR HOLELE:  Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And what did Mr Montana do based on those 
allegations? 
MR HOLELE:  Well I was as I say here just accused of this and I was 
then demoted Chairperson and removed from the role of Group Chief 
10 
Strategy Officer and I was sent to Intersite. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Was any hearing held? 
MR HOLELE:  No nothing.  No hearing, nothing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What was the reason that was given to you for your 
demotion? 
MR HOLELE:  So, as we say Chair it was a culmination of a number of 
these problems.  These relations becoming really difficult between me 
and my supervisor, Mr Montana … (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you supervisor being? 
MR HOLELE:  Mr Montana.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay mm. 
MR HOLELE:  And I mean the Advertising Portfolio is one of them, it 
was a really big one that, “you know, I give you instructions and you 
second guess me.”  And then it was the Public Protector issue because 
we were compiling responses to the Public Protector and Mr Montana 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 85 of 124 
 
was very unhappy about our compilation.  And then again then from 
there, “you have leaked information to the Public Protector”.  So, it was 
a culmination of just bad relations at the workplace. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But those were the reasons for your demotion as well 
as you saw them? 
MR HOLELE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did he tell you what the reason was? 
MR HOLELE:  This were all the allegations that he raised.  We did have 
a meeting and in the- well before the actual demotion and in the formal 
meeting he was, “you know look, things are no longer working okay 
10 
between you and me.  We must look at a different place for you.”  
Again, maybe as still as I was waiting, a week or two later I was then 
again told that, “It looks like you are going to be removed and primarily 
on this issue of the leaking of information to the Public Protector”.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And he specifically gave you that as the reason for 
your being … (intervenes) 
MR HOLELE:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairman, may I on that point make this point 
that when we get to the report of the Public Protector through Mr 
Molefe and Mr Ahmad, you will see that the Public Protector complains 
20 
that there was no cooperation, documents were not provided, 
incomplete documents but furthermore we will give the details.  But it is 
quite significant that Mr Holele because he is in some way cooperating 
with the Public Protector basis Mr Montana as well. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 86 of 124 
 
 
Chairman, subject to anything that you may want from this 
witness (indistinct). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes no, that is fine.  You are done? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am done. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are done.  Thank you Mr Holele.   
MR HOLELE:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If a need arises, we will ask you to come back but 
thank you very much.  You are excused. 
MR HOLELE:  Thank you very much Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  For the next witness I wonder whether 
10 
there is a chance to change and let him sit much further maybe that we 
contribute to me hearing what they say clearly. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Perhaps he should sit here then. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Yes, because I can hear you quite well but I have 
been struggling.  So maybe it is the distance, the further somebody is 
from the better maybe. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I do not know whether that is going to be easy 
and probably whether it will need any adjournment.  But I see that the 
mic that Mr Holele was using has a base.  And I do not know whether 
20 
that remove it will be taken to the end of the, where the witness will be 
or whether they would need another one.  Maybe Mr Soni you can talk 
to the technicians to see whether we … (intervenes) 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 87 of 124 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  That they would need or should we adjourn for a short 
time?  Ja, I think let us take a short adjournment to … (intervenes) 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am sorry Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Allow everything to be sorted out.  We will take a 5 
minutes adjournment. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  5 minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes Mr Soni, your mic is not on. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please.   The next witness is going to be 
Mr Makwantala[?] Jacob Rakgoathe.  His affidavit is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I thought that they were going to try something else, 
did the technician say it was not going to work? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It couldn’t work because none of the others are 
active. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...[Indistinct] or are active? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And what needs to be done to make them active.  I 
think Reverend Stamela wants to tell you something, unless the 
20 
technicians tell me that it won’t make a difference. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   For today they have suggested they have 
adjusted the mic and they will attend to this tomorrow because it needs 
an activation process done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh which is not possible today. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 88 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It can’t be done today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...[Indistinct – recording breaking up] but is this 
supposed to be better now. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That’s what the technicians say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright let’s see.  Okay we can continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Fine, can the witness be sworn in. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Please administer the oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
WITNESS:   My name is ...[Indistinct] Jacob Rakgoathe. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection to taking the prescribed 
10 
oath? 
WITNESS:   No. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath to be binding on your 
conscience? 
WITNESS:   I do. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you swear that the evidence that you will give will be 
truth, the whole truth and nothing else but the truth, if so please raise 
your right hand and say so help me God. 
WITNESS:   So help me God. 
JACOB RAKGOATHE:   (duly sworn, states) 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:    Thank you, you may be seated.  Yes Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As it pleases Mr Chairperson.   Mr Rakgoathe in 
front of you is a document headed Affidavit, you recognise that 
document? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   I do sir. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 89 of 124 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well first is the document not in the same bundle 
that we were using? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think[indistinct] state that for whoever is the 
transcribers they know we’re still using the same bundle. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, and is that document on the top right hand 
corner marked SS11? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The file – this witnesses’ affidavit is on page – in the 
same bundle that we were using earlier on in respect of Mr Kodela’s 
10 
evidence that contains Exhibit SS7, SS8, SS9, SS10, SS11, SS12, yes 
thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Chairman before I start dabbling [indistinct] 
for Moodley and prodigy wish to place some stuff on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh – ja please come through, I thought we had done 
that, oh that might involve somebody else? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That was the previous witness [indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No we don’t have to get you to place yourself on 
record for each one unless you – there is some additional person you 
represent in regard to whom you didn’t place yourself on record, if it’s 
20 
the same people it’s fine. 
UNIDENTIFIED MALE:   I will leave it with the same reservation as with 
all the witnesses, thank you Judge. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 90 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Thank you Mr Chairman.  Mr Rakgoathe have you 
read the affidavit in front of you? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   Yes I have. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The signature at the bottom of that affidavit is 
that your signature? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   It is indeed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Do you confirm that…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that at the bottom of the second page of the 
affidavit? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That’s correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And do you confirm that what’s contained in this 
affidavit is true and correct? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   That’s correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, you’ve heard the evidence of Mr 
Holele[indistinct] in February/March 2017 that was you, he and Mr 
Moodley were present. 
MR RAKGOATHE:   Correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Tell the Chairperson how it came about that you 
went to that meeting? 
20 
MR RAKGOATHE:  Chair I was called by [indistinct – recording 
breaking up]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   …the witness who would testify on the same side 
would be listening in the room but – because the idea would be that his 
evidence must be based on his own memory but check him because 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 91 of 124 
 
these proceedings are broadcast so even if somebody is not in the 
room, they may be watching and listening but it does [indistinct] one 
would have preferred that he was not listening to that evidence and 
then you ask him to give you his evidence as he recalls it without 
having listening – without having been in the room when the evidence 
was given but those are the challenges that come with technology  and, 
ja.  Okay your mic is not on again. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry please accept that we did debate this and 
the very issue that you raised is if Mr Rakgoathe is sitting next door 
he’d be able to have – but [indistinct] and I think you are right or 
10 
submit you are right and that in future we must ensure a [indistinct] 
between who is the person giving evidence and the person who is 
[indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON: It’s – as I say it’s tricky but if somebody is known to 
be sitting here and listening to evidence of a witness that later on he or 
she is required to [indistinct] he or she is able to [indistinct – recording 
breaking up] evidence is not the same as that of somebody who might 
not have been in the room, so [indistinct] but as I say sometimes 
somebody’s listening and they don’t even know they’ll end up being 
called but they get called and that they give evidence but it’s just that 
20 
we need to be alive to these challenges [indistinct] what needs to be 
done.    
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, may I just say that [indistinct – 
recording breaking up] to err on the side of [indistinct] rather than 
convenience that one could – and I think that is for me [indistinct]. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 92 of 124 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes because of course [indistinct] be open to 
anybody who might want to challenge his evidence to say that what 
[indistinct] put on – can the Commission put on his evidence because 
he was sitting here, he heard everything that Mr Holele says, he then 
comes after Mr Holele and says, yes it’s right but you are sitting here 
listening to everything. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I will go on Mr Chairman and we just – you have 
[indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, you’ve heard the evidence of Mr Holele and 
10 
as Chairperson has rightly pointed out to us [indistinct] but before you 
made your statement you had seen his statement? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   That’s correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And you, in fact say that you confirm what he has 
said. 
MR RAKGOATHE:   That’s correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now let’s just get to the nub of your evidence 
[indistinct] we know this meeting happened, so tell us in your own 
words what happened at the meeting, in other words, how did you – we 
know that Mr Holele invited you but where was the meeting held? 
20 
MR RAKGOATHE:   The meeting was held…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let’s just make sure – is the meeting that Mr Holele 
said happened in March or February 2017, that’s the meeting you’re 
talking about? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   Correct, I can’t remember the date specifically as 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 93 of 124 
 
indicated by Mr Holele but certainly I remember the meeting that I was 
invited to by him.  As I indicated Chair, I was sitting in my office and Mr 
Holele called me from the office and said, join me in a meeting.  When I 
enquired what was the meeting about he said come, and I said, let me 
just go with a colleague and that meeting was in the section we call the 
Group CEO section, in one of the boardrooms and as I indicated I was 
not aware about the meeting or what the subject meeting was or who 
we were meeting for that matter and when I walked into the boardroom 
there was a gentleman sitting, I didn’t know the name, I didn’t know the 
person it was my first encounter with the gentleman.  I remember he 
10 
was introduced but I didn’t take it to note because that was not part of 
the meeting so I didn’t know [indistinct – recording breaking up] that 
particular meeting. We then sat down and enough of the discussion was 
that PRASA owes Prodigy a certain sum of money for the services 
rendered and Mr Moodley then indicated that he’s surprised that 
[indistinct] why we’re defending the matter for services that had been 
rendered.  He did most of the talking and I then – when it came to my 
turn to speak in the meeting I then indicated to Mr Moodley that if you 
[indistinct] on making a proposal that he must make the proposal 
formally and that will be considered by PRASA attorneys so that the 
20 
matter can be looked at.  It was difficult to say with regards to his 
decision, his proposal or his demand for payment other than the fact 
that, that kind of process you need to process what you require from 
PRASA through a process that we indicate and then the process – I 
said to him that he must make a formal proposal to our lawyers so that 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 94 of 124 
 
the matter – because the matter was in Court at that stage for that 
other proposal to be considered. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Before you carry on, can I just ask you this, was 
any figure mentioned, to the best of your knowledge? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   I can’t remember the number there was a number 
that was mentioned in the meeting Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And were you aware of the fact of the dispute and 
the nature of the dispute? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   I was on high level – I’m part of the Group Leader 
Risk and Compliance, my role is compliance so we hold meetings 
10 
regularly to discuss the workload that we have through the Group Risk 
Legal meeting.  That matter was mentioned but I can’t remember the 
nature and the substance of the meeting but it was one of the matters 
that was mentioned. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And when you [indistinct] rebuffed the demand, 
what was Mr Moodley’s reaction? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   Well I suppose it was insisting – there was a 
stalemate but what I remember was that at the tail end of the meeting, 
they mentioned that he was fine with the top 15 or 17, I recall it to be 
17 but I could be on advisement if 15 or 17 that was part of the 
20 
decision maker and that decision making, involved appointments or 
looking at nominations for State owned enterprises he used and that 
when the decision – and that the young man – he did say that the 
young man may be coming and as a result we must be on the right side 
of the changes that are eminent. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 95 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Can I just get back to precisely what Mr Moodley 
said in relation to being one of the [indistinct – recording breaking up] 
and you say you can’t remember if it was 15 or 17, did he mention one 
number or did he mention multiple numbers? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   He mentioned one number but I thought in my head 
that it was the 17 but it could have been the 15 Chair, I can’t remember 
that precisely. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now he either said, I am one of the top 15 
decision makers in the country or he said I’m one of the top 17 decision 
makers  [indistinct] and decisions relating to what, that decision 
10 
involves a nominations of State owned enterprises CEO as part of the 
decision making processes that were involved. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on I’m sorry, you say he said he was one of the 
top – well 15 or 17, you can’t remember which one but you think it’s 17, 
you say decision makers, I just want to…[intervenes]. 
MR RAKGOATHE:   He’s a decision maker. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In the country or how [indistinct]? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   I don’t know if in relation to the country but 
[indistinct] State owned enterprises [indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was he saying he was one of the top 17 decision 
20 
makers in relation to State owned enterprises?  
MR RAKGOATHE:   CEO’s. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   CEO’s. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, CEO’s. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 96 of 124 
 
MR RAKGOATHE:   CEO’s, Chief Executive Officer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay no, let me just get that, he was saying he was 
one of the top 17 decision makers in relation to the appointment of 
CEO’s of State enterprises? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   Correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And what did you understand by that, I mean, I 
know it’s almost obvious but what did you understand by it? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   Chair I understood two things, that I didn’t know 
the man or [indistinct] and I didn’t know the extent of his power.  So 
when he mentioned that, at the back of my mind was, his probably 
10 
informing us that we must understand that if the changes come, we 
might be on the right as indicated, we must be on the right side or 
maybe it may have been a ploy because the basis of our discussion 
was that he wanted payment to say, you dare not make payment, those 
are the kind of things that are running in my head. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay those are the two things that went in your 
mind at that time? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   That’s correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Let me ask you, you had not met Mr Moodley 
before this meeting? 
20 
MR RAKGOATHE:   No I had not. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   After the meeting did you become aware of Mr 
Moodley and his dealings with PRASA? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   I had become aware of it[indistinct] when I read the 
book by Jacques Pauw, the President’s Keepers, that’s when I then 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 97 of 124 
 
formed a notion about the extent of his power at least as indicated in 
that book and that [indistinct] person that we spoke to and maybe has 
reached that [indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, prior to this meeting, you say you had not met Mr 
Moodley? 
MR RAKGOATHE:  No I had not met Mr Moodley.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Had you heard of him? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   I’ve heard of him in the corridors but not in so 
many greater details. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And what was the talk in the corridors.  Mr 
Chairperson I’m aware of hearsay but I want it for a different context, 
just to say, that was the thinking. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, what did you know about him that people may 
have been saying within PRASA about him. 
MR RAKGOATHE:   Certain [indistinct] to be – before I joined PRASA 
the compliance I had been working at Interside Asset Investment and I 
was in the CO’s office, in Martha’s office, there was a rumour that he 
was aligned to [indistinct]. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So when you talk about Martha, you’re talking 
20 
about Ms Ngoye? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   That’s correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   This is the person that Holele talked about being 
at one of those meetings? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   That’s correct. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 98 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, did you treat this as just a [indistinct] or did 
– after the meeting you asked Mr Holele, but who is this person to tell 
us about how we should operate? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   I did ask Mr Holele about the person and he said, 
no that is [indistinct] but obviously I didn’t go to the great extent of 
saying what power does he have within PRASA but at some point, I 
think because of my experience as a lawyer it might be name dropping 
and maybe that extent of what he wanted to show off that he has got 
power within PRASA and that he’s got power [indistinct] so that he can 
make changes that we have [indistinct]. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Hindsight sometimes throws greater light on what 
happened before.  You, thereafter read Jacques Pauw’s book, the 
President’s Keepers. 
MR RAKGOATHE:   That’s correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   When you read the book, did you then go, in your 
own mind go back to this incident where Mr Moodley had told you what 
powers he supposedly had. 
MR RAKGOATHE:   It did really [indistinct] that might be the person 
that – that when he said he’s got power that he probably might have the 
power that he indicated he had. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   After the meeting, immediately after, you didn’t 
have any further dealings with Mr Moodley? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   Not at all. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   [Indistinct]. 
MR RAKGOATHE:   Not at all Chair. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 99 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And what happened to the dispute between 
Prodigy and PRASA, the one that Mr Moodley was demanding payment 
[indistinct]? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   I’m – although I’m [indistinct] but I didn’t deal with 
the matter and I’m not too sure how far it is currently or where it ended, 
if it has. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Well evidence will be led by [indistinct] but you 
have no idea? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   No I don’t have recollection of the end of that 
matter Chair. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now Mr Moodley said, I am one of the 15 or 17 
people who appoint or nominate people to be appointed as CEO’s of 
SOE. 
MR RAKGOATHE:   That’s correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What else did he say in relation to PRASA itself? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   Other than the young man was coming back he then 
– I can’t recall any other matter that he may have mentioned in the 
meeting. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now when he said, the young man is coming 
back, what did you understand him to mean by that? 
20 
MR RAKGOATHE:   I understood Chair that, he was referencing 
obviously that – because the discussion was prefaced by one of the top 
15/17 decision makers of SOE’s and therefore reference would have 
been to – at that time PRASA didn’t have a full time or permanent CEO 
and therefore the reference would have been to a CEO who had been 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 100 of 124 
 
gone and come back and I could only relate it to Mr Montana who had 
left, although in 2015 and he intends [indistinct] that, that could be the 
person. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So that’s what you understood? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   Correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now he also said you need to be on the right side 
of [indistinct]. 
MR RAKGOATHE:   That’s correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay, what did you understand by that, that you 
must be on the right side of the fence in relation to a decision you were 
10 
going to make in regard to him? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   Chair as I indicated two things that [indistinct] you 
see that there’s going to be some serious challenges to us at work 
because of the decision – well I call it no decision because he just 
indicated the correct process that he needed us to follow or having 
rebuffed by myself or Tiro but alternatively as I’ve said at that time of 
the meeting I thought, it might be a name dropping exercise so he’s 
trying to nudge us to re-think or to re-think what he had proposed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But if he was not name dropping then you 
understood by resisting his demand or not acceding to his demand you 
20 
were risking being on the wrong side, you reconciled yourself in that? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   Correct, I think, in hindsight, after reading the 
book, Jacques Pauw and then I realised he probably might have power, 
he probably then might have been that our careers at PRASA – my 
career at PRASA would have been [indistinct] but I hadn’t been on the 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 101 of 124 
 
backside of either Mr Montana or Mr Moodley to have experienced that 
and say, it’s that, that’s going to happen, that assumption certainly I 
couldn’t make based on the reflection that I had a few years down the 
line when I read Jacques Pauw’s book. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You say you were not on the wrong side of Mr 
Montana are you aware of people who were on the wrong side of Mr 
Montana? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   Correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And what happened to them? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   The allegation – well the reality that Mr Chauke 
10 
experienced at PRASA, because he was a colleague that I worked with, 
although I was not involved intricately with his disciplinary, what was 
indicated in the corridors was it was an insistence that came from 
[indistinct] which was aligned with Mr Moodley as I indicated and then 
through Mr Montana that he then got suspended. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Are there any other people who suffered any 
disadvantage as a result of being on the wrong side of Mr Montana that 
you’re aware of? 
MR RAKGOATHE:   I’ll be speculating, other than corridor talk.  The 
fate that Mr Holele suffered, I know he moved to PRASA but I can’t tell 
20 
you the detail about the reason and the reason he was suspended, it 
will be [indistinct – audio breaking up]. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Those are the questions I have for this witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much Mr Rakgoathe, did I pronounce 
it correctly? 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 102 of 124 
 
MR RAKGOATHE:  Rakgoathe, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much for coming to give your 
evidence, if we need you again I will ask you to come back but for now 
you are excused. 
MR RAKGOATHE:  Thanks. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Chairman, as I indicated earlier this morning 
our next witness is going to be [indistinct – audio breaking up]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, [indistinct] Mr Soni did somebody speak to the 
technicians about – give us more light? 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Chairman we could not find any of the 
technicians here, we’ve escalated it [indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Somebody must just speak to somebody, the lighting 
is very poor really here in front. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I can tell you it has been escalated. 
CHAIRPERSON:    I don’t know with this Government, escalating means 
when you get the answer on Friday because I mean, somebody must 
just talk to somebody, I would imagine nobody would have any 
objection to giving us more light.  I don’t know if it’s something that 
must go to committees or municipalities [laughter].  It was before lunch, 
20 
in fact quite early when we started that I raised the issue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes you did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   May the witness be sworn in? 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 103 of 124 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, please administer the oath, I think it was the 
oath last time, well affirmation if it has changed. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
WITNESS:  My name is [inaudible – not speaking into mic] 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the prescribed oath? 
WITNESS:  [Inaudible]. 
REGISTRAR: Do you consider the oath to be binding on your 
conscious. 
WITNESS:  I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you’ll give will be the 
10 
truth the whole truth and nothing else but the truth, if so, please raise 
your right hand and say, so help me God. 
WITNESS:  So help me God. 
MR POPO SIMON MOLEFE:   (duly sworn, states) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Welcome back Mr Molefe you’re coming back for the 
second time and we appreciate it very much.  When you were here, of 
course, it was about Transnet, this time it’s about PRASA but we 
appreciate that you are back, thank you.  Are you able to hear me well 
there Mr Molefe, are you able to hear me? 
MR MOLEFE:  I do Chairperson, I do hear. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Molefe, you have an affidavit before 
you…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It looks like you are not comfortable there is that 
because of the microphone, perhaps it should be taken out or what, or 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 104 of 124 
 
it can’t be taken out will somebody assist him.  I think somebody will 
come and assist you.  You didn’t look comfortable, oh the chair is too 
short, too low ja.  Is there something that can be done to raise it or is 
there nothing that can be done? 
MR MOLEFE:  We’ll just change the sitting position, the chairs. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you look kind of squashed but are you 
comfortable? 
MR MOLEFE:  I will sit this way. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja as long as you are comfortable ja, okay alright, 
thank you. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC: Mr Molefe you have an affidavit in front of you, am 
I correct? 
MR MOLEFE: I do sir. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And on the top…[intervenes]. 
MR MOLEFE:  May I request, before we proceed with that affidavit I 
make certain….[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Some corrections? 
MR MOLEFE:  Some corrections because I’ve not had the opportunity 
to see it with counsel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh is that so, okay. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  I just need the opportunity, we could…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well we could do one of two things, we can take a 
five-minute adjournment for you to alert him to what you wish 
…[intervenes]. 
MR MOLEFE:  I think that might be better. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 105 of 124 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  That might be better that way, ja let’s take a five-
minute adjournment, we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we ready? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us proceed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson may I quickly go through those?  
They – it is only about five paragraphs and they deal with just 
(indistinct) mainly. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  The … 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Or would you like me to do that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  There are two ways in which we can do it.  One is to 
point them out now. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Another is to keep an eye on them and as and when 
he reaches a point where he talks about the part of the affidavit where 
the – the mistakes or errors are then we can deal with them. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am happy with either. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  In view of the fact that some of the dates are quite 
crucial I am going to ask if we cannot – and it is not going to take more 
than about three minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  No that is fine.  Of course it may be 
necessary to arrange for a supplementary affidavit. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 106 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To correct it but for purposes of today the errors can 
be pointed out. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Molefe you have raised with me a number of 
issues I just want to go through the ones that are worrying you.  If you 
look at paragraph 1 we say… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh I am sorry.  I may have intervened earlier before 
the adjournment when you were still about to get into identify his 
10 
affidavits that you confirm that it is his affidavits. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you want to do that first? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Mr Molefe you accept that your affidavit has 
been marked SS6?  It is – you will see that on the top right hand 
corner. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes I do. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Except for those corrections that we are going to 
go through now do you confirm that what is contained in this affidavit is 
true and correct? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  I do Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Alright let us just look at those matters that are of 
some concern to you.  Firstly in paragraph 1 in the second line you say, 
during the period 1 August 2014 to – and you have got the 30 August 
2017.  What did you want to change in that? 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 107 of 124 
 
MR MOLEFE:  The correct date Chairperson is the 31 July 2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that in the place of … 
MR MOLEFE:  So you substitute 30 – 31 July for 30 August. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now paragraphs 2 and 3 that you dealt with are 
grammatical mistakes and we can deal with them with a little later.  May 
I go – because this worries you at paragraph 30? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  In the last sentence of that paragraph you say, all 
this continued until Mr Montana left office on the 31 March 2015.  You 
10 
want to change that there? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson I want to substitute 15 July 2015 for 31 
March 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  15 July 2015 that is what it should be? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that right?  Well I can tell you that when I read this 
affidavit I saw this date I made a note – wrong date. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is why I wanted to correct it before. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then paragraph 50 Mr Molefe.  On the 4 t h line 
20 
you say, starting at the end of the third line.  The Department of 
Transport later launched the multimillion rand Taxi Recapitalisation 
Programme what did you want to change? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry which paragraph? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh sorry.  Paragraph 50 Mr Chairperson. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 108 of 124 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  15? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  50. 
CHAIRPERSON:  50. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  50. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  Line 4. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you.  Yes I have got it. 
MR MOLEFE:  So it should be multibillion rand instead of multimillion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Those are the essential changes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And we will – we will have a – Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The minor ones later. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  I want to also say Mr Chairperson you will 
recall that when you look at the annexures some of the annexures have 
been removed from Mr Molefe’s affidavit and put up under References 
and Legislation.  That affidavit will deal with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Alright so let us go there now Mr Molefe. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That this is not the first time you are coming to 
this commission.  You have given evidence before in relation to State 
Capture in respect of Transnet am I correct? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now I just at a level where people would 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 109 of 124 
 
understand.  The nature of the evidence you are going to be giving in 
this affidavit is that in substance different from the nature of the 
evidence.  I am not talking about the detail.  In other words about State 
Capture. 
MR MOLEFE:  Would you please repeat the question? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Okay perhaps – perhaps I could leave it.  I 
am just trying to say that… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or maybe what if we put it this way?  If you look at 
the evidence you are going to give today with regard to PRASA and 
having regard to the evidence you gave with regard to Transnet in the 
10 
context of State Capture are there any common features that you are 
able to identify? 
MR MOLEFE:  There are certain common features. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And – which I would. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which you will deal with. 
MR MOLEFE:  We will deliberate on as we go along. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Does that cover what you wanted to? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Indeed and I am (indistinct) with you Mr 
Chairperson.  But I just want to ask a follow up question today.  Are 
20 
there unique features or different features in PRASA and that too we 
can cover but I am just asking so that we know we should be alert to 
them? 
MR MOLEFE:  Well the unique features are to the extent of the – the 
individuals who feature and who are considered to behind the capture 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 110 of 124 
 
of the state.  But the modus operandi in both instances as in 
commonalities.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now in paragraph 5 of your affidavit you set out 
why in your view your experiences at PRASA will assist the commission 
to better understand and make recommendations in respect to State 
Capture.  Could you explain to the Chairperson what those particular 
features are? 
MR MOLEFE:  What the Chairperson the features really I – which I set 
out in my statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Molefe I am going to disturb you.  Mr 
10 
Soni I may be mistaken but maybe because we had some – there were 
some corrections to be made under paragraph 1 you thought that has 
been dealt with in terms of him saying when he became Chairperson of 
the Board and what his term was. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or has that been covered? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That has been covered Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Okay.  Okay I am afraid you might have to 
ask the question again. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because I have not intervened. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Not at all Mr Chairperson.  Mr Molefe if you look 
at paragraph 5 of your affidavit and I just want to ask you to considered 
what you have said in paragraph 5 and set out for the Chairperson why 
your experiences at PRASA will assist this commission?  You have set 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 111 of 124 
 
it out in paragraph 5. 
MR MOLEFE:  Basically what I am saying Chairperson is that in all that 
to facilitate the capture which is fundamentally of PRASA but we do it 
in the context of State Capture that the modus operandi was firstly to 
capture people who hold positions of trust and responsibility and that 
was done by those at the heart of State Capture and they do so 
because there is individuals have the authority and influence in 
awarding tenders.  These people who were made vulnerable by those 
who have the – the intent on capturing the organs of state in this 
instance PRASA.  But I also seek to show that individuals and 
10 
institutions which were under obligation and duty to protect PRASA and 
those who were made vulnerable failed to fulfil that duty and as a result 
allowed the capture of PRASA to succeed and to benefit certain 
individuals and (indistinct) concerned.  We will when we talk of 
institutions we will deal with those matters later on when we refer to 
Portfolio Committees, Parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Even organs of state who have a duty to discharge 
constitutional mandate of dealing with the – the (indistinct). 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And to your credit as is – as emerges from the – 
20 
the court cases that are before the Chairperson you took on some of 
these institutions.   You took on the Minister when she dissolved your 
board.  You took on the HAWKS when they refused to make certain 
investigations. 
MR MOLEFE:  If you saw Chairperson that it is what we did – I did well 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 112 of 124 
 
representing the board of directors, the board of control of Passenger 
Rail Agency of South Africa.  Well firstly that you know the – we had 
gone into detailed investigation, laid before the HAWKS.  Volumes of 
evidence in lever arch files.  Even made available to them forensic 
capacity so that they could analyse instances of – of corruption and 
also be able to follow the funds of course and collaborate with other 
state institutions which had that responsibility.  But of course it is now 
a matter of record that they refused to do their job.  Secondly we as a 
board we – we rejected an attempt of abuse of office by the Executive 
Authority to muzzle the board and prevent it from doing what was right 
10 
in discharging its fiduciary duties.   And in this instance we will later 
deal with what the Minister did.  The third aspect is what the Portfolio 
Committee whose responsibility is to assess the work of these all 
important state owned company objectively and to take together what 
the board of directors corrective measures which would strengthen the 
Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa and that of course it not 
happened and I – I wrote to the Speaker of Parliament on behalf of the 
board to ask for a public inquiry on maladministration in PRASA and of 
course their relationship between the Minister and the board of 
directors.  Similarly I wrote to the Portfolio Committee on Transport 
20 
again asking that that (indistinct) distract its responsibility in a far 
more dignified way and in a professional manner.  All of that is detailed 
in I am sure Counsel will refer me to those documents.  Counsel I might 
just go on and on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 113 of 124 
 
MR MOLEFE:  I must allow you to lead me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I was about to say maybe he should – Counsel 
should have allowed you to come at the right time to those issues 
because they are very important issues and I myself am very interested 
in your evidence with regard to those efforts that you have made and 
the question of lack of support that you talk about from quarters where 
you expected support and as you say failure to perform constitutional 
obligations by certain bodies.  So – so. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So when you come – when you come to that point I 
10 
am – I will be very interested in those parts.  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Molefe just in order to understand the structure 
of the affidavit you do not deal with matters necessarily in a 
chronological order you deal with them in terms of different subjects.  
Am I correct? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Among the subjects that you raise are the 
problems that PRASA – that the new board encountered after it was 
appointed in August 2014.  Is that correct?  I am just going through it 
so we can deal with each one that we have a road map for whoever is 
20 
listening as to what is coming next. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then you again – you then deal with an 
attempt by Mr Moodley to capture you personally.  It is all there I am 
just – I am just going through it. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 114 of 124 
 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then you deal with the deterioration in the 
relationship between you and Mr Montana – well you and the board on 
one hand and Mr Montana on the other.  
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then you also say that you found certain very 
worried features about the governance including some quite lucrative 
contracts that had been concluded just before our board took office. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And you detail them.  Then you say after Mr 
10 
Montana left the former President called you to a meeting where he was 
attempting to persuade you and the board to reinstate Mr Montana 
notwithstanding that he had handed in his resignation and the 
resignation had been accepted by the board? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct and by the way I need to also to state 
Counsel that … 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And you must please address the Chairperson 
(indistinct). 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson that in reality Mr Montana’s contract was 
ending on the 31 March 2015.  It is therefore a misnomer to even talk 
20 
of him resigning but that is what he said to us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR MOLEFE:  Because he had actually requested that he be allowed to 
work with the board for another six months to assist the board in its 
search for a new Group CEO.  And it is in that context therefore that we 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 115 of 124 
 
allowed him to stay longer and we are talking about the 15 July. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Oh but that is important to note because when I 
was reading here I was just saying references to letter of resignation, 
resignation and acceptance of resignation.  So that is what the letter 
said but his term was coming – his contract was coming to an end and 
there was no need to resign. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja save that he could of course (indistinct) what he said 
was a commitment he made to serve an extra six months. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And that he wanted to use that six months to assist the 
board of directors. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  The board of control in his search for a new CEO. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  But of course in – in hindsight now after the 
investigations had happened it is now clear to me that he wanted the 
six months to continue covering up the corrupt activities that had taken 
place under his watch. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then you deal with the fact that you made several 
attempts and you have referred to them – take the HAWKS to court to 
get the – to take the Minister to court – to take – to reach out to the 
Speaker to have a proper investigation into matters concerning PRASA 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 116 of 124 
 
and on each of those occasions you were spurned effectively? 
MR MOLEFE:  It is so. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then finally you – you lament the fact that the 
board was allowed to effectively disintegrate because no new 
appointments were made and since your board has been dissolved 
effectively there has been no permanent board? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson.  And I think at that point it 
had become clear to me that I was now being considered as the main 
obstacle by the government and the Minister and in order to give this 
individual who is an (indistinct) new to the board of its directors make 
10 
the board not to have a quorum in which case then it could not validly 
make decisions.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now during the course of your evidence Mr Molefe 
we will deal with two important issues was – important provisions.  One 
is the provisions of the succession of South African Transport Services 
Act and then also the board charter because that tells you the division 
of power between the Minister and the board. But let us deal with them 
when they become relevant.  Okay.  And then… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then you then say that PRASA is a bit of an 
20 
unusual state owned entity because it falls under the Minister of 
Transport as opposed to the Minister of Public Enterprises as do most 
of the other major state owned entities. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh sorry. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 117 of 124 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you starting to deal… 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Paragraph… 
CHAIRPERSON:  To link it on the evidence and you finish outlining. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The road map. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Okay that is where – which – I think 
you can ask the question again. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  So with we dealt with paragraph 8 which 
deals with the legislation that we will refer to and then in paragraph 9 
10 
you make the point that unlike other SOE’s PRASA falls under the 
general authority of the Minister of Transport.  Why do you think that 
that is an important issue to raise? 
MR MOLEFE:  The – I think (indistinct) on PRASA was not entity whose 
fundamental objective Chairperson was to generate it was an entity that 
was promoting public good and as a transport organisation I think 
therefore it was for that reason that the government chose to place it 
under the Ministry of Transport and those that had the potential to 
generate growth in the economy and generate the kind of affects which 
would augment the fiscus would then fall under Public Enterprises.  
20 
There are Chairperson others that fall under departments if you think of 
Minerals and Mineral Resources and Energy.  You would have the – 
what used to be known as the Central Energy Funds and the strategic 
(indistinct) as well as Petroleum Corporation of South Africa Petro SA 
they would fall under the Minerals an Energy.  You would singular 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 118 of 124 
 
others falling for example under different departments.  Amscor would 
fall under the Minister of Defence.  The Armaments Corporation of 
South Africa.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes then you then make the point that the 
Accounting Authority of PRASA is the board.   
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ja and we will deal with the legislation in terms of 
which the board is to be appointed at a later stage.  I just want to set 
the scenario for as far as – because procurement is an important issue 
you say that as the Accounting Authority the board had to involve itself 
10 
in ensuring that there was – there were proper processes for the 
procurement of goods in terms of the PFMA. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then you say it is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please try and get him to give evidence.  Get him to 
give to me the one giving the evidence. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Now what are PRASA’s main objects in 
business?  If you look at paragraph 10 you deal with that issue. 
MR MOLEFE:  I have already said Chairperson the primary mandate of 
PRASA is that of new moving commuters within to and from South 
20 
Africa.  Large numbers of workers who are critical for (indistinct) 
production in the business.  But it also has a secondary mandate.  The 
secondary mandate was that of – let me first say that moving those 
workers had to be done through the rail operations to a lesser extent 
the Oropex as the base subsidiary of PRASA.  Then the secondary 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 119 of 124 
 
mandate was to look at the assets that PRASA had and do what is 
normally in the business (indistinct) called sweating those assets.  
Generating revenue out of those assets – optimising it so that PRASA 
could generate its own income.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Those are the main aims or principle or the 
objects of PRASA? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And you then say to the extent… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe before that Mr Soni if you are able to maybe 
you can just give me a picture in terms of subsidiaries of PRASA.  You 
10 
do not have to mention all of them if there are many.  The – some of 
the – whether it has got subsidiaries and what I have heard Autopax – 
something about. 
MR MOLEFE:  Unfortunately Chairperson PRASA had only two 
subsidiaries. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh is that so? 
MR MOLEFE:  Intersite and Autopax. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay, okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  The boards of which had their own board of directors. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  Thank you.  Mr Soni I interrupted you. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No thank you Mr Chairman.  Now they would each 
have their own board of control as opposed to PRASA’s board of 
control. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So they enjoy their measure of independence 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 120 of 124 
 
notwithstanding that they were subsidiaries of PRASA? 
MR MOLEFE:  It is so Chairperson but I need to state that when we got 
onto the board of control of PRASA it became immediately clear that 
that independence was affected by the fact that the Group CEO of 
PRASA was put as Chairperson of all of those subsidiaries.  And our 
argument was that that did not (indistinct) well for good corporate 
governance.  It cannot be in those subsidiaries and accounting himself 
when it comes to the main board. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  When you say he was the Chairperson you talking 
about the Chairperson of the board of Autopax and Intersite? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But they had their own CEO’s? 
MR MOLEFE:  They had their own CEO’s Chair.  They had their own 
boards and relevant statutory committees. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So it was quite – quite strange or interesting. So the 
Group CEO of PRASA would be the Group CEO of PRASA then there 
would be those two subsidiaries of PRASA and they would each have 
their own board and where they would also have their own CEO’s but 
the Group CEO of PRASA would be the Chairperson of the board of 
each of these subsidiaries and that board – the CEO of each – of each 
20 
subsidiary would effectively report to the Group CEO of PRASA.  Of 
course they report to the board but if you are Chairperson you have 
what is more interaction with the CEO than other members of the 
board? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson.  I need to hasten to say that 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 121 of 124 
 
we stopped that kind of arrangement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  We felt that it was incorrect. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  We even argued that directors in the main board should 
not sit on the board of the subsidiaries. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  So that they needed to have their own independence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And later in your affidavit in fact you point out that 
10 
that decision was taken soon after Mr Montana’s term of office came to 
an end although he continued.  I am just going further to link it up with 
what you have just said now. 
MR MOLEFE:  It is correct.  He was still there or – on the board serving 
what he said was six months which of course we did not allow to reach 
his finality. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The – the idea that the Group CEO of PRASA would 
be Chairperson of each of the boards of each of the two subsidiaries 
was that something that had occurred as you understood it when you 
came in as a practical measure which was not provided for in any 
20 
official document that that is how it shall – it would be?  Or was there 
something in the articles of association or some other document that 
said the Chairperson of the board of this subsidiary would be the Group 
CEO of PRASA? 
MR MOLEFE:  My recollection Chairperson is that there was no legal 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 122 of 124 
 
instrument that authorised the appointment of the Group CEO as 
Chairman of the subsidiaries. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And you then say at the end of paragraph 10 that 
the delivery was not there and may I just ask you what was the 
consequence of the failure of PRASA to fulfil its mandate? 
MR MOLEFE:  The consequences Chairperson of PRASA failing to fulfil 
its mandate was a huge one.  It meant that the effective and efficient 
transport services necessary to ferry the workers to work and go was 
impacted.  The – we have lots of problems of failures in respect of 
10 
(indistinct) system, poor maintenance of rail infrastructure.  So it – it 
meant therefore that the commuters had no protection.  Now the – I 
must say that further with this kind of failure the Civil Society 
Organisation (indistinct) to take upon themselves the decision to 
approach the (indistinct) PRASA to act in a manner that protected the 
rights of commuters and the public.  As I understand Chairperson there 
will be detailed evidence led by other witnesses in this regard. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Well certainly Mr Achmat is going to give evidence 
about why they were effectively prompted to (indistinct).  Chairperson I 
am then going to go to the next section of the affidavit which is the 
20 
early days at PRASA.  I see it is four o’clock I do not what your view is 
about whether I should start – it is unlikely we will finish that section 
today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We normally finish but we go beyond four o’clock 
when it is necessary to do so. Do you want to cover some section 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 123 of 124 
 
before we adjourn or what is your attitude? 
MR MOLEFE:  I would like to – to take this – like to take a bit of time to 
consider how to condense this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Because although it is necessary background one 
can stick to certain facts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And I am wondering if I could take later this 
evening to do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And sort of press ahead more quickly tomorrow 
morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you would prefer that we adjourn now? 
MR MOLEFE:  We adjourn now on this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  I think then we should adjourn now and 
then start at ten tomorrow.  We should be fine with starting at ten.  We 
should be able to – do you contemplate that we will finish tomorrow 
with Mr Molefe’s evidence or you think we might go beyond that? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  We think it probably will spill over into Friday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  Okay, no that is fine.  That is fine with you 
20 
Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:  It is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is fine okay.  Alright we will adjourn for the day now 
it is about one minute past four and we will resume tomorrow morning 
at ten o’clock. 
11 MARCH 2020 – DAY 221 
 
Page 124 of 124 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As it pleases. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 12 MARCH 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
