 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
BRAAMFONTEIN CHAMBERS 
 
 
 
10 
 
12 MARCH 2020 
 
 
 
DAY 222 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 2 of 131 
 
PROCEEDINGS COMMENCE ON 12 MARCH 2020 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  To start with an apology.  You raised questions 
yesterday Mr Chairperson about the bundles.  We could only get to talk 
to the correct people this morning.  They are working on them and they 
tell me they will need another half hour so I am going to please ask if 
we could start just after 10:30.  The bundles will then be in the order 
that – that you have suggested and which obviously would allow us to 
proceed expeditiously. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright (Chairperson not speaking into the 
microphone) do you mean half past ten or at quarter to eleven? 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson may – may I suggest quarter to 
eleven but if it is earlier we will give you a shout. 
CHAIRPERSON:  (Chairperson not speaking into the microphone). 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  I see there are lights that have been 
put in but it will be certainly that one is too bright and I had hoped the 
technicians on their (indistinct). 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I can say to you Mr Chairperson from here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That the lights here look okay but you look like 
20 
something (indistinct). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that so – ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ja.  I do not know we will try and deal with that as 
well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I think that one at the top was not (indistinct) but 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 3 of 131 
 
from what I am told it might be that it is – it only works under certain 
circumstances.  It will still (indistinct) or something.  It may be that 
they need to see whether they can position the back one where it is not 
going to be so bright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not know exactly how they should it but they – 
they have it (indistinct).  I do not know about this one to people that 
side whether it looks fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes it is 
CHAIRPERSON:  This one was not there yesterday. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It was not there yesterday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja how is it – is it fine? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is fine.  So I think it is just that one.  It may be that 
part of the (indistinct) that seems to be … 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That something done over there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And maybe would (indistinct) but it is been directly it 
might be fine I am not sure.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes (indistinct) idea Mr Chairperson that they will 
adjust they have heard what you have said and they will adjust it 
20 
accordingly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  Okay no that is fine.  So we will set down 
the matter until quarter to eleven unless you will let me earlier that we 
can pursue and under which pages you would like to (indistinct). 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am indebted to you Mr Chairperson. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 4 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
MEETING ADJOURNS 
HEARING RESUMES 
(There is no sound from 03:29 – 08:05) 
CHAIRPERSON:  The (indistinct) Report is it not a separate exhibit on 
its own? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It is in fact a – it is in a separate – entirely 
separate file. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja it is a separate exhibit ja. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then there is Mr Molefe – Bundle D is Mr 
Molefe’s affidavit together with the annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Bundle E is Ms Ngoye’s – two of Ms Ngoye’s 
affidavits with the annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Annexures ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then Bundle F are the affidavits together with 
the annexures of the rest of the witnesses namely Mr Achmat, Mr 
20 
Dingiswayo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ms Kweyama, Mr Holele, Mr Rakgoathe and Mr 
Muller. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine.  I think we just also need to 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 5 of 131 
 
emphasise that although on the spine of these files they will appear 
Exhibit numbers – the Exhibit numbers do not refer to the file they refer 
to the documents inside the files. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And we will refine – we will refine that so that 
references that you look at will tell you exactly what is in that file. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So whatever is there we will refine to some extent. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.   
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson before we continue I am told that that 
light has been adjusted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am just looking at the lighting.  There is some 
improvement in terms of the lighting it is just that it is not enough and 
the – that light is not facing me the way it was before. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I wonder whether these ones work or whether they – 
when they are on they cause any problems because I see right at the 
back there with the lights on the ceiling it looks quite well.  The lighting 
seems quite fine.  Well those responsible do hear what I have to say.  
20 
Maybe they are not working but let us continue in the meantime.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sure at some stage we will have perfect lighting 
REGISTRAR:  Yes.  Mr Chairperson before we continue with the 
evidence of Mr Molefe we are constraint to place a matter on record 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 6 of 131 
 
because it has emerged in the public space.  Apparently Minister Fikile 
Mbalula was on radio this morning complaining that he had not received 
the affidavits in which comments are made about the dismissal of Ms 
Kweyama’s Board.  Ms Chairperson I have been told and I have proof 
here that in respect of Ms Kweyama’s affidavit that affidavit was in fact 
served on Mr Mbalula through a – an email address which the 
commission has used previously and about which there have been no 
complaints.  The same applies to Mr Achmat’s affidavits.  And the same 
applies to Ms Ngoye’s affidavit.  So they were all served on him and I 
could just say Mr Chairperson that in addition to the normal address 
10 
one of the investigators saw – looked if there was an additional 
address and after the affidavit of Ms Kweyama was served on him… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it not Kweyama? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Kweyama yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Kweyama ja I think it is ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  After that affidavit was served Mr 
Chairperson the further two affidavits namely that of Ms Ngoye and Mr 
Achmat were served on a second address as well.  Now at the end of 
the day Mr Chairperson we do not what to be side tracked from the 
matter.  There has been a communication between the commission and 
20 
the Ministries office and all the affidavits were then – that we served on 
that address we forwarded to the Ministry and they appear to have 
confirmed that at least this morning they had received them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 7 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you may proceed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Molefe the oath you took yesterday will continue 
to apply.  You accept that? 
MR MOLEFE:  (Indistinct). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Molefe… 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I think you may keep your microphone on I have 
been told that that should be fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Molefe yesterday we interrupted your evidence 
10 
at the point where… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I just mention in case anybody who has something to 
say I propose that since we have had this delay we do not take any tea 
break we go straight up to lunch time.  Mr Molefe would that fine with 
you? 
MR MOLEFE:  (Not audible). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Thank you.  Maybe I should have placed that on 
20 
record.  Sorry Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no, no that is fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now the topic before which we stopped is in your 
affidavit dealt with as your early days at PRASA.  You remember that? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 8 of 131 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now would you tell the Chair very briefly what 
your experiences were about the time you were appointed as the Chair 
of the Board?  If you could tell us when you were appointed and so on? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson I was appointed on the – on the 1 August 
2014.  Other directors were also appointed at the same time.  I must 
hasten to say that I was not involved in their nomination per se.  Now 
once we had been confirmed as a Board of Directors the first thing I did 
was to meet with the Group CEO of – of PRASA Mr Lucky Montana who 
generously congratulated me on my appointment.  He told me a bit 
about what a great leader I was.  He followed my struggle, track record 
10 
and he mentioned more specifically the Delmas Treason Trial which 
involved the leaders of the United Democratic Front.  A front 
organisation for which I was the General Secretary at the time of the 
trial.  And it was held at Delmas.  It came to be known as the Delmas 
Treason Trial and I think it was Delmas 1. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry Mr Molefe.  Just for the record you were one 
of the accused in the trial? 
MR MOLEFE:  I was one the accused in the trial.  It was not an easy 
trial.  I had to give evidence for four weeks in the witness stand for four 
weeks. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and that was during apartheid? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just so that whoever may read this transcript your 
evidence ten years, twenty years from now they should not think it was 
under democracy. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 9 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  In fact the fundamental demand of the United 
Democratic Front was that we needed an inclusive and democratic 
constitution which provided for Universal Suffrage.  A right that 
excluded by the Constitution under the apartheid government.  So in 
response to Mr Montana’s generous congratulations and at the same 
time of course as he was congratulating me he informed me that he had 
been in PRASA for a long time.  He had previously advised the previous 
Chair, Chairperson of PRASA and the Board that he intended not to 
10 
renew his contract when it ended.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry can I just – this is just for record I am not 
wanting to interrupt you.  When you say the previous Chairperson of 
the Board who was that? 
MR MOLEFE:  The previous Chairperson of the Board at that point had 
been Mr Sfiso Buthelezi.  I think he is currently one of the Ministers in 
the current government – Deputy Ministers in the current government.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you were saying in response ja.  You were saying 
in response to this. 
MR MOLEFE:  My end response to what Mr Montana said to me, I said 
20 
well you know we come in at a time when PRASA is undertaking a major 
carrying out a major programme of mobilisation and therefore the new 
Board would need you to stay on and provide leadership to the 
management team as we proceed to execute this important programme.  
And we got in there saying what we said understanding that in the first 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 10 of 131 
 
instance our commitment as the directors was to support the executive 
management team who were essentially the operational people in the 
business.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And just in brief Mr Molefe what did that 
modernisation programme involve, what period would it take and what 
was the amount that would be eventually spent? 
MR MOLEFE:  The modernisation programme Chairperson was a 
programme intended to revitalise the rail system in South Africa which 
had suffered a neglect of over 40 years where there was no 
capitalisation both in terms its infrastructure as well as the locomotives 
10 
and the coaches for trains.  For a long time PRASA was relying on 
attempts to fix the – particularly the Metrorail which was failing all the 
time.  Another element of modernisation included the installation and 
rollout of signalling systems.  And in this regard there were essentially 
three major contracts.  One rolled out in KwaZulu Natal led by a 
Canadian company called Bombardia Transport.  In the Western Cape it 
was Talis Africa with a black partner there and then here in the Gauteng 
Province it was Seamans where the main nerve centre for Command 
and Control was established in I think in Kalkfontein.  So that was the 
modernisation programme but it would have also entailed manufacturing 
20 
of new locomotives, the trains, new trains, state of the art trains.  20 of 
each were initially to be procured from Brazil and here in South Africa 
in order to ensure that this procurement leads to creation of jobs and 
its stimulates growth in the economy a factory was to be built in a place 
called Danota in Nigel.  Various railway stations were to be renovated.  
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 11 of 131 
 
A lot of expenditure go in it and because new trains were going to be 
procured it was critical that they should be depots that were 
modernised and the key ones I think there was one in Braamfontein 
around the corner here.  One was Wolmerton and then there would be 
one in the – the Western Cape.  All of those involved a lot of 
investment.  Overall the programme of modernisation was estimated to 
cost R172 billion over 40 years.  So it is this kind of a programme that 
PRASA had to implement and the Board of Control of PRASA had to 
exercise oversight over it. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So in Mr Molefe before you on. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Soni. You might have to raise your 
voice.  I am just wanting to make sure everybody can hear everybody.  
Ja. Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  These were quite ambitious programmes and so 
on.  Who had devised those programmes?  Was it your board or was it 
your board that was going to – had inherited these programmes if I can 
call it that? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson indeed these were ambitious and exciting a 
programme this is precisely for that reason that we found being on the 
Board of PRASA at that historic moment to have been very attractive.  
20 
Now who designed them?  This was a decision taken by the cabinet of 
the Republic of South Africa and I – I must say that Chairperso0n it was 
not only about PRASA it included also Transnet which became a 
separate logistics business after the unbundling of the previous 
structure of the government.  So it was a government programme.   
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 12 of 131 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now you mentioned a number of programmes.  At 
the time the board took over of assumed office what was the state of 
the contracts in relation to this modern – the first phase of the 
modernisation programme? 
MR MOLEFE:  Most if not all Chairperson the contracts had already 
been concluded, signed with various original equipment manufacturers 
as well as other service providers.  I have indicated those that were 
rolling out signalling systems.  The – those contracts had already been 
concluded and to be more specific with regard to the locomotives a 
contract had been concluded with a company called Swifambo which 
10 
was a South African company which later was to partner with Vossloh.  
I say later advisedly because at the time when this contract was 
awarded Swifambo which had no experience in rail either leasing or 
operation did not have a sub-contract with Vossloh which had the 
capacity to manufacture the locomotives.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  And as far as the board was concerned what 
steps did it take in relation to those contracts? 
MR MOLEFE:  As a new Board Chairperson in order for us to exercise a 
proper oversight we – we felt duty bound to ask for detailed 
presentation on the contract by the Group CEO and his executive team 
20 
but we also then requested the actual contract – contract so that we 
could see precisely what the company was committing itself to.  What 
obligations we had in respect of those contracts.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Now… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do – I am sorry.  Are you able to give an indication as 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 13 of 131 
 
to how much in terms of that R170 something billion over 40 years that 
was estimated to be required for the whole modernisation programme.  
Are you able to indicate about how much – what percentage of that 
maybe was anticipated to be used in the next ten years or so from the 
time that the programme started or from the time when your Board 
came in?  Was – are you able to give an indication whether it was 10% 
of that, 5% of that over the next X number of years? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson I might not specifically be able to say 10% 
but I know that over the – the – I think the first ten years or so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  The – the amount of money to be spent was R51 billion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay.  No that is helpful.  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now you say that the – the contracts had already 
been concluded and you asked the then CEO to – to explain matters to 
you and make detailed presentations.  Were those made? 
MR MOLEFE:  The presentations were made in respect of the briefings 
that the Board had requested.  But to the extent that the Board of 
Control required the actual contracts in terms of which these 
locomotives particularly and the trains that were going to be built called 
the Gibela Consortium led by a company called Alstom those were not 
20 
given to the Board.  The Board had to in fact I led that to go to the 
companies at the time we had been advised were the ones who advised 
PRASA on the contract.  They drafted the contracts and advised them 
on the signing thereof.  My recollection is that the company in question 
at the time was Webber Wentzel. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 14 of 131 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is the legal firm you mean? 
MR MOLEFE:  The legal firm that was – external legal firm advising 
PRASA.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I am sorry. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You say the contracts were not provided to the Board.  
I assume by the Group CEO? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But did he give a reason – did he refuse or did he just 
not provide without refusing and if so did the Board not say, hey we 
10 
asked for the contracts what is happening?  Where are the contracts? 
MR MOLEFE:  Meeting after meeting Chairperson the GCEO – Group 
CEO was reminded that the Board needed those contracts.  They were 
not forthcoming. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But he – he was also not flatly refusing but he was 
just not providing them? 
MR MOLEFE:  No he does not say no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  But he does not provide. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  But I must also say that of course during that period now 
we were moving towards the time when he – we were beginning to deal 
with issues pertaining to the Public Protector and the fact that he was 
saying now he is not going to renew his contract.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 15 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:   So, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you able to indicate what you think the reason 
was why despite the Board requesting that these contracts be provided 
to them and requesting repeatedly, they were not being provided or is 
there something that you haven’t – you’re not able to say.  It’s just 
strange that Group CEO who’s answerable to the Board is asked to 
provide very important documents and over some time they are not 
provided? 
MR MOLEFE:   I would be speculating if I were to talk about what the 
reasons were. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   All I can say is that…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They were not provided. 
MR MOLEFE:   They were not provided and when we initiated 
engagements 
with 
the 
firm 
of 
buyers 
that 
did 
the 
contracts…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   We spent time with them presenting to us, the Group 
CEO was very angry that we went directly to those lawyers to ask for 
those contracts because we didn’t stop there, we even said, well we 
20 
will also ask the CEO of the company that is manufacturing the trains to 
also come and present to us, that time it was a man called Mr Granger, 
Mark Granger. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   I don’t know why he was unhappy with what the Board 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 16 of 131 
 
wanted, that was the position. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, and the Board only went to other sources, other 
parties, when the Group CEO was – they had failed, over some time, to 
furnish the contracts to the Board. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Just to check up something that the Chairperson 
has raised, you understand what prompts that series of questions.  You 
are the Board, the CEO reports to you, you come in with these multi 
billion rand contracts on the table as it were, you ask for the contracts 
10 
and you’re not provided with them and you understand the cloud that 
hangs over that issue? 
MR MOLEFE:   Well I do understand the cloud that hangs over the 
issue Chairperson but I would imagine that at the appropriate time in 
the course of this evidence we will deal with that but what was strange, 
Chairperson, was that with this particular State owned company the 
Board of Directors didn’t seem to immediately, at that stage to have the 
kind of relationship where the Group CEO understands that when the 
Board requires something, which you know you have or you know where 
to find, you go get it and give it to the Board as per it’s request.  I think 
20 
it’s an issue about, what was their understanding of the power relations 
between the Group CEO and the Board, was it a situation of dual power 
or was the CEO understanding that he reports to the Board.  So these 
re issues that are [indistinct] when you compare with the private 
companies or public companies with their Board of Directors. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 17 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well of course we’ll continue with your evidence, that 
maybe by the end of your evidence more light or perspectives will 
emerge.  It’s just that it seems strange to me because my expectation 
and maybe the expectation of many people would be that when there is 
a new Board, whether it’s a private sector or parastatal the current 
Group CEO would actually offer to the Board, Chairperson say, I and 
my team will be ready as soon as you are ready for us to present to you 
and give you a full picture of what is happening at the moment in the 
company and then the Chairperson would in due course say, let’s say 
the date, come and brief us fully.  So obviously the Board would want to 
10 
know what commitments, important commitments does the company 
have and if you have a programme such as the modernisation 
programme obviously, the Board would want to know, would want to see 
the contracts and have a full picture.  So that’s my expectation and 
that’s why, maybe I asked you the question that I asked you in regard 
to a situation where the Group CEO knows you are new as a Board in 
this entity and you specifically ask for documents and they are not 
provided until you have to go outside of the company.  So I thought I’d 
just mention that context. 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson in the normal course of events in a normal 
20 
company that’s what happens but I want to separate what we would call 
the induction of the Board from the contracts that we are talking about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   The process of induction did take place. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 18 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:   And the Group CEO Mr Montana, together with his 
Executive team led that process. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Where we could not understand failures on his part was, 
when we wanted now to see the actual contracts because as a Board of 
Directors it is well and good to say, yes management have given 
presentations they’ve told us what the programme of modernisation 
entails and what is its status, what are the critical elements thereof but 
you still wan to know, what do the contracts commit us to as a Board of 
Directors. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no definitely, particularly when you’re talking 
about big amounts as the Board you should want to see that, thank you 
Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please Mr Chairperson, and especially 
given the fact that in terms of the PFMA the Board is the accounting 
authority. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson, the Board is the accounting 
authority, we can’t say to the Executive Authority, that is the 
shareholder and to the legislature to which we have to account that, no 
we can’t account because management did not give us a report, didn’t 
20 
give us a contract.  We are obliged in terms of the Public Finance 
Management Act to exercise fiduciary duty to exercise the duty of care 
and diligence as we deal with these matters. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now a point you made in relation to the power 
relations and so in, it appears to have been quite a fluid situation 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 19 of 131 
 
because you then talk about a challenge that faced the Board in regard 
to the audit report.  Can you tell the Chairperson about that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson by September 2014 which is a time at 
which the final audit and annual report should have been concluded and 
actually tabled in Parliament by the Minister subsequent to which the 
Board would be required to appear before Parliament to answer 
questions.  PRASA at that time was not ready there were many queries 
from the Auditor General regarding that, and I recall pretty well that by 
September 2014, which is really just a month after I had been 
appointed Chairman of the Board, I was invited by the Group Chief 
10 
Executive to attend to events in Europe.  The first one was Mufex which 
was a conference of rail organisations and that one was held in Madrid 
and the second one was the biannual global and the biggest exhibition 
rail or exhibition being organised and hosted by Deutsche Bahn which 
is a German rail organisation.  So I was invited to that, the GCE and I, 
Group Chief Executive Officer and I had to return hurriedly because the 
annual financials had not been concluded and we had to go back 
quickly to engage the Auditor General’s team management to try and 
get the finances in order. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you had – both of you had already left and you 
20 
had to come back? 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja but to clarify matters, Chairperson, the Group CEO 
would have known that the financials had not been conclude, it’s not 
like we only discovered when we were out of the country.  We were 
saying we can’t stay longer because we’ve got to go back and get our 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 20 of 131 
 
house in order. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes okay alright.  Before you proceed, I just 
want us to conclude the issue of you or your Board trying to get the 
contracts.  You spoke to Webber Wentzel they did a presentation and I 
think you said somebody else did a presentation.  Ultimately were you 
able to have copies of all the contracts that you wanted? 
MR MOLEFE:   We never got the contracts to be given to us but it was 
through our consent.  They said they’d given PRASA the contract but 
what they had was their own copy and we were satisfied, having spent 
like, half a day with them discussing those contracts and getting them 
10 
to present to us that we had the assurance that this big firm of lawyers 
had done the correct done, they have done the best they could to 
protect the interest of PRASA.  Actually the person who was leading 
these negotiations and the drafting of the contract was an experienced 
former – experience lawyer who had worked in rail in the UK and other 
part of the world, he understood the complexities of these contracts. 
CHAIRPERSON:    So – but are you saying  that they did a presentation 
but didn’t give you, as the Board, copies of the contracts?  
MR MOLEFE:   We didn’t take copies of the contract, we accepted that 
if we want them we can go and get them at the firm of attorneys. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay but did you get to know, like how many 
contracts had been concluded with whom they had been concluded and 
what the value of each one was, all of that, maybe through the 
presentation? 
MR MOLEFE:   In respect of this contract I think our main focus was on 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 21 of 131 
 
the – and I must come back to this point, was on the R51billion which 
was being allocated for the manufacturing of the new trains.  I should 
have indicated that the procurement of the locomotives was outside the 
R51billion, that one was in the region of R3.4billion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, okay so would it then be correct for me to 
conclude from your evidence that after Webber Wentzel had made their 
presentation you were satisfied that they had their presentations had 
included telling you all the contracts that they were telling you about, 
all the contracts that they were aware of relating to PRASA in which 
they had been – which they had drafted but you are not sure as to how 
10 
many contracts there had been – that had been concluded that fell 
under the modernisation programme already and I accept that you 
might not be wanting to see every small contract you would be 
interested in big ones, but would it be fair to make that conclusion or 
not really? 
MR MOLEFE:   It would be fair to say, Chairperson, that we did not 
know about the rest of the contract, and I must hasten to say, whereas 
Webber Wentzel advised PRASA on the Gibela programme, the 
manufacturing of the trains, they did not seem to be involved in any 
other contract.  The rest of the contracts were done by different law 
20 
firms, small ones and so on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so the one on which they had been involved 
was he Gibela – that’s the R51billion one? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is the R51billione one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 22 of 131 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   May I just ask to conclude in relation to the 
presentation by Webber Wentzel, was the CEO, Mr Montana present at 
that presentation? 
MR MOLEFE:   No he was not.  He was not because at that stage it was 
already clear to us that he was not keen to share with the Board all 
information that the Board required and if I remember well at that time 
he was not even at the office of the company when the Board wanted 
that presentation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So would it be correct to then say that, as far as you 
are concerned by the time of the presentation that was made by 
10 
Webber Wentzel to your Board it was clear to you that Mr Montana’s 
failure to provide the Board with contracts was based on his 
unpreparedness to provide the Board it was not anything else, he was 
simply not prepared to provide them or is that being unfair to him? 
MR MOLEFE:   There could be two reasons that – but he didn’t even 
need to be – or unpreparedness means unwilling…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Unpreparedness means unwilling yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja it could be that he was unwilling, secondly it could 
be that he felt but, you are the Board of Directors why – this is an 
operational matter why do you interfere and that, probably, would 
20 
explain why he made a big issue of the fact that the Board went and 
met with the firm of attorneys that was advising PRASA.  Ordinarily he 
would have said, okay you’ve seen them well we hope that now you 
understand the programme better than before but that was not the 
attitude of the Group CEO. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 23 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well it seems to me that – you said it could be one of 
two reasons, it seems to me that in either case it’s unwillingness to say 
this, he is not prepared – was not prepared, at least that’s how you saw 
it, that’s what I want to confirm that, that’s how you saw it that he was 
unprepared to give these contracts or share some other information 
with the Board that the Board wanted and when you look at why he 
might not have wanted to share the information, then it may be that he 
thought it’s operational and the Board should have nothing to do with it.  
Would that be a fair summary of what you thought by the time of the 
presentation? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson, I may also want to locate it 
within the context of other developments at that time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   I think we would probably return to this matter in the 
evidence, two things had happened.  It was a disagreement we had, 
had with the Group CEO regarding the contracts that they had awarded 
in respect of the Braamfontein depot modernisation, the rail and 
turnouts procurement, it is also part of the evidence later on.  The 
second one was the fact that we raised each issue with having to hear 
from the media that PRASA had been given an interim report which 
20 
included a number of questions that the company had to respond to, 
and it came from the Public Protector which the Board was not 
presented with and this now, the situation around much when we still 
asking for that report and it is at that time after these two events 
happened, 27 November 2014 and this matter of the Public Protector’s 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 24 of 131 
 
interim report which I had discussed with the Group CEO that at that 
point in time he says, I’m not renewing my contract but I’m happy to 
serve six months whilst you are searching for a new Group CEO but the 
attitude  that time also changes as we will show in the evidence that 
increasingly the Board was getting an indication that the GCE for that 
period – GCEO for that period, Group Chief Executive Officer for that 
period, Mr Montana did not consider himself fully accountable to the 
Board.  He actually was beginning to question the integrity and the 
validity of the appointment of the Board and one of the key issues he 
raised in his many complaints was that he was not consulted when the 
10 
new Board was appointed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I just want to make sure, with regard to the two 
developments that you have talked about, I just want to make sure that 
you – that they happened before the Webber Wentzel presentation 
because my question was more on the question on what you understood 
or thought to be the position as far as the Group CEO was concerned at 
that time.  Did the two events or development happen before the 
Webber Wentzel presentation or after? 
MR MOLEFE:   Well certainly the first event of November but I do 
believe that the second one also happed before the Webber Wentzel 
20 
engagement because it took time, for us waiting for the contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now in your affidavit you say, Mr Molefe, that 
there were two warring aspects in regard to the audit state of PRASA 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 25 of 131 
 
and you refer to two separate amounts and you annex the audit report, 
do you want to deal with that quickly? 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson the audit report of the year 2014/2015 by 
the Auditor General recorded that there was an irregular expenditure of 
over R500million which in precise terms I think it was R550million and 
queries arising out of the report projected, also that the following 
financial year the irregular expenditure would be in the region of 
R8billion.  The response of the Board was to direct the Audit and Risk 
Committee to have a special workshop that was going to interrogate 
what went wrong to assess what could be done to fix these wrongs.  
10 
The conclusions of the Audit and Risk Committee was that literally all 
the departments of PRASA, especially the finance function were 
dysfunctional and that the people in those positions just did not have 
requisite skills and therefore they were unable to discharge their 
responsibilities as they were required but also the Audit and Risk 
Committee didn’t only talk about dysfunctional, it emphasised the fact 
that 
there were no controls as 
well 
within 
the organisation.  
Fundamentally what it meant was that they were saying that this 
organisation was broken, a lot of work has to be done to fix it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This was now the risk – the Audit and Risk 
20 
Committee of your Board. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And there would have been an Audit and Risk 
Committee under the previous Board, did you get to understand from 
the report of the Audit and Risk Committee under your Board that this 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 26 of 131 
 
finding they were making, namely that there were no controls reflected 
that there had been no controls for quite some time or that there was – 
this was a new thing?  I’m trying to see whether somebody hadn’t done 
their job for some time and that’s why there were these challenges or 
whether it was something new. 
MR MOLEFE:   I, at this stage would not be privy to what the previous 
Audit and Risk Committee, the one before my Board had found. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   But I am aware, it’s something I want to steer clear of 
that in the course of the investigations conducted on the [indistinct] 
10 
within PRASA it was clear that some member of the Board had raided 
red flags about certain contracts, and one of those was this one of the 
locomotives even before we came in, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Just, Mr Molefe, just to attempt to tie in the 
annexures with the evidence you’ve led, you refer, in regard to those 
two amounts you referred to, the R500million in paragraph 16 and then 
R8billion, can I just ask you to look at PM2 so that the Chairperson, 
when he’s looking at the report would know, precisely where to look at 
and ask you…[intervenes]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And PM2 would be at page 34 if you look at the red 
page numbers at the top right, is that correct? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please Chairperson PM2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You might recall from your previous engagements that 
we do not mention the zero before the number. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 27 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:   But P but where do I see the P?  Oh, okay thanks.  Thank 
you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   May I ask you to turn to page 38?  The 38 being the 
number on the top. 
CHAIRPERSON:    So, you disregard the zero. 
MR MOLEFE:   I am on page 38. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   38.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay, alright. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, I have found it on PM(2) 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  So, if you look at paragraph 10 if you could 
10 
just read that into the record, please? 
CHAIRPERSON:    Maybe Mr Soni you can just repeat what this document 
is first so you can ask the witness to identify the document before he 
reads from it. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, yes.  Yes.  First of all, Mr Molefe will you 
please tell the Chairperson what this document is.   PM(2)? 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson PM(2) is the Auditors General Report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That would have been for which financial year? 
MR MOLEFE:   For 2014, 2015 financial year. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you.  And then you can read paragraph 10 
20 
at page 38. 
MR MOLEFE:   The relevant paragraph and I quote Chairperson reads as 
follows and that is paragraph 10 says: 
“As disclosed in the note (xx) to the financial 
statements the capital commitment for the purchase 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 28 of 131 
 
of Rolling Stock Fleet Renewal programme is 
59.6 billion which was disclosed under events after 
reporting date in 2013, 2014 Annual Report as 
51 billion rand.” 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So, what is the significance of that in relation to the 
two figures you have mentioned in paragraph 16 of your affidavit?  
Remember you say it was projected to be 8 billion rand more the following 
year? 
MR MOLEFE:   Well what I – what I am saying Chairperson, is that if you 
were, add for example 8 billion rand to what was reported as 51 billion 
10 
rand it will take you to 59 billion, of course it has some six hundred on 
the side. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   So, it is this particular aspect that reflect that that amount 
is not being properly accounted for. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes.  Is there a suggestion here as you understand 
this paragraph of any, of some misrepresentation that may have been 
made or not really?  That is, let us  how you understand that paragraph? 
MR MOLEFE:   One can summarize that but what is quite clear 
Chairperson is that there is a disjuncture between what is set out as a 
20 
what the renewal programme of the rolling stock would cost to purchase 
that and what then is disclosed to the Auditor General.  So, there has not 
been a full disclosure to the Auditor General that is what it means. 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes.  Then whether or not that was 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 29 of 131 
 
intentional, deliberate or not that might be another matter. 
MR MOLEFE:   It is another matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but what was disclosed was not the correct figure? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And the difference between what was disclosed and 
what the real figure was, was 8 billion rand. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then, can I ask you at the bottom of that page if 
you could look at paragraph 14 please Mr Molefe and read what is the 
10 
heading to that paragraph? 
MR MOLEFE:   The heading to that paragraph Chairperson is: 
“Irregular Expenditure.” 
 And it is paragraph 14 and again if I quote it says: 
“As disclosed in the note (xx) to the financial 
statements the agency incurred irregular expenditure 
to the amount of 550 million rand”. 
Which is what I have referred to earlier on Chairperson. 
“Evidence provided confirmed noncompliance with 
section 51(1) paragraph A item 3 and section 51(1) 
20 
paragraph B item 2 of the PFMA and the Agency 
supply Chain Management Policy.” 
So, there is no compliance with the PFMA, there is no compliance with 
our own Supply Chain Policy. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And for just the record when a reference is made to 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 30 of 131 
 
Agency what is the entity? 
MR MOLEFE:   The Agency, Chairperson refers to the Passenger Rail 
Agency known by the acronym PRASA. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Right.  Then you say in addition to this issue of the 
– the – the audit, concerns being raised about the Audit Report by the 
Auditor General or in his Audit Report.  You say there were other issues 
that the Board was concerned about, what were those?  You refer to them 
in paragraph 17. 
MR MOLEFE:   The – at the time when the Board took office Chairperson 
we found that a whole lot of people had either been suspended or 
10 
dismissed and the disciplinary procedure of the company was not 
followed.  It was one of the major problems we had.  And in fact 
five hundred employees of a trade union that broke away from the South 
African Trade workers trade SATAWU South African Trade Union 
[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Transport and Allied. 
MR MOLEFE:   Transport and Allied Workers Union. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you said workers or members of a Trade Union? 
MR 
MOLEFE:   NTM 
which 
is 
a 
National 
Transport 
Movement.  
Five hundred of them had been dismissed. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Part of that Union. 
MR MOLEFE:   Of that Union.  The Labour Court held that their dismissal 
was irregular and unlawful and that they needed to be reinstated.  Now 
this occasioned an enormous problem for the company because suddenly 
the company had to find money to pay these people who have not been at 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 31 of 131 
 
work for a long time.  They were not receiving their salaries and the 
reinstatement meant that the situation had to return until - return to what 
it was before they were suspended. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   So it was a big problem for the company, and of course 
regardless of whether at the time it was the Group CEO who made the 
decision, but, he was the ultimate person responsible as the Chief of the 
Administrative function of the company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you – do you have, these might be details that you 
might not remember, do you remember what kind of figures the backpay 
10 
for the five hundred workers, more or less was that the company had to 
find? 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson, I would not remember the actual figures 
[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But it was a huge amount as far as you recall. 
MR MOLEFE:   I may just say that when these things were happening, 
when the reinstatement was happening it was close to when the term of 
Office of my Board was going to end. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, was going to end.  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   We were not able to go into these details.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   What I remember is that I met with the leaders of the 
National Transport Movement to say and I must say that we think that we 
were estimating that it will cost us over in the region of five hundred 
million to reinstate that, but it is an estimation. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 32 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that was an estimation. 
MR MOLEFE:   But – but – but I met with the leaders of the Union to say; 
hey guys you understand that the company is in trouble and we have to 
respect the Court judgment, but can’t we as people collectively committed 
to making sure that the company succeed. Agree on negotiating the 
amounts that the company can afford maybe over an extended period of 
time.   
 
And they were willing to do so, but of course I am not an 
operationals person and again our Human Resources function in the 
company was very poor, was weak.  I never got to know whether that 
10 
negotiation was pursued and concluded.  But of course if it becomes 
necessary I am sure those leaders I spoke to are there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   And should the Commission require to ask them to confirm 
what I am saying I am sure they will be willing to do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and I am sure that the judgment of the court is 
also available somewhere.  Ja, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now Mr Molefe earlier you recall.  You were saying 
to the Chairperson that there is difference between the induction of the 
Board and then the substantive meetings that the Board had.   
20 
 
I would like you to look at paragraph 18 and you say there that 
the first substantive meeting of the Board was in November, could you 
explain to the Chairperson how that came about.  And what happened at 
the meeting? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am very sorry to both of you before that question I 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 33 of 131 
 
wanted to ask something else arising from the previous question.   
 
You said that I think when your Board came in you found that 
there were a number of employees who had been suspended or dismissed 
and so on, are you able to give me an idea that maybe although you might 
not be a 100 percent what the numbers were that you were talking about, 
apart from that group of five  hundred or is that difficult because it has 
been quite some time? 
MR MOLEFE:   My – my number would not be precise, but I know that 
there was an Executive called Cromet Molepo who also had an extended 
...[intervenes].  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Suspension. 
MR MOLEFE:   Suspension and legal ...[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   Challenge. 
MR MOLEFE:   Challenge, the others had simply been moved from where 
they were to other positions there was, and some of them were forced to 
resign.  I can’t give the exact number but I mean if I want to do that we 
would have to go back to and find, try to find something from the records 
of the company which I do not have access to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Ja.  No, no that is fine.  I just want to have 
an idea whether it was something substantial but I guess it was 
20 
something enough to cause the Board concern, as to what the numbers 
are but, whatever it was but it was enough to cause you to be concerned. 
MR MOLEFE:   Well – well by the way Chairperson, from our point of view 
it is not so much the numbers ...[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 34 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:   It is the question whether there has been fairness and 
compliance with the procedures of the company on how you terminate the 
employment of your employees. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   And whether the basis for suspending or removing them 
was in our view valid, justified.  That kind of action and we concluded 
that in many respects.  It did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that is fine.  The angle from which I was 
looking at it was as the Board you might not necessarily want to get 
involved if there might be one isolated incident but if there seems to be a 
10 
number of instances where people are being suspended and dismissed in 
circumstances that are questionable as the Board you might say no, let us 
try and find out what is happening, as opposed to what might be an 
isolated case.  But – but I understand what you mean, but I just thought 
that I must keep you in the picture. 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson I must state that there were many. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There were many. 
MR MOLEFE:   There were many. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   And I suppose when we go down,  deal at some point with 
20 
the Public Protector’s Report this matter is raised there again by the 
Public Protector. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  You can elaborate.  Ja.  Okay, no that is 
fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Molefe the first substantive meeting of the Board 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 35 of 131 
 
you say was held in November 2014, you tell us what - tell the 
Chairperson what happened at that meeting? 
MR MOLEFE:   I call it the first substantive meeting Chairperson because 
that was the first scheduled meeting of the Board that is outside the 
induction that had already taken place.   
 
That meeting we were required to hold, because the – the  
amongst others there would have been other items, but amongst others 
the Finance Capital and Investment - Capital Investment and Procurement 
Committee of the Board which is called the FCIP and in line with the 
urgency of accelerating the programme of modernization and preparing 
10 
for a stage in yards for the trains that were being manufactured in Brazil 
and which were likely to come.   
 
We had to make urgent decisions in that regard.  Management 
had awarded well had – had announced their preferred bidders in respect 
of, in particular Braamfontein Depot and the matter that pertained to rails 
and turnouts.   
 
Because we are a new Board, because we also needed to have 
been seen to have appliede our minds on these matters.  We looked at 
the amounts it was in the region of 4 billion and we said look we 
appreciate the urgency of the matter which was of course presented by 
20 
the former Chairperson of the Board Mr Sfiso Buthelezi who had now 
become the Chairperson of the FCIP.   
 
We said give us an assurance that proper process was followed 
before you awarded to your preferred bidder.  Give us the Probity Report.  
The Probity Report was not in the pack of the Board.  The Group CEO, 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 36 of 131 
 
Mr Montana, said well you know that Probity Report is there, I cannot 
understand why it is not in the pack but you will get it, we will give it you 
as soon as possible.   
 
On the strength of the promise that Mr Montana made to the 
Board which was not refuted by the Chairperson of the FCIP, we agreed 
to adopt,  to approve the recommendation but we said it is subject to that 
Probity Report being delivered to the Chairperson of the Board and the 
Chairperson of the Risk Committee.   
 
Them having acquainted themselves to that report will then 
advise the rest of the Directors that we can now go ahead and implement. 
10 
At that point we said to management;  nobody should go and tell what we, 
who we are saying are the preferred bidders that they have got this 
contract because we must first jump this hurdle.   
 
So, we waited – we waited Chairperson for that report it was not 
forthcoming.  Of course around that time Mr Montana had advised me that 
he felt like he was burned out, he had been working very hard, could he 
please take a break which I encouraged because I could see he had been 
running around the country and so on.   
 
Then, one of the executives Miss Martha Ngoye was appointed to 
act as the Group CEO in the absence of Mr Montana.  Because we did not 
20 
get the report I had to call Directors who were on holiday to a meeting of 
the Board of Control understanding the urgency of this project of depot 
modernization rails and turnouts which are necessary for the maintenance 
of the rail tracks and so on.   
 
We called the meeting on the 23 r d December that was just two 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 37 of 131 
 
days before Christmas and I must applaud the loyalty of the Directors at 
the time because they were all willing to come back to consider this 
matter.   
 
At that meeting Miss Ngoye said actually there is no Probity 
Report it could never have been there because the Probity Officer, his 
contract had expired already twelve months before this meeting so there 
could not have been a report.   
 
The decision we then took Chairperson was to ask an audit firm 
that also served as our internal auditors to do what we called ad hoc 
tenders assessment and produce out of that an assurance for us that we 
10 
can proceed with an award of that tender.   
 
The report came back.  It was in the negative we says no you 
can’t, at that point we then said to management in then of course this 
happens at the meeting held in February of the following year. 
CHAIRPERSON:   2015. 
MR MOLEFE:   The Board then says well we have to cancel this contract, 
ask management to reissue the RFB. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Before we get to that I just need to raise two issues 
about the meeting of the 27 t h of November, Mr Buthelezi, the Chairperson 
of the FCIP, said to you these are urgent and you should approve them. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What was his position on the Board immediately 
after the meeting? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, actually even before we discussed this 
matter he gave me a letter of resignation, saying that he is resigning from 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 38 of 131 
 
the Board and it will be effective immediately after that particular board 
meeting of the 27 t h of November. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well just going back to the meeting you clearly said 
that the GCEO made it clear at the meeting that the Probity Report was 
there and it would be furnished, he did not understand why it was not part 
of the pack that was given to the Board members, is that right?  That is 
what he said. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is so, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Now, with regard to the then Chairperson of FCIP 
Mr Buthelezi did he also say that there was the Probity Report – the 
10 
Probity Report was there, or did he not say that but he did not refute what 
the GCEO said? 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson he did not say whether there was a Probity 
Report neither did he refute what was said by the group CEO. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   He did not even say over the last 12 months we did not 
have a Probity Officer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Yes, but as I understood your evidence you did 
ask him to give you as Chairperson of this particular committee give you 
an assurance that processes had been followed.  Now, whether or not 
20 
processes had been followed would that have been evident from the 
Probity Report or was that request separate from that you were making to 
him separate from the Probity Report namely give us an assurance that 
processes were followed that is what you said you asked him so my 
question is whether that question was going to be answered by the 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 39 of 131 
 
Probity Report or whether that question was separate from the Probity 
Report?  And if it was separate whether he did answer you and said yes 
processes were followed or whether he did not answer. 
MR MOLEFE:   The sequence was that we asked for assurance and I 
recall that leading this discussion was the Chair of the then our Audit and 
Risk Committee Miss Zhoro Mnasi[?] and then she went on to say a 
Probity Report, the availability of a Probity Report would give us that 
assurance.   
 
Of course, in that discussion Mr Montana said no we can assure 
we followed process, the Probity Report is there.  At that point, I think, Mr 
10 
Buthelezi was taking guidance from the Group CEO given that he is the 
Chief of, the Head of Operations of the company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And would the - would you know whether the 
chairperson of the FCIP report would have been expected to have known 
if there was such a report before they made their decision or whether it is 
possible that they could have done their job without having seen that 
report, seen whether it existed or did not exist? 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson, if they were applying the duty of diligence 
and care he would have together with his team in the meeting of the FCIP 
the Finance Capital Investment and Procurement Committee asked 
20 
management when they presented to them this recommendation whether 
there had been Probity.  But it would seem like the committee failed to 
address that question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Can I just finish off the regard of the Probity in 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 40 of 131 
 
regard to these two contracts.  You say that the Board asked for an Audit 
Report on these two contracts. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And you then say that that report, you call it an 
assessment report, is annexed as PM(3) if you look at the last sentence 
of paragraph 20 of your affidavit. 
MR MOLEFE:   Oh, okay.  Yes, it is. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Can you please look at PM(3) please? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Tell him – tell us what page PM(3) is. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, sorry.  It is at page 64 Mr Molefe.  What – what 
10 
is that document? 
MR MOLEFE:   The – Chairperson, the document is called ad hoc review 
of tenders Braamfontein Depo and supply of rails and turnouts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And if you look at the first page of the document, 
what is the date of that document? 
MR MOLEFE:   The date of the document is the 15 t h of February which is 
the date on which The Board met to receive this Report and to make a 
determination on whether to proceed or not to proceed with the tender 
award. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now it is not necessary to go through the report 
because the board did take a decision eventually. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Can I ask you ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second.   
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 41 of 131 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The date or rather what I see on page 64 is the month 
and the year of the report without the day- any public date.  I understood 
you to be linking the date of the report with a certain meeting of the 
board.  Is that right?  I thought that you were saying that the date of the 
report is the date of a certain meeting of the board. 
MR MOLEFE:  Oh, let me say Chairperson it was during the month 
February or thereafter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At some stage during February. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja.  I- yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  At some stage during February? 
MR MOLEFE:  In February. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  Probably the 25 t h but we can go to the record to confirm 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Can I then ask you to look at page 88, the 88 on the 
top. 
MR MOLEFE:  Page 88. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then you would see in the second last paragraph 
20 
after the number paragraph 15 they advise what management and the 
board should do.  And what is the advice as recorded there?  Starting 
with the word “overall”? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well should we not just first hear who are the authors of 
this report? 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 42 of 131 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then we know who is advising.  It looks like it is the 
Group Chief Executive Officer, is that right?  The author of the report. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Of- who authored the report?  I thought it was the 
special committee that the board had appointed. 
MR MOLEFE:  No, the authors of the report were an audit firm that was 
providing internal audit work for Transnet.  I did not think ... (intervenes) 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  For PRASA. 
MR MOLEFE:  For PRASA, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  For PRASA.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you ... (intervenes) 
MR MOLEFE:  I ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are chairman of Transnet now so.  Okay, so let ... 
(intervenes) 
MR MOLEFE:  I have to speak for Transnet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay so ... (intervenes) 
MR MOLEFE:  No the ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  The document at one page of which is at page 88, is 
that the page you were looking for Mr Soni? 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that the document that Mr Molefe, you say is a report 
of- did you say the audit of the firm that had been asked to prepare it? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  I was referring to the Group Chief Executive 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 43 of 131 
 
Officer simply because it seemed to me that that document ends at page 
89 and I see that name there.  But I see it says responsible official so. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So responsible official might not mean official 
responsible for this report for the preparation of the report. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I thought that is what it meant. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is not what it means?  I was seeing that where it says 
responsible official and I thought it meant that that is the official that 
10 
prepared the report.  But you are saying, no that is not the position. 
MR MOLEFE:  The report was prepared by the ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  An outside firm. 
MR MOLEFE:  An outside firm but it was working inside. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh within, ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  PRASA on a regular basis. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  Because it was providing services for that internal audit 
function throughout. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  And Chairperson I have not looked at the name.  I have not 
been in PRASA for a long time but I think it was called Sikhela Tlhabiso, I 
think was the company if I remember very well, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Mr Soni, is this clarify so that responsible 
official ... (intervenes) 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 44 of 131 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am going to deal with ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  You will deal with it, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So, can I just put the report in perspective or ask 
you to put the report in perspective?  At page 88, that is the one we are 
looking at, if you look at page 86 first of all Mr Molefe, page 86 of that 
report.  Have you got it? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  You see that the heading is, Overall Conclusion and 
Recommendations.  You see that? 
MR MOLEFE:  I do.  I do see that Chair. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Right.  Now we do not need to go through all of that 
because I just one I think the relevant part is, so they articulate 15 
recommendations that they make and those end at page 88. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Soni.  I am really sorry to interrupt you 
again. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, that is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Can I know where this report starts and where it ends 
because maybe that is where my problem is. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes, sorry Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am thinking it is a particular of pages, the end of the 
20 
report where it might (indistinct). 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So, it starts at page 64 Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. And it ends where? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And it ends on page 89 but I will try through the 
witness to explain how 89 comes about and how it is related to the report. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 45 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, 89 is the page to which I referred earlier as 
advised? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes, that is the page. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  So, I was right about that page being the last 
page? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So Mr Molefe ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  The reason why I was wondering whether that is where 
it ends is because if you go to the next page it says 7.   
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And 7 seems to follow up on 6 at page 88 and that gave 
me the impression that it is still continuing. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Continuing with the report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So, we know that this part of the report which ends 
on page 88 is paragraph- big paragraph 5 of the report which is headed, 
Overall Conclusion and Recommendation.  Would that be correct? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay.  Then if you look at right at the end of page 88 
20 
after the numbered paragraph 15 there are two paragraphs, two short 
paragraphs.  Do you see that? 
MR MOLEFE:  I do Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Would you please read them into the record and then 
I am just going to ask you what you understand them to mean. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 46 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:  The paragraphs reads as follow Chairperson and I read on 
page 88 of the Annexure.  It says; 
 
Overall management and the board must take a decision to 
 
accept or reject the non-compliance with the policy of the two 
 
affected tenders reviewed.  
 
Then the following paragraph says; 
 
This recommendation has been discussed with the Group Chief 
 
Executive Officer and his response and action plan is reflected 
 
below. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So that is the Overall Recommendation to the board.  
10 
I see you shake your head Mr Molefe, does that mean yes? 
MR MOLEFE:  Well it is.  It is the recommendation to the board 
Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay.  Then the next paragraph- oh sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second Mr Soni.  Are we able to have a name 
for this report so when we refer to it we can know what we call it in the 
mist of all these documents?  We can call it by the name of the author if 
necessary was- was it Thlabiso whoever?  What report? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Should we call it ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  I just want that when we refer to it and when anybody 
20 
reads the transcripts, they can know what report we are talking about. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  To identify what the substance is Chairperson I am 
going to propose we call it Report on Review of Tenders. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Report on Review of Tenders. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 47 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Report on Review of Tenders. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  That is what we will call it then.  Okay, 
thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Can I then ask Mr Molefe for you to turn to page 89.  
Now what is that in relation to the report?  What does that indicate? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson the- that page is called Management 
Response and Action Plan but fundamentally it is a section that says 
there has been non-compliance and that the tenders should be cancelled. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Does it not go further and say the matter has been 
10 
discussed with management and this is how management responded?  If 
you read the response, the small- the paragraph under the small heading, 
Response. 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson we recall that we had already referred in the 
preceding page ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  To the discussion with Management. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  I do not see that on this page. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  However ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is on the last page, on the previous page, the last 
sentence. 
MR MOLEFE:  The previous page. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 48 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:  That was dealt with at that point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  So, it says we have discussed.  We demonstrated that 
there had not been compliance and management agree with us.  And that 
they therefore propose this Action Plan which must be driven by the Chief 
Executive Officer, Mr Lucky Montana, Group Chief Executive Officer. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  In effect that is summarising what the final outcome 
was following the publication of the report? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson.  If I may come in just to say 
that where they deal with the Action Plan, they state categorically that; 
10 
  
We will design alternative tender procedures to acquire the 
 
equipment and services required.  Consequence management 
 
would be implemented accordingly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now the last sentence at page 88 to which you also 
referred Mr Molefe.  It tells us that what we will find on the next page is 
the Group CEOs Response and Action Plan.  You see that? 
MR MOLEFE:  I see that Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Now when one looks at the next page it refers to, 
“we”. 
 
After due consideration of the context of this report from the 
20 
 
internal audit consortium, we are of the view that the two 
 
tenders are non-compliant and will therefore be cancelled. 
 
Is it the Group CEO speaking there that is saying that?  As you 
understand the position. 
MR MOLEFE:  Paragraph 6 says Management Response and Action Plan. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 49 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Action Plan, yes.  Which suggest that ... (intervenes) 
MR MOLEFE:  I imagine it is the Group CEO that is talking as part of the 
collective. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  No, I just wanted to understand that 
because the language seems to suggest to me that maybe it is the 
committee still speaking even though it says Management Response.  But 
think probably I am mistaken.  Because later on it says; 
 
We will design alternative tender procedures to acquire the 
 
equipment. 
 
That “we” must be management.  
10 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson it is the management ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Management. 
MR MOLEFE:  Team ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is talking. 
MR MOLEFE:  That says that lead by the Group CEO. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And because the board committee or the internal audit firm 
cannot be the one that designs ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes of course. 
MR MOLEFE:  These procedures to acquire this. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And secondly it would- the committee would not have taken 
a view on who should be the responsible officer. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So that responsible official that was confusing me 
earlier must be meaning that is the official who will be responsible to- for 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 50 of 131 
 
the implementation of this Action Plan. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  The owner of the business. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The owner of the- ja, okay.  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now following the publication of this report in 
February who the acceptance of this report seemingly brought by the 
board and management, what happened? 
MR MOLEFE:  Well Chairperson I did say at that meeting given the 
recommendation and the- because there is a detailed report of the 
10 
internal auditors.  I think this bundle must be containing that.   
 
The board concurred that it was not the kind of a tender we 
could proceed with.  That a new RFP needed to be issued as a matter of 
urgency to invite participants.  Of course, I must say Chairperson that 
the- at that time the GCE, well he would have been back in February but 
he had gone leave as I indicated earlier on that he needed a rest.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So, did you then cancel the tender?  Did the board 
cancel the tender? 
MR MOLEFE:  The board cancelled the tender Chairperson but the 
directors and the board sanctioned the conduct of the Group CEO that he 
20 
had mislead the board when he assured the board that there was a 
probity report when in fact he should have known that there was no such 
a report.  Because the probity officer had not been in place for a period 
of approximately 12 months.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So, can I just ask you in regard to that issue Mr 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 51 of 131 
 
Molefe.  There is no probity officer for 12 months, that is what you were 
told? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Montana assures you that there is a probity 
report. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  You then find out in December that there is no 
probity officer.  In terms of the assurance that Mr Montana had given you, 
what conclusion did you arrive at?  In other words, had he made a 
mistake?  What was his state of mind in making that representation to you 
10 
about the probity report? 
MR MOLEFE:  Well Chairperson the only conclusion one can draw is that 
the Group CEO deliberately mislead the board because he wanted the 
board to rapidly approve a tender that was seriously flawed.  Because 
even after it was found that the tender process was flawed, he never 
came to apologise to the board for that.   
 
And that is why the board said there is a need to enforce good 
corporate governance in the light of this gross dereliction of duty by the 
Executive Management Team at the head of whom was the Group CEO. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did the board not after it had been informed by Ms 
20 
Ngoye that one, there was not any probity report and two there could not 
have been any probity report because there was not- there had been no 
probity officer for 12 months.   
 
Did the board at any stage confront the Group CEO and say, 
“CEO, you told us there was a probity report.  You know how important 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 52 of 131 
 
that report would have been.  Why did you tell us there was a probity 
report when in fact there was no probity report?”  And if the board did 
obviously not necessarily in those terms but in effect and if the board did, 
what was his answer? 
MR MOLEFE:  My recollection is that the board did so.  The excuse of the 
Group CEO is that he was misled, he was told that there was that probity 
report.  There was no explanation as to how the probity report could have 
been there if there was no probity officer for 12 months. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But am I wrong to think that the way he had given 
the assurance to the board that there was a probity report gave one the 
10 
impression that it is a document that he had seen or am I being unfair to 
him? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson if and the record that show there was no 
probity officers for 12 months preceding the recommended tender.  There 
was no way in which he could have seen probity report.  Because where 
would it have come from?  Unless it is a concoction of somebody else, it 
could not have been a proper probity report.  And besides the internal 
audit company would have been aware of that probity report themselves 
as they are the ones that have to advise on the preparation of financial 
statements which ultimately become part of the Audited General’s report.   
20 
 
So, it could not have been that he had seen the report.  One can 
talk at length about these things but the conclusion that one can ask is 
that- that one can arrive at is that the Group CEO and management most 
likely were used to the board of directors which did not interrogate issues 
to the extend that this board was doing.  So, all that you needed to do is 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 53 of 131 
 
to write good English, do a presentation in a very articulate way and say 
that, “I recommend that you approve”.  And the board would just approve.  
Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  May I ask and I want to return to that issue in 
moment Chairperson because I- it is an important issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is quite important. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  But I will return to it in a moment because I 
just want to deal with other developments that took place at that time.   
 
Now forgetting Mr Montana’s state of mind and what you 
10 
believed prompted him to misrepresent the position to you.  What steps 
did the board take in regard to Mr Montana’s powers following the 
cancellation of the tenders? 
MR MOLEFE:  Again, we need to put in context Chairperson these steps.  
The context is that we now are in a possession of the letter from Mr 
Montana that says, “Do not extend my contract.  I am leaving.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Then the immediate thing that exercises the mind of the 
board is that we now know that things can go grossly wrong with the 
business.  It would not be proper to keep the Group CEO who has already 
20 
told us he is leaving with all the delegated authority of a Group CEO.  
That is one point.  The second one was we also did an assessment and 
concluded that the Office of the Group CEO was just too powerful.  The 
group CEO was a Group CEO of PRASA, he was the chairman of Autopax, 
he was chairman of Intersite.  And so, we said we think that- we took a 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 54 of 131 
 
decision that we are withdrawing him as a chairperson to allow those 
subsidiaries to operate in autonomous way and account for their sins to 
the board of control of the group.   
 
But we also said that we were going to curtail the authority of 
the Group CEO in respect of procurement.  That procurement that he 
intends proceeding with will have to be approved by the board.  He needs 
to report on all of these instances.  And basically, we are saying things 
must change.  There is a new board it has got its own new style of 
governance.  It is important for management including the Group CEO to 
adjust to this style of management of the board- style of governance, 
10 
sorry. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Is that what you conveyed to Mr Montana? 
MR MOLEFE:  I did. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now that ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  One second Mr Soni.  Just to understand where the 
board was at this stage.  So, the board had heard an incident or maybe 
not incident.  Had had a situation where the GCEO- it had asked the 
GCEO for various contracts and the GCEO had not provided with those 
contracts.  And the board had had to go outside of the- of PRASA to get a 
presentation that satisfied the board.  To did not had- the same GCEO 
20 
had given the board an assurance on a very important issue that turned 
out to be wrong.  At that stage after these two situations which had 
happened, what was the board’s attitude of or towards or understanding 
of the type of CEO PRASA had? 
MR MOLEFE:  The concern of the board was that it had a Group CEO who 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 55 of 131 
 
could mislead the board any part of the day but who could also withhold 
information from the board.  But that being the case, we had to deal with 
the reality Chairperson that I mean in the normal- things being normal 
one would have said, why did you not just fire the person instead?   
CHAIRPERSON:  Mm. 
MR MOLEFE:  But I had already referred to earlier on to the assessment 
made by the Audit and Risk committee that said the organisation is 
broken it is dysfunctional.  Departments ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  There were no controls. 
MR MOLEFE:  And people who are there do not have the requisite skills 
10 
to do what they are supposed to do.  That is one point.  The second point 
is that we were aware that in any event the person is leaving. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is leaving, ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  But we do not readily have a person to fill that position 
and we are going out to search for an appropriate Group CEO. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mm. 
MR MOLEFE:  So, we say, well we will leave with this situation provided 
we introduce certain strictures certain controls amongst which would have 
been that one of reducing the delegation of authority and certain certain 
conditions on not going out to issue tenders without the approval of the 
20 
board.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  So that is how we were looking at it at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  So, had it not been for the fact that he was 
about to leave anyway, it may be that the board might have considered 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 56 of 131 
 
whether it should take any disciplinary action against him. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ordinarily Chairperson that is what the board would have 
had to consider. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Given his own responsibilities. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay, Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson, I see it is 1 o’clock and we are going to 
get into a new topic. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I think let us take the lunch adjournment and we 
will resume at 2 o’clock.  We adjourn. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Molefe you were dealing with some of the 
issues that you took into account in deciding how to handle Mr Montana 
after you discovered that he had firstly not given you the contracts and 
then he had misled you in relation to the – the Property Reports 
mandate. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is… 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That was all part of the background against which 
you decided that instead of taking action against him you would sort of 
ride the storm until he left and you found a new CEO? 
MR MOLEFE:  It is so Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now there are a couple other matters that seem to 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 57 of 131 
 
fit into that and you say at paragraph 24 that one of those concerned… 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is 24 of his affidavit? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Of – as you please Mr Chairman that is SS6.  You 
say that one of those matters was an Interim Report by the Public 
Protector? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is so Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay we – if we could leave out a consideration of 
the report because that is the final report until later when we will deal 
with it more – in more detail.  Can I just ask you now what was the 
issue of concern at that time in December 2014 for you? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  Is it in relation to the Public Protector’s Interim Report 
or is it a different question Chair? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay if you look at paragraph 24 of your affidavit. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  You say in December I became aware of media 
reports. 
MR MOLEFE:  Okay.  Well Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes in December I became aware of media reports but 
those reports related to the – what was alleged to have been an interim 
20 
– a pending report by the Public Protector and at that stage it was 
reported that the Interim Report had been given to – to PRASA already. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And in regard to that what was your concern? 
MR MOLEFE:  My main concern Chairperson was that the Board having 
been in office for approximately four months had not been informed of 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 58 of 131 
 
that report.  It had not – we had not seen it and it was clear that at the 
time that the Public Protector was concerned that PRASA was not 
cooperating the information required. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At the time you became aware of these media reports 
in December 2014 about an Interim Report of the Public Protector were 
you aware that there was some investigation that was being conducted 
by the Public Protector into some issues at PRASA? 
MR MOLEFE:  No formal information had been given to about the 
investigations by the Public Protector. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  But I know that in some casual discussions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  The GCEO Mr Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  Kept on talking about some members of the Union who 
lied about him. 
MR MOLEFE:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  Who went to complain to the Public Protector and the 
fact that their Union disagreed with them and had expelled them from 
the Union. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is really the extent of the little… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  That you knew. 
MR MOLEFE:  I can remember of that period. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And would that have been something that you 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 59 of 131 
 
became aware of from as you say a casual discussion with the GCEO? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yourself as opposed to the Board? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja as far as the Board is concerned it was not 
informed? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It had not been informed at that stage. 
MR MOLEFE:  No the Board had not been. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  Informed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now your own attitude to the fact that matters had 
been referred to the Public Protector you were aware of that at least?  
That is why she was producing her report? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think – I think what he mean is…. 
MR MOLEFE:  Well I am saying that I became aware as a result of what 
was in the media report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes but the question I am asking is did you make 
20 
any enquiries as to what are the issues that the Public Protector or had 
been reported to the Public Protector and the Public Protector would 
report on? 
MR MOLEFE:  I did do so Chairperson I did ask about this report after I 
had seen in the media in a one to one discussion with Mr Montana and 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 60 of 131 
 
that would have been in the new year not – that would have been in 
2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Not in 2014 at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  And that engagement you know did not yield anything 
substantive because I was saying if it is so give us the report we want 
to know what is it that the Public Protector wants. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So what you – is what you understood from the media 
reports was that there was an Interim Report of the Public Protector 
10 
that had allegedly been forwarded to PRASA? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  To which certain questions were raised. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes needing answers. 
MR MOLEFE:  In which certain questions were raised to which PRASA 
was required to provide answers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  So that the Public Protector could finalise the report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  You made reference a little earlier on to – you 
20 
said something along the lines that apparently PRASA was not 
cooperating with the Public Protector.  Is that what emerged from the 
media reports or is that something you heard from elsewhere?   Or was 
that much later? 
MR MOLEFE:  Well that matter is dealt with in the report of the Public 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 61 of 131 
 
Protector. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  But besides that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  The Public Protector had requested a meeting with me 
and I directors. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  To appeal to us to cooperate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  On the issues on the questions that she had wanted 
10 
answered and the documents that she had requested. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  And that meeting would have taken place on the 20 – 
around the 26 June 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  At this stage when you heard about a Preliminary 
Report of the Public Protector did you or any – sorry were the Board 
members also aware that there was going to be a report from the Public 
Protector? 
MR MOLEFE:  I would not say every member of the Board but I recall 
20 
one of the directors raising it.  What I cannot confirm is whether it was 
in a meeting of the Board or it was only during my discussion with her. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am – I am asking in this context Mr Molefe in 
around 2014 you will recall that the then Public Protector Advocate 
Thuli Madonsela had published the Nkandla Report. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 62 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:  2014? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The Public Protector. 
MR MOLEFE:  Was it in 2014? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  To the best of my knowledge it was 2013 or 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think it was later.  Was the Nkandla Report not in… 
MR MOLEFE:  I would not – I know there was a – that report called the 
Captured.  I think that this was… 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That was 2017. 
MR MOLEFE:  Oh that is a different one. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  No I was not aware of … 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And I am only putting it in the context. 
MR MOLEFE:  Because I cannot remember. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am putting it in this context.  The Public 
Protector’s Report on Nkandla created a major storm in our political 
space because people were saying, here is somebody who is ensuring 
clean government in our country and is holding the holder of the 
highest office accountable.  Whenever it was would you agree with me 
that that was what the Public Protector’s Report on Nkandla was? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson I do not want … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Confirm anything about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Because I really cannot recollect. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 63 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:  At this stage as I am sitting here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  But I would not be surprised that that is what it would 
have said. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now I ask in that – in this context you are aware 
that the Public Protector is investigating complaints about PRASA 
whether from PRASA people or from outsiders.  Did you make any 
enquires but what are those complaints?  What is it that is likely for – 
is PRASA likely to be embarrassed by the outcome of those 
10 
investigations? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson I did ask.  I did say I had a one on one 
discussion with the Group CEO to say there has been these media 
reports.  Take us as the Board or take me into confidence.  Do you 
have such a report?  What are the allegations and what are the 
questions that we should answer?  I never got a proper response until 
only during March the same year when at the time as we were 
discussing I also received a letter advising me that Mr Montana is 
resigning.  He is willing to serve six months. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Well let us go back to that one on one 
20 
discussion you had with him when you asked that – this report. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you are able to just give me – tell me the content of 
the discussion how it – how it went?  If you are able to remember.  This 
is what you asked him.  Is there such a report, if there is please can I 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 64 of 131 
 
have a copy?  What are the complaints?  What are the allegations and 
what was his response?  I know you say you did not get – I do not know 
if said a straight answer but I just want to understand how he 
responded. 
MR MOLEFE:  Certain – certainly Chairperson.  The approach was 
there has been these reports in the media about the impending final 
report and the fact that PRASA was given the Interim Report to respond 
to in respect of questions which were raised in that report.  Can you 
explain to me whether you have that report and if you do why is it that 
you have not given that report to the Board?  Is there a deficit of trust 
10 
between you and me as the Chairman – in my capacity as Chairman of 
the Board or do you have difficulties of trust between yourself and the 
Board of Control of the company?  So this is how the discussion went. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And then of course he says, no I – there are no issues of 
trust.  So then the next step is then you must give us the report.  You 
need to give that report.  It did not come at that time 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did he confirm that there was such a report or did he 
not confirm? 
MR MOLEFE:  He confirmed. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And he says, we – you know I have responded to the 
many questions that the Public Protector asked.  So he says that and – 
but he does not give us the report and that stage.  So I keep asking 
him until finally I got it in March. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 65 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now at the meeting he says, I responded to the 
questions from the Public Protector but does he tell you what the 
allegations were or does he not?  As far as you remember. 
MR MOLEFE:  He does not deal with the details of allegations save to 
say that the Public Protector relied on false reports and allegations 
given to her by expelled members of the South African… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Transport… 
MR MOLEFE:  Transport and Allied Workers Union. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But then you do get the report and this was on the 
10 
occasion of the memorial service for the late Minister Collin Chabane?  
If you look at paragraph 25 of your affidavit. 
MR MOLEFE:  It is correct Sir I recall that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And did you say you received it at the same time as 
when you received what we have referred to as Mr Montana’s letter of 
resignation? 
MR MOLEFE:  It is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  As he was giving me the file he also gave me an 
envelope which he said, do not read it now you can read it later. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  At home because now we are in a hurry to go to the 
memorial service. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  Of Minister – the late Minister Collins Chabane. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 66 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Chabane.  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now he then on that occasion Mr Molefe gave you 
two documents.  That letter and the Interim Report that the Public 
Protector had sent to him and which he has kept away from you for a 
little while.   
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson.  But the file also included 
exchanges of correspondence between him and the office of the Public 
Protector.  My recollection is that there would also have been letters 
which had been addressed to the Chair the previous Chair, the 
immediate … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your predecessor? 
MR MOLEFE:  My predecessor, my immediate predecessor and his 
replies to the Public Protector. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now when did you first read the Interim Report? 
MR MOLEFE:  I read the Interim Report I cannot put a date on it but 
shortly after I – I had received it.  Part of the difficulties that were – 
you had that memorial service and we were going to drive. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Travel to the village of former Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Collins Chabane who was laid.  So it is probable that I 
would have read that report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  A few days later. 
MR MOLEFE:  A few days later. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  But when you – when you got whether it was a 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 67 of 131 
 
file or whatever documents from the GCEO which had this report did 
you also get his answers to the questions that he told you about he had 
given to the Public Protector? 
MR MOLEFE:  The – his letters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  Included what he called the answers but they were not 
really responding to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  The questions. 
MR MOLEFE:  The questions Chairman to the enquiry of the Public 
Protector. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  And to the extent that some document would have been 
given they were – they did not appear to be authentic documents so 
there was nobody to authenticate them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Is – was that your impression of the documents in 
the file that Mr Montana gave to you? 
MR MOLEFE:  That was my impression but of course I must say that I 
would have also been influenced by my subsequent meeting with the 
Public Protector.  Because the Public Protector then dealt with those 
20 
matters fundamentally raised about eleven questions which had not 
adequately been responded to.  But he also said besides these 
questions the documents I have been given I cannot rely on.  Because 
they do not appear to be authentic and PRASA is not willing to 
authenticate them.  And of course I must say the Public Protector had 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 68 of 131 
 
written to a number of other employees and or managers of PRASA but 
of course everything was going through the office of the Group CEO 
who did not favour the affected individuals with the correspondence 
that he had received. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Molefe I want to come back to your reaction to 
the Public Protector’s final report.  But just in respect of the Interim 
Report which you now read I take it would be at latest early in April 
2015 what was your reaction to that?  And I do not need you to say it I 
mean to expand on it but was it one of surprise, was it one of well there 
is not too much wrong?  Just your initial reaction to that. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  The – well it was quite clear that the critical issues in 
the Interim Report related to irregularities pertaining to procurement, 
application of disciplinary procedures of the company and the manner 
controls within the organisation and so issues of maladministration.  
Naturally I concluded that the – there was a lot that we needed to – to 
fix or to answer to.  I must also hasten to say Chairperson that there 
has already been a context to this and that context is what happened 
on the 27 November and subsequent meeting held in February of the 
Board as well as the – the then Tender Report that the Board received.  
So clearly therefore there was no way in which looking at that report I 
20 
could say there was nothing wrong with it. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  In fact it – I mean nobody would say there is 
nothing wrong because the Public Protector even in the Interim Report 
found a great deal wrong.  Would that be correct? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 69 of 131 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now you then say that after these exchanges 
between you and Mr Montana relating to the Public Protector’s Interim 
Report and his letter of resignation that you were in Knysna when Mr 
Montana asked you for a meeting.  Would you tell us about that meeting 
please? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson I think we are separating the two so that 
there is no confusion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  The – the meeting with Mr Montana relating to whether 
he had or did not have the Interim Report of the Public Protector is 
10 
separate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was a one on one. 
MR MOLEFE:  One on one.  And then of course later on in April when I 
was away he called he asked to see me in Knysna and to which I 
agreed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  And what happened at that meeting? 
MR MOLEFE:  In that meeting – well I must say that Mr Montana is a 
prolific writer.  So he had – he had written a lengthy document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Letter or memorandum. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja on the issues that he was concerned about.  But 
20 
central to the issues that he was raising would be either relating to 
what he considered to unacceptable conduct by certain directors or 
what 
he 
believed 
is 
my 
style 
of 
leadership 
that 
made 
him 
uncomfortable.  But he was basically saying you have been appointed, I 
respect you, you are my leader but I was not even consulted when 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 70 of 131 
 
these appointments were done and you – you have done quite a number 
of things that I am unhappy with.  Amongst them you went and have a 
discussion with the Webber Wentzel lawyers I was not there.  You did 
not even ask me first.  You asked for a meeting with the CEO of Gibela 
Consortium Mr Mark Granger.  You – I have been observing the 
behaviour of this board and I think that I am convinced that the extra 
(indistinct) purpose of this Board’s appointment was really to get rid of 
me.  Its mandate was to get rid of me as the GCE of PRASA.  And he 
raised concern also about the Minister.  So it was as I say a litany of 
complaints.  Lots of things you know.  A lot and lot.  And then of course 
10 
there was also the complaint that certain directors who for example the 
Chair of the Audit and Risk Committee he – the Chair of Health and 
Safety Committee I cannot remember the exact name that they were 
behaving in a manner that he considered disrespectful you know to him.  
The – so the – there were a lot of these – these sort of things and of 
course I did say to him, your impression about us is wrong.  We are not 
intent – we are not here to remove the Group CEO from the company.  
But even at that stage it was already an academic exercise Chairperson 
because the man had already submitted a letter informing us that he is 
not going to have his contract extended.  He has resigned and I did say 
20 
that even to use the word resignation is a misnomer because when the 
contract ends it ends.  So basically we – we had agreed with him that 
he could serve another six months to help us to get a new CEO.  So it 
is strange that a person who says, I am not renewing my contract, I am 
going, but would rather have for this short period conflict and tensions.  
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 71 of 131 
 
And it does not say because there are these tensions I am leaving now.  
He wants to stay there but he wants the tensions to continue, conflicts 
to continue.  I do need to say that around that period also there were 
lots of you know public statement or interviews by Mr Montana.  And by 
that time the – what was fundamentally a corporate governance issue 
demanded executed by the Board and the standards to which the Board 
wanted to hold its Group CEO was reduced to no, no we are contesting 
for power it is me versus Molefe.  And there were extensive reports that 
then portrayed it as this so that you reduce what is fundamentally a 
problem that affects this organisation and it is not a problem per se 
10 
sucked from the air it is a problem that finds its genesis from reports, 
documents you know, flawed contracts, all of these things that I have 
referred earlier but that was shifted, no you do it because you – you do 
not like me.  Because I need to say also one of the issues raised was 
that when I attended and FCIP – F – Finance  
CHAIRPERSON:   And investment.  
MR MOLEFE:   And investment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Procurement ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   Investment, capital investment and procurement 
committee. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm. 
MR MOLEFE:   But I should not have attended that meeting and in the 
meeting, which of course the GCE was present in, he says I am not a 
member of that committee, the Chairperson of the Board is not a 
member of this committee, but he was the one who was asking the most 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 72 of 131 
 
difficult questions, it was quite clear to me that the Chairperson of the 
Board was already by that time laying a basis for my dismissal. 
 
Now in many companies that I have been a director or 
Chairman of the Board it is taken that the Chairman of the Board has ex 
officio status, can attend a meeting of any committee and he will have 
speaking rights like any other member, and it is also good because it 
assists to keep the chairperson informed in advance instead of waiting 
only for when the said committee is reporting to the Board, so I am 
mentioning all these things because it does appear like at a certain 
point once Mr Montana had taken a view that he is not renewing his 
10 
contract he began to clutch at the straws to find reasons for tensions to 
be there, within the organisation, because ordinarily you don’t do that if 
you have decided you want to go, especially when you make this 
decision against a backdrop of the fact that the Chairman of the Board 
had appealed to you actually not to leave that early. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I was about to refer to that. 
MR MOLEFE:   Given this ambitious modernisation programme which is 
a very historic mission for the country, but he decided regardless of 
what you are saying I am going, I had previously told the previous 
Chair that I am not wanting to stay long. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   So as I understand part of what you are saying it is 
this he wrote a letter or was it a memo or whatever ahead of your 
meeting with him where among other things he made the accusation 
that this Board, your Board, had been appointed for the purposes of 
getting rid of him, is that right? 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 73 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:   He did write a letter to me Chairperson and it is in the 
notes that he had written. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   And taking me through that, in a sense a form of an 
agenda, but at a later stage we can talk about the document written 
which then deals with those questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But he said this in the meeting? 
MR MOLEFE:   He says them in the meeting ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In the meeting and he says this despite the fact that 
after your appointment as Chairperson of the Board and I think from 
10 
what you said it was the first encounter you had with him after an 
appointment where he was congratulating you that he told you that he 
had already told the previous Chairperson that he would not be 
renewing his contract, is that correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you were the one who then said you would have 
to stay around to assist the Board. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So in other words on your arrival when he told you of 
his plans to leave you were talking to him on the basis that we might 
20 
need you for some time, is that right? 
MR MOLEFE:   I didn’t even say we might need you Chair, I said the 
organisation needs you to carry out an ambition programme, how do 
you expect the new board to come into office and as it comes into 
office ...[intervenes]  
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 74 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...the Group CEO walks out. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and part of the point you are making is that 
when one has regard to what you said to him on that occasion it is – it 
does not support the accusation that this Board was appointed to get 
rid of him. 
MR MOLEFE:   It doesn’t Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   The facts would not support that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now just regarding that meeting he as you put it, 
or firstly was a short meeting or a long meeting? 
MR MOLEFE:   It was a very long meeting Chairperson but most of the 
time it was Mr Montana talking, he is a very articulate person and he is 
a very good thinker as well, and as I said he writes well.  So he was 
talking through ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Just so that I don’t miss this that meeting was just 
between the two of you? 
MR MOLEFE:   It was just between the two of us, it was one on one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. Okay. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And the venue was where? 
MR MOLEFE:   I think the venue of the meeting was the Golf Estate 
called Simola, Simola I think Golf Resort or Golf Estate, it is in Knysna, 
and I am a member of that Club. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now it is a fairly long meeting, Mr Montana makes 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 75 of 131 
 
a number of allegations against you, I just want to deal with one point 
which you raised, he says but you and your board were appointed and I 
was not consulted, that’s what I understood your evidence to be a little 
while ago, is that correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What was your response to that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Well my response to that is a simple one, as a 
shareholder who appoints the Board of Directors I mean there is 
nothing I can say about it and I don’t know of a CEO who determines, 
who becomes a director of the company that he is the CEO of.  I 
10 
suppose of course the CEO nothing bars him or from nominating or 
giving names to the shareholder to say as you consider the directors 
consider these names as well, and of course giving profits and 
motivation for each one of the names. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm, mmm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But you even at that stage Mr Molefe were 
experienced in these matters, you know how boards are appointed, you 
know, as you have articulated now the powers of the CEO on the one 
hand and the Board on the other.  As a matter of correctness, correct 
procedure and ...[indistinct] was he right to say he ought to have been 
20 
consulted? 
MR MOLEFE:   Not at all, he was not right to have said so, and I must 
say Chairperson I didn’t think that for the first time I had been 
Chairperson of by that time already three State Owned companies, the 
Armaments Cooperation of South Africa, ARMSCOR, I had been the 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 76 of 131 
 
Chairman of Petroleum and Gas Corporation of South Africa, PetroSA, 
and I ja PRASA was the third one but I had also served on the Board of 
CEF Group of Companies, which is what used to be known as the 
Central Energy Fund, I had served also already on the Board of the 
Strategic Fuel Fund of the Government of the Republic of South Africa. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you knew ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   So I knew how Boards are appointed, procedures, the 
relationship and roles of the Board vis-a-vis the CEO. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you did not know of any State Owned Entity or 
any even private sector maybe where there was an obligation on the 
10 
part of the appointing authority to consult the CEO about  who the 
board members should be, other than a situation where the CEO might 
just put names for consideration and that’s all? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson, I had no precedent 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Deriving from any government or legislative instrument 
which would have empowered the Group CEO to make a determination 
as to who becomes a director in the company, whether in State Owned 
Companies or in private companies.  The only time when that could 
20 
arise is if it is a private company where the CEO is the majority 
shareholder and decides that I want more people or it is a family 
business and want to bring in people onto the Board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm, mmm, yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now did you say to Mr Montana look man why 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 77 of 131 
 
would the Minister want to consult you before he appoints us? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just repeat the question for me. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Did you say to Mr Montana but look why would 
the Minister want to consult you, that doesn’t happen anywhere. 
MR MOLEFE:   I did not say so but certain things are better left unsaid. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I was just going to come to that.  Now he makes 
this number of other allegations against you, you assure him that look 
your agenda was not to get rid of him. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But the other allegations now how did you 
10 
respond to the other allegations, you say he did not ...[indistinct].   
How did you respond to that? 
MR MOLEFE:   There were – well maybe whilst I am here I must also 
introduce another allegation that arose.  His other concern was that the 
Board of Directors, the directors would want to have an in-committee 
meeting of non-executive director without him being there.  
 
Now that is provided for, I mean it is allowed in the King 
Report and so on, if the directors want to discuss amongst themselves 
matters that they don’t want to coloured by the influence of 
management they do that, so there were several such meetings and he 
20 
says no he is not happy about that.  The other issue he raised was that 
the Chairman was not ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry before that was his complaint in regard to 
a situation where board members sit alone in committees to discuss 
certain issues without anybody from management or was his complaint 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 78 of 131 
 
that Board members in committees were discussing matters in the 
presence of some members of the management? 
MR MOLEFE:   Let me first explain Chairperson what I mean when I 
talk of in-committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   In-committee means a meeting where certain people 
may not sit but which is a  meeting of the directors on their own 
because of issues they wanted to consider on their own, which issues 
anyway in a formal board meeting would be tabled as well. 
 
So the in-committee does not refer to committees of the Board. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, it includes other people who otherwise don’t 
belong to those – the Boards. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, ja, that’s right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes so his complaint ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   Is why are you meeting ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Why are you meeting with my teams ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   ...and you don’t meet, are you already suspicious of the 
Board but why are you meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, okay, thank you.   You were about to deal 
with another point when I interrupted you in regard to Mr Molefe, I may 
20 
have caused you to forget the point you were about to deal with, but I 
interrupted you while you were taking the issue further. 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson I was asked what was my response to this 
that I called a litany of complaints. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 79 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Along we deal with what comes to mind as I am sitting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Alright, no that’s fine, Mr Soni we will repeat the 
question if he ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   But the general response was that his perceptions and 
his fears were misplaced, it was not true.   Secondly to the extent that 
he was accusing certain directors, I requested him to present that 
report, all those complaints, to the Board meeting and in fact even 
before the next Board meeting I asked him are we going to present this 
detailed report, should I report to the Board what you say, he says no 
you can just say that we have met and I expressed my concerns and so 
10 
on.  So that’s how he presented, he didn’t want to present this detailed 
report, of course until, we will deal with it later on, when suddenly we 
see strange management, what is called management report to the 
Board and making certain allegations as well, and again it is long after 
the person said I am leaving. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   And the Board had agreed with him to go, but I agreed 
let’s work together to search for your replacement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm, mmm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Molefe I am trying to piece all of this together 
20 
and if I could just ask you to consider the following, earlier you said 
one of the reasons – one of your observations was that Mr Montana 
was leaving but instead of leaving gracefully and peacefully he was 
creating more storms and strife between himself and the Board.   I am 
just trying to paint a picture, would that be correct? 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 80 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now I get the impression from your response to 
the complaints he made and your measured response that you were 
trying to do the opposite, you were trying to calm the water as it were 
to say we’ve got a few months to go let’s just tolerate each other 
without putting the house on fire as it were. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just to go back to the question that Mr Soni asked 
before this one, was your impression that Mr Montana was trying to 
create tensions and conflict between himself and the Board, or was 
10 
your impression that he was trying to create conflict and tensions 
between himself and yourself as Chairperson of the Board or it is just 
that being Chairperson you were first among equals in terms of the 
Board but it was not just about yourself, it was more about the Board, 
even though it might seem it was tension between yourself and him that 
was intended.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That is correct Chairperson, the starting point if 
you want to create turmoil, a storm go for the head of the Board, 
particularly when that person is a public figure and therefore a 
newsmaker, you do that, but he didn’t limit it to that.   I did say that he 
20 
was also raising issues about ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Certain directors? 
MR MOLEFE:   Certain directors. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   But interestingly enough there were other directors who 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 81 of 131 
 
were on the Board and who had previously been with him in either the 
Board of Subsidiaries or main Board.  He found nothing wrong about 
them, so they never featured it was these new ones where there were 
problems with him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So was your observation quite clear that the people, 
the directors that he seemed to have issues with were directors who 
had not been either at the PRASA Board or at an Board of the 
subsidiaries of PRASA prior to your coming to PRASA? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So those were the two camps that he created.  In 
other words distinguishing those directors from the new directors? 
MR MOLEFE:   Well that was the attempt, but it didn’t happen because 
the Board was united, because it was not about the personalities, the 
Board was more concerned about how do we give effect to the 
principles of good corporate governance and how do we make sure that 
we account for our work and we hold those who report to us 
accountable, that really was what the Board was concerned about. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now thereafter if I could just go chronologically 
and we are going to deal with a matter that is raised in your affidavit 
20 
quit prominently, namely Mr Roy Moodley, but thereafter there were two 
important developments as set out in your affidavit. 
 
The first the final report of the Public Protector in regard to 
the complaints laid by PRASA employees. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 82 of 131 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And when was that about? 
MR MOLEFE:   Well the – my recollection is that the final report of the 
Public Protector would have been on or about August 2015. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   August 2015. 
MR MOLEFE:   By that time Mr Montana had exited PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He had left at the end of July or –of 2015? 
MR MOLEFE:   He had left on the 15 t h of July. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And then the other one was that the Board had 
decided to appoint a set of attorneys to conduct forensic investigations 
10 
into a number of matter.  That’s Werksmans Attorneys. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the letter ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   But I must state that the appointment of the firm of 
attorneys to investigate was a consequence of the Auditor General 
Report, because it happened even before the Public Protector Report 
came out and we saw what were the findings and remedial action 
required of us, and it is precisely for that reason that when it happened 
we agreed that the scope of these investigators should include matters 
raised by the Public Protector.  That would have included Chairperson 
20 
also engaging with National Treasury and Ministers and the officials in 
the Department of Transport and agree that in view of the fact that 
PRASA Board had already started the investigation let everybody else 
be coordinated by the Board as a centre of this investigation.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So we have come back to those but those 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 83 of 131 
 
investigations, from Werksmans and from the Treasury result in two 
cases, would I be correct, and you deal with them at paragraph 33 of 
your report, I mean of your affidavit, sorry. 
MR MOLEFE:   My affidavit ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I wonder if I can interrupt you Mr Soni and Mr 
Molefe, because I think we are towards the last months of 2015 now.  
Can I take you back to the time when Mr Montana actually left PRASA, 
you just told me he left on the 15 t h of July.  Can you describe to me 
what the relationship was between yourself on the one side and the 
Board, and him on the other as at the time of his departure. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   At the time of Mr Montana’s departure the differences 
between the Board and him had crystallised, it means they had become 
interns and we – maybe I should leave it at that, so that I make space 
for further questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, not that’s fine, I just wanted to have an idea 
because we have been talking about the relationship between the Board 
and him and at a time when he had given his letter of resignation in 
codes and then I didn’t hear whether there was anything of importance 
that might have happened around the time of his departure and how the 
relationship was, but you have indicated now that at the time he left the 
20 
tensions and the challenges had crystallised. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes Chairperson let me also remind you that the 
purpose for Mr Montana staying on beyond the expiration of his 
contract on the 31 s t of March was in order for him to assist the Board to 
sail a steady ship for six months, whilst it sought to appoint the Group 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 84 of 131 
 
CEO.   
 
By the – by July of that year the year, the July following the 
31 s t of March it had become clear to the Board of control of PRASA that 
the purpose for which we were keeping Mr Montana was not being 
served by his presence because he is creating instability, something 
contrary to what we sought to achieve by keeping him for six months.   
It was at that point when we said look your stay here serves no purpose 
anymore, by that time there had been just a barrage of media reports 
attacking the Board, literally every week and so we said look it will 
serve the company better if we let you go now. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I am interested in that so just for clarification 
he tendered – he gave the Board his so-called of resignation 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And he would, did he do that before the end of 
2014?  Or when would he have given you his letter of resignation, 
would it have been before the end of 2014? 
MR MOLEFE:   No, no, Chairperson he gave me that letter during the 
month of March and it is on that occasion when he gave me the interim 
report of the Public Protector, that file. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   And in that letter he says he is availing himself to assist 
the Board for six months whilst it is looking for a new CEO.  Of course 
he called that notice, it is not notice because the contract had expired. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 85 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:   But it was neither here nor there, the critical issue was 
are we willing to stay with him to keep; the company to the extent 
possible, and of course you would have also not – or just letting him go 
and struggle to find somebody with relative authority in the company 
 
So we chose the latter to keep him in. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, so he – the 31 s t of March 2015 was in terms the 
last day of the contract, the 31 s t of March. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That is correct. 
MR MOLEFE:   That was the last day, but by special arrangement which 
was your request as the Board that he stay on and you had said for six 
10 
months to help you find his replacement.   Is that beyond the 31 s t of 
March? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At that stage the contemplation was that he would 
stay for six months. 
MR MOLEFE:   It is so Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but after a few months the Board became 
concerned, as I think that’s what you are telling me, became concerned 
that is continued stay at PRASA wasn’t helping the Board in the manner 
in which the Board had hoped it would help them. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And therefore the Board asked him to leave, is that 
right? 
MR MOLEFE:   To leave, that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, thank you. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 86 of 131 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now can I then turn to a special top.. – a specific 
topic that you deal with in your affidavit, namely, Mr Roy Moodley, PRASA 
and yourself.  And that starts at paragraph 34, Mr Molefe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe before that I am sorry again Mr Soni.  Mr Molefe 
what was Mr Montana’s reaction when The Board asked him to leave 
before this part of the six months that had been indicated, what was his 
reaction to that?  If you are able to remember?  Did he said kind of 
accept or then he [intervenes]. 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson, I can’t remember reaction but the reality is 
that his reaction would not have mattered after the Board had arrived at 
10 
the conclusion that his stay [intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   He is not serving the purpose of the company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   And the purposes for which the Board had wanted him to 
stay.  Had asked him to stay for an additional six months 
CHAIRPERSON:   And do you remember whether the Board had just 
asked him to stay without stating why it was asking him. I am sorry, the 
Board had asked him to leave before the expiry of six months without 
stating why it had come to conclusion or do you remember that it did 
20 
actually tell him that I am sorry we think your stay is not serving the 
purpose for which we wanted you to stay 
MR MOLEFE:   We did inform him that his – the limited stay that he had 
there he rigid a lot of havoc.  He did not serve the interest of the 
company the Board has now decided to release him immediately.  The 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 87 of 131 
 
Board would pay him.  In fact we probably should not have done so but 
we paid him for the balance of the six months [intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Of the six months, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:    Because in reality, that was not really the notice period. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Okay so-so when he left he knew that the Board – the 
reason why the Board asked him to leave prior to the expiry of six 
months, was that the Board did not think that his continuous stay served 
the purpose for which he had been asked to stay. 
MR MOLEFE:   That – that he understood. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes, thank you. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Chairman I am wondering and just for 
completeness sake, so you do not get a somewhat incomplete picture.  I 
can refer the witness to a particular document which addresses 
[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is fine 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   This issue in-in – in in a different way but it 
addresses this issue 
CHAIRPERSON:    Ja 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Molefe may I ask you to look at annexure PM(4) 
to your affidavit it appears at page 147.  Have you got it in front of you? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, I have got it 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What is this document Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   The document Chairperson is a Notice of Termination of 
contract of Mr Montana on, dated 1 s t April 2015. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now just for identification purposes, this is a letter 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 88 of 131 
 
written by yourself to Mr Montana? 
MR MOLEFE:   This is so Chairperson, it is a letter written by me in 
response to his letter where he advised us that he – he was not intending 
to extend his contract and that he would assist the company for - for six 
months.  So, in a sense it is an acknowledgement of acceptance of the 
decision that he had made 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But in regard to the period of notice. The letter 
responds to him not as one of total acceptance but of conditional 
acceptance of the six month period.  May I ask you to look at paragraph 2 
on page 147. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   Paragraph 2 on [intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Maybe-maybe, maybe we should ask Mr Molefe to give 
the gist of what he said in the letter to Mr Motana first and then we can 
go to this specific paragraph without reading the whole letter simply the 
gist. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now Mr Motana says to you in his letter which we 
do not have that I want to leave but I would like to serve a six month 
period.  You respond to that in that in this letter PM(4) to SS(6) and you - 
you acknowledge receipt of that letter.  In essence how did you respond 
to his offer that he will serve a six-month notice period? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   My response -  the response well acting on behalf of the 
Board was to accept his request to stay on for six months because I said 
that will give the Board sufficient time to find a replacement for him and 
this is what he has asked for as well in his letter but we did say in the 
letter – I did say in the letter also that should the process of recruitment 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 89 of 131 
 
result in the possibility of the new candidate being able to start earlier 
that the expiry of the six months, we would therefore ask him to leave 
early. 
 
And then we also said in our letter that we will communicate with 
him specific measures what probably one would call interim measures and 
during this period when he is there and I had earlier on as part of my 
evidence referred to these matters relating to delegated authority, 
procurement and the need for the Board to be informed [intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To be consulted. 
MR MOLEFE:   The Board to approve such procurement measures. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   In essence Mr Motana can I ...[intervenes].  
MR MOLEFE:   And we also ask him that he would not, he should not 
make any further appointments. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now in essences relating to Mr Motana’s leaving 
and the possible date of his leaving.  You get a letter to say I am not 
going to renew my contract at the end of March but I would like to serve a 
six month notice period that would be the end of August.  Would that be 
correct?  I want to continue until the end of August. 
MR MOLEFE:   No – no six months from the [intervenes]. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   In April.  It might be October.  Six months from April 
20 
1, May, June, July, August ...[intervenes].  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   End of September. 
CHAIRPERSON:    End of September ja would be six months ja right.  
Fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You say in principle yes, we reserve our right to ask 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 90 of 131 
 
you to leave early 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, that is correct 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That is the essence of the two letters 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now we do not have our as I understand the position 
Mr Motana’s letter,  so called letter of resignation here in the bundle as I 
understand the position.   
 
I see that your letter to him that we are talking about now has 
Notice of Termination of Contract as the subject of the letter.  You see 
that?   
10 
 
It says Notice of Termination, your letter to him.  Did you put 
that heading or that subject on your letter because his own letter bore the 
same subject or how did you come to put that subject? 
MR MOLEFE:   Where I am seated now, I cannot remember exactly? 
CHAIRPERSON:    You cannot remember? 
MR MOLEFE:   What – what exactly what the subheading the subject of 
his letter was. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   But I would imagine that I would have put that notice of 
termination of contract because that is how he would have formulated his 
20 
subject. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Subject on his letter. 
MR MOLEFE:   His subject. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes okay, so this letter that you did, your letter was 
not a notice to him of the termination of the contract. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 91 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, it is really a acceptance of what he had requested 
because he called that notice of termination himself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   But Chairperson ones to says well you do not have 
Mr Motana’s letter of resignation by the way ...[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   I did not see it and I had [intervenes]. 
MR MOLEFE:   I do not work for PRASA and my access to information is 
not easy.  I have tried to find it.  I have not been able to find it. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes, yes.  No – no that is fine.  That was not meant as 
criticism for you that you did not supply us it was just stating because 
10 
one I did not see it and two Mr Soni seems to have suggest, to have 
confirmed that we do not have it but it was not meant to say that you 
supplied us with your response but you did not supply us with his letter to 
you so that was not criticism okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now let us deal with Mr Roy Moodley. 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson before we deal with Mr Roy Moodley, I just 
want to check if counsel in talking about the appointment of investigators 
and making reference to workmen’s and then saying actually two major 
cases arose as a consequence I do not know whether you wanted to 
counsel wanted to say something about that  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes and you realized that he seems to have moved 
from that, yes   [intervenes]. 
MR MOLEFE:   Or maybe ...[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I remember something like that as well.  It has 
been a long day. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 92 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Maybe it was mentioned because it will come later. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes -yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay so both those matters are quite important to 
this Commission and they are both going to be dealt with the Sifambo [?] 
matter through you, because you were the applicant in  the matter now we 
will deal with judgments in the High Court and the Supreme Court of 
Appeal through you and place that on record. 
 
We will also deal with the Public Protector’s Report through you.  
The Sifambo matter we will deal with through Miss Ngoye because she 
filed the affidavit that are now before this Commission. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But I just headlined them, Mr Montana, and perhaps 
I should have completed it to say we are going to come back to those 
matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So, this Mr Moodley, why are you so reluctant to get 
into Mr Moodley? 
MR MOLEFE:   Did we not hear yesterday what a powerful man he is?  
No, I am not reluctant I just wanted to make sure that nothing fell through 
the cracks. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no no.  That is true and it has got nothing to 
do with the fact that Mr Moodley’s counsel is sitting opposite you. 
MR MOLEFE:   No, no no.  In fact, I did not even notice that he had the 
kind of powers that they say he has but I cannot refuse what they say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.  Mr Soni. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 93 of 131 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, you start your observations on your dealings 
with Mr Moodley by dealing with the modus operandi of people who are 
involved in State Capture, can you explain to the Chairperson how you 
understand their modus operandi.  And it may not be one but the ones 
that you have experienced. 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson, the phenomenal State Capture itself entails 
the repurposing of institutions or organisation in order to achieve the 
objectives of those who are intent of those capturing those institutions.  
 
Now, one cannot proceed and capture something by simply 
working from outside because they will be resistance.  The modus 
10 
operandi as we have observed over a period of time when we really saw 
this thing was that those who want to capture the State or PRASA in this 
instance would first identify key decision makers and the extent of their 
influence and capture them first.   
 
Having captured them then they tend to manipulate or 
compromise them so that lucrative contracts that institution would be 
issuing would be directed to where those who are capturing it want them 
to go.  Quite often these individuals would know what is the programme,  
capital programme of the company, what are the key projects that are 
going to be coming and in each instance what is the budget allocation for 
20 
them, and this is how they then begin to engage in capturing the State.  
So ...[intervenes].  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So, sorry – sorry.  
MR MOLEFE:   So carry on.  No, sorry. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No. no sorry.  So I was just trying to articulate a 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 94 of 131 
 
different issue namely the, what is the in-game of State Capture? 
MR MOLEFE:   What we now know Chairperson the end game of State 
Capture is to syphon off funds to loot if you were to say so.   
 
Put your hand your fingers on the public trail and take as much 
and they could take out of the public trail.  Of course it has got dire 
consequences for a large number of people, you know ordinary people, 
not that company or organisation is serving, and the general interest of 
the public provided for within the framework of the Constitution of the 
Republic and the mandate of that particular organisation in terms of the 
legal instruments in terms of which it has been formed or established. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Molefe you say that you cannot capture from 
outside you have got to be inside. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, firstly how does, and you say you capture 
certain people in the organisation, capture in what sense and how? 
MR MOLEFE:   Well the, I suppose there are various ways in which they 
do it but the starting point is to get closer to people holding this important 
positions and making themselves acceptable to the people in this 
positions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Get them to dance to your tune, so to speak. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Get them to dance to your tune. 
MR MOLEFE:   They do so and get to them to dance to your tune or 
actually act like your proxy’s inside the company and of course to this 
extent there will be distribution of benefits, resources, offers of things 
freely in a sense having been given all of these things or being made to 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 95 of 131 
 
be a close associate of the affected individuals who are planning to 
capture the institution result in them becoming behold them, to them and 
in many ways they deliberately compromise people by, you know monies 
giving them money doing all kinds of things, inviting them to important 
functions, drawing them to functions where there are very senior public 
figures just to demonstrate who they are associating with and how strong 
they are.  So, generally that is what they do.  If you get into a company 
and you do not know them the first thing they will do they would approach 
those who are inside the company to arrange for them to come closer to 
you because they then need to study you to understand you and begin to 
10 
make certain offers to you as an individual who would later of course then 
would also exercise influence with the hope that that influence would be 
of a manner that would benefit them or their allies. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, in respect of Mr Moodley when did you first 
get to know him? 
MR MOLEFE:   I really got to know Mr Moodley after I had become the 
Chairperson of PRASA.  The very first instance where I met him closely 
was when I had been invited by Mr Montana to attend the intertrans the 
global the huge global exhibition business and Mr Moodley was there but 
it also it also happened that he stayed in the same hotel where I was 
20 
staying and the same floor. 
  Where I was staying so that is how it comes and then of 
course as I come there walking from the shops I see 3 men waiting next 
to the hotel and as I approach they greet me.  One of them turned to be 
Mr Moodley and that is where it then starts.  At the intertrans we get into 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 96 of 131 
 
this big exhibition hall clearly somebody had told Mr Moodley which 
entrance I am going to be using because he was waiting for me at that 
entrance with a business partner of his a man called Mike, I forget the 
surname now but I will remember it during the course of this evidence, 
but he is a Spanish guy, and they representing themselves as if they were 
my hosts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As if they were? 
MR MOLEFE:   They were hosting me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR MOLEFE:   So and then they say let us take you to our stand at which 
10 
point I said no, no I cannot go to your stand I have my own plan, what I 
want to see.  If by the end of all that I have time I can come to your 
stand.  That is how I met him for the first time. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And where was the show? 
MR MOLEFE:   The show was in Berlin in Germany. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And from PRASA’s side who was there? 
MR MOLEFE:   Well, I would not be able to give the exact number of 
individuals, but the Group CEO was there, I think, Mr Daniel Mthimkhulu 
as a man who was then called Executive manager was like the guy who 
was really driving the Rolling Stock and Rail Procurement Programme 
20 
including the locomotives that we spoke about earlier on.  Ja.  That – that 
– there were others there were other junior employees well other 
managers in the team. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And – and Mr Moodley was he there in his personal 
capacity or was he there under PRASA’s flag if I can put it that way? 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 97 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:   I would not know how under what auspices he was there 
my assumption was that because he was the service provider of PRASA 
as I had been told.  He was there as somebody interested in opportunities 
maybe in the space of rail or so.  So, I did not know how he got there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At that stage you already knew that he either was a 
service provider to PRASA or had some association of one kind or 
another with PRASA? 
MR MOLEFE:   I think by that time I knew because I asked one of the 
executive members who was the executive for PRASA technical services 
Mr Zakizamxlaka[?].  I was seeing them going around together and I said 
10 
but who – who is this guy then he tells me who is he. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That was Mr Moodley? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  Then I said to him it looks like if you say to me he is 
a service provider to PRASA you might be compromised and you might 
also compromise him because if you behave in a manner as if you like it 
your tongue and saliva when he gets a contract from the company 
somebody is going to say what do you expect he has got all of them in his 
pocket, so I said no, let us find a way of ...[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   Getting out of ...[intervenes].  
MR MOLEFE:   Getting out of this closeness.  I cannot say do not talk to 
20 
him, it cannot be like when a person sees you they cannot make out their 
minds whether this one is just a business person or an executive manager 
of the company.  So that was that and I must say that it did not end there 
at a later stage I did say to Mr Moodley I see you being too close to the 
management of the company, I do not think it is too good for you, I think 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 98 of 131 
 
keep your distance because you do not want suspicions about the 
company when you know, procurement is done, tenders are issued 
because you might be winning some of them. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, you cautioned some mangers and you 
cautioned Mr Moodley where those cautionary signs comply with in other 
words did this closeness stop? 
MR MOLEFE:   Well Chairperson I was not a day to day operator an 
executive of the Board so I do not know, I have given my advice and by 
the way whether my advice is heeded is simply dependent on those who 
listened to it because even if is ay I saw you walking around in the 
10 
premises of the company they can still do it outside the premises of the 
company.  So I do not know if they complied with my request. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And what was your observation? 
MR MOLEFE:   Well – well my sense is that they continued to that he Mr 
Moodley continued to be close 
CHAIRPERSON:   To have a strong presence at PRASA. 
MR MOLEFE:   He continued to do so and also of course he had, it 
appeared at that time he had been very close to the Group CEO at the 
time as well, because at one point I was told by the Group CEO because 
they knew that I loved golf that he had sponsored on behalf of PRASA the 
20 
golf event of Mr Moodley which was going to happen somewhere in 
Durban and that- he suggested that I attend and Mr Moodley also invited 
me.  I do not want to go into those details.  I will wait to hear counsel 
lead me.  But I can go on with this story until I go. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  He will lead you on that at the right time.  But I just 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 99 of 131 
 
want to share this with you.  A few minutes ago, you described- well 
maybe you did not describe but you refer to a tongue and saliva.  No, all I 
want to say is that in my language isiZulu it is a very descriptive way a 
very good way to describe a certain relationship.  So, if people seem to 
be really very close, that is how we put it.  So maybe my Zulu meaning for 
it- it makes it quite clear what you were objecting to.  So, I thought I will 
share with you because after you mentioned it, it was lingering in my 
mind. 
MR MOLEFE:  Thank you Chairperson but perhaps now that the 
Chairperson has explained it in English as well. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  That English import should be recorded ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Next to what I have said for anyone who might not 
understand what tongue and saliva means. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Understand, yes.  But I was also wondering whether in 
your language which I do not understand to be isiZulu whether you have 
something similar.  This is just an aside now in whether that you have a 
similar kind of description or not really? 
MR MOLEFE:  There is a similar ... (intervenes) 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  There is a similar, ja okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  Also an understanding of a relationship where- which is 
interdependent. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  One does not exist without the other. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 100 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Without the other, yes.  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Among some employees, what was- how was Mr 
Moodley referred to?  What was his reputation in regard to PRASA and 
his influence in PRASA? 
MR MOLEFE:  Well later on Chairperson I asked employees especially 
those with whom I had the opportunity to converse and one of them said, 
“Look, this is Mr PRASA.  This gentleman here he is called Mr Moodley, 
he owns PRASA”.  Another one says, “PRASA is his farm”.  So, it is a 
farm, you have this farm.  From time to time if it is harvesting time you 
come to harvest.  So that is how they put it.   
10 
 
So, for the first time one begins to realise some of the critical 
challenges that those running the state-owned companies and who are 
intent on ensuring prudency and good corporate governance we are 
facing. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now were you aware that any of his companies had 
received contracts from PRASA? 
MR MOLEFE:  I was advised Chairperson that- and it is when I asked 
what service does, he provide.  To what he said no, he has got Royal 
Security company.  A security company called Royal Security.  And he had 
another business called Strawberry Worx which was run by his son.  In 
20 
respect of Royal Security is obviously to provide security at different in 
stations ... (intervenes)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Train stations. 
MR MOLEFE:  Or assets at stations of PRASA.  Strawberry Worx, I was 
advised that it had been awarded a contract and the terms to advertise 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 101 of 131 
 
everywhere where PRASA had property especially at the stations.  And 
that the terms of that arrangement were that 60% of the profit proceeds of 
advertisement will go to PRASA, 40% will go to Mr Moodley’s company, 
Strawberry Worx.   
 
And then I asked a question, is it happening?  Are we making 
money out of it?  Is it complaint? He said, “no, he has stopped paying to 
PRASA its 60%.  He is not paying it”.  And I think around that point then a 
dispute arose between PRASA and him- and Strawberry Worx.  Let me put 
it that way. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you get to know about how long it had been 
10 
advertising at the properties owned by PRASA? 
MR MOLEFE:  In all fairness I never got to probe that deeper. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You never got to probe, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  But generally talking about the relationship between 
PRASA and Mr Moodley I was advised it is an old relationship.  In fact, it 
did not start only when PRASA was unbundled from what is now Transnet 
and its entities.  That he started there at what is today called Transnet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mm. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja.  And continued to follow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Those who were operating Metrorail who had become part 
of PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mm okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now can I just ask you and I ask you because this is 
what I said yesterday is the evidence that is going to be led on this issue.  
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 102 of 131 
 
Did you know that until yesterday that an amount of 471 million rand paid 
by PRASA to Royal Security for services they purportedly rendered? 
MR MOLEFE:  I did not know independently but I would- if it was part of 
the investigations of the Werksmans it would be in their report of 
Werksmans.  But I have heard other witnesses saying it.  I did not know. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  You also know that Royal Security had between 2007 
and 2009 paid Mr Zuma an amount of 1,5 million rand in monthly 
instalments of about R64 000.00 
MR MOLEFE:  Well Chairperson I independently I did not know but it 
became a matter of public record because it was reported extensively 
10 
here in the media and I am not sure if Public Protectors report eluded to 
it but it was in the media extensively.  And of course, I have no 
recollection of Mr Zuma challenging that allegation.    He was I suppose 
because it was in the record and it can be proven. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Just on that score, what- you do come to a stage 
where you say Mr Moodley invited you to the 2015 July Handicap and told 
you that Mr Zuma and Minister Radebe were going to be there.  You 
remember- we will come to that in a moment but you recall that part of 
your affidavit? 
MR MOLEFE:  I did Chair.  But maybe before we move away, we should 
20 
take this example of an owner of a small company putting the President of 
the country on his payroll as a confirmation of the statement I made about 
how those intent on State Capture, their modus operandi.  You pick a key 
decisionmaker, very influential people and they will do your bidding for 
you.  This is just the right example of that. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 103 of 131 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ja, thank you for pointing that out Mr Molefe.  That 
is another piece in the puzzle obviously.  But the question I want to ask is 
what from your observations was the relationship between Mr Moodley 
and Mr Zuma aside from these transactions that we have talked about? 
MR MOLEFE:  Initially Chairperson I knew nothing about his relationships 
with the former President Zuma save what he told me.  He told me that 
when he has functions, two major ones, the July Horse racing and I 
understand Mr Moodley has got a number of horses.  He is an owner of 
racing horses.  So, there he invited the President of the time from time to 
time.   
10 
 
The second one was this golf event to which he was inviting me.  
There on the day when there is a Gala dinner with prize giving, he would 
invite President Zuma to that.  The third instance was on the occasion of 
the State of the Nation address, Mr Moodley was one of the very 
important people invited.  I must say that regardless of my struggle 
credentials I was no longer being invited to those events.  In fact, he was 
the one who would then ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who invited you. 
MR MOLEFE:  Mr Moodley will be the one to say, “are you going there?”  
And I say, “no, I have not been invited”.  He will say, “Look, I will get you 
20 
... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  An invite. 
MR MOLEFE:  And invitation.  So, I said, “I do not want you to go and ask 
for an invitation for me”.  The fact that they did not invite me is that they 
do not want me to be invited and I will rather wait for the invitation to 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 104 of 131 
 
come from them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mm. 
MR MOLEFE:  So, these are instances which are really indicated that that 
relationship and in his view he was getting these invitations from the 
President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now the state of the nation address to which you 
referred, do you remember whether which year that was? 
MR MOLEFE:  The first time I noticed it would have been in ... 
(intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  2016. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  In 2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And was it one occasion in terms of the State of th 
National Address or was it more than that? 
MR MOLEFE:  Because I was not attending all of them ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  It could be that in 2017 again a similar thing happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Because we were- the hotel where I was staying Mr 
20 
Moodley would also be staying in the same hotel.  So, he was getting 
regular invitations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mm.  now you spoke about him, that is Mr Moodley, 
inviting the former President to his golfing function.  Is that right, in 
Durban? 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 105 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:  I did say so Chairperson but I did also say I had no 
independent knowledge of that because I never attended those events. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  But I was told by him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  By him, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Mr Moodley, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  And what he told you was that he would invite 
the former President to some of those functions. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes, and he would say, “Come the President will be there.  
Come to the dinner, he will be there”.  And he would sometimes say, “Well 
10 
Minister Jeff Radebe will be there”.  And refer to other ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ministers that he normally invited. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Maybe even the former Premier of KwaZulu Natal who then 
become the Treasurer General of the ANC, Mr Zweli Mkhize. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mm. 
MR MOLEFE:  Doctor, sorry.  Dr Mkhize. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now going back to Mr Moodley attending the state of 
the nation address and offering to in effect as I understand your evidence 
20 
organise an invitation for you.  Is he the one who said to you he had been 
invited to the state of the nation address, did he say by the former 
President?  Or do you know how he- who had invited him?  I mean 
technically the initiation would come from the Speaker of Parliament, I 
would imagine.  But I wonder whether you are able to clarify that? 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 106 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:  Well he said he is getting invited by the Presidency but the 
way when I was still a politician, the way this matter would work is that 
the Speaker of Parliament would allocate individuals- to individuals an 
invitation.  For the Presidency there are so many invitations and 
somebody in the Presidency would then invite people who are close to the 
President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  There would be those individuals who are like your Head of 
State and so on ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  State entities. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  And then those would probably be invited directly or the 
President would say, I want you to invite those people.  And then they 
would invite them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mm. 
MR MOLEFE:  Especially Heads of Government because it needs to have 
that decorum of the highest office in the legislature they are inviting.  And 
the same applies to every member of Parliament.  They invite their 
friends and families. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay, thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Thank you Chairperson.  Mr Molefe, before I leave 
20 
this and perhaps, I was not as vigilant as I should have been.  You 
mentioned a prize giving occasion, what was that? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson when you play golf- when golf was played, 
they keep the scores and at the end of the game those scores are kept in 
the order of the performance of the golfers depending on how many prizes 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 107 of 131 
 
they have.  They could have- they could give out 5 prizes or 10 prizes but 
they would give them in different ways.  There could be a golfer with what 
is called the longest drive, he hits or she hits the ball much longer than 
anyone else, further than anyone else and then get a prize for that.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So ... (intervenes) 
MR MOLEFE:  And then others would be depending on the format, if it is 
what they call the better ball, a better ball means there should be two 
parties.  The better of the two.  And a better ball would have two golfers 
on one side the other two on one side and the better ball winners will be 
the two on the best performing side. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The question I am asking is in answer to the 
question from the Chairperson you referred to a prize giving ceremony.  
What prize giving ceremony were you referring to? 
MR MOLEFE:  I was referring to the prize giving ceremony of the golf 
event which was organised by Mr Moodley which I was advised by Mr 
Montana that he had sponsored as the GCEO of PRASA and was 
encouraging me to attend.  So, I did not attend but Mr Moodley also 
inviting me he said, “Come and the President will be there.  He will be at 
the prize giving”.  Because at the prize giving you also have some kind of 
a Gala dinner.  So that is what it means. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry (indistinct). 
MR MOLEFE:  And prize giving by the way I do not know if they would 
give money anywhere but they normally give you a golf clubs, maybe one 
driver.  A driver is a wood, a number one wood.  Or a sand wedge, the 
one that you use to chip the ball out of the sand in the bunker and so on.  
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 108 of 131 
 
Or a putter, the one that you use to put the ball into the whole.  I do not 
know if the Chairperson played golf at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, he is not.  But he hopes to be one after retirement.  
Were there a few occasions when Mr Moodley invited you to some of 
these events that he was sponsoring or organising or just once or twice? 
MR MOLEFE:  It might well have been twice but I remember one ... 
(intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Of course, I then in between things changed that also 
made me to be cautious. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja of by association, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  now the other point you- is that the same tournament 
that PRASA had sponsored? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And what was the sponsorship? 
MR MOLEFE:  I do not know what the sponsorship was.  Ordinarily the 
board would not concern itself with the small things.  I mean they sponsor 
charity I mean the board would not want to know about that.  But I think 
20 
in time we began to ask corporate communication of PRASA where 
apparently sponsorship was being directed from to give to the board the 
sponsorship policy of the company.   
 
We were beginning to see some strange parties who we were 
told we were giving money, they were given like 5 million per annum.  And 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 109 of 131 
 
they served no good social cause and so that is what made us to want to 
now get the policy to understand what is it that we may or may not 
sponsor.  But that was not the only one that caused us to do so 
Chairperson.   
 
PRASA for a long time or for some time became an anchor- one 
of the anchor sponsors of the Cape Town Jazz Festival.  Of course, for 
which it had got certain benefits but it also supplied free trains to people 
from certain parts of the province.  And it turned out that that sponsorship 
was done in a manner that we thought was prejudicial to PRASA and we 
wanted it reviewed.  First, we had been committed to several years and 
10 
that too made us want to understand the sponsorship policy.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now you have described two of the occasions on 
which you listed paragraphs 37 and 38 where Mr Moodley you say tried to 
capture you, the one being the golf day and an invitation to the July 
Handicap.  Do you see that? 
MR MOLEFE:  I see that Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now there is a third one that you mentioned but 
before I ask you about the third one, there are news reports that then 
President Zuma made R15 000.00 at a Durban July.  Is this the Durban 
July where you- that report refers to? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson I would not put my head on the block for that 
save to say that it was at one of those fairly recent Durban July Handicap 
just before I left PRASA. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now the third occasion you talk about is the trip you 
were planning to attend the US Masters in Augusta Atlantic in the United 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 110 of 131 
 
States.   
MR MOLEFE:  Yes, I do Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Can I ask you very briefly, I know it is quite detailed 
here.  Could you briefly explain to the Chairperson what are various 
indicia that this was a further attempt by Mr Moodley to capture you. 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson in the- in my statement I explain what they- 
the Masters is, a Global Golf Competition.  Mr Moodley had overheard me 
talking about the fact that I was going to go to the Masters.  He then 
asked me ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe- I am sorry.  Maybe you can lower the mic a little 
10 
towards your direction because I think you now speaking- ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  The- having heard me saying that I am planning to go to 
the Masters he said he would want to come along.  Him and his Spanish 
friend or business partner, the one I said whose surname I cannot 
remember but now I remember it is Michael Forstam.  The two of them 
wanted to come, I said, “that is fine.  You can come with me.  I do with 
many people, there is no big deal”.  Ja and I explained what it is entailed 
to it entails to go to the Masters acquiring the badges, the badges are 
normally what is called accreditation or a offer access badges or ticket 
and then of course your accommodation apart from your air ticket and so 
20 
on.  So, we explained that.  Then Mr Moodley says, “do nothing.  I will 
bear the cost for everything.  Your air ticket, your accommodation, your 
transfers, your subsistence when you are there.  And you tell me how 
much the badges will cost and I will pay for that”.   
 
So, I said, “no, that is not how I do it.  I will not do that”.  And 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 111 of 131 
 
then I decided instead of waiting longer I am just going to go ahead, book 
accommodation, pay for the badges, I will pay for his as well.  I paid for 
his badges as well and I have said I have done all of those things.  I have 
got my air ticket and I am going with my wife.  So, and we have got a 
house where we are staying.  That is what I had told him.  But it turned 
out that after I had said to him, I was happy for him to join me going to 
the Masters, I had done it for many people I knew without any condition 
attached.  Then I got a report- counsel will stop me if counsel wants me 
not to proceed in that manner.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ja. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  Counsel I get a report from a former colleague who worked 
with me at Petro SA, the Petroleum and Gas Corporation of South Africa 
of which I was the chairman at some point.  He says to me, “I am 
consulting for this particular and we were in Spain.  I had a meeting of 
the Board with these people because I needed to present to them a 
proposal for the work that I am doing for them.  In that meeting Mr 
Moodley then asked several of these people to give him money because 
he needed that money to pay for the air tickets, business or first class 
tickets for the Chairman of PRASA, to pay for his accommodation for a 
week.  To pay for the children air tickets of the Chairman and to give 
20 
them money for subsistence as well as ensuring that they have got 
transfers from the airport back to the airport and from where they live 
to Augusta National which is where the event is held.  So this guy tells 
me this.  When I had heard that I got scared.  In fact this is what made 
me pay for everything quickly.  I can say that now that I – I did not 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 112 of 131 
 
claim the monies I paid for Mr Moodley because I began to worry that I 
did not really want to have exchanges of monies with him.  I 
recommended that he books his air ticket, that he books his own 
accommodation.  He said he had booked accommodation but he wanted 
me to stay with him all the time and I said, no we do not – I do not want 
to stay with you I have got my house where I have got other people.  
And Chairperson that is the house that I have been staying in for years.  
I mean the family knows me.  I just tell them I am coming, give me your 
price and I pay them.  That is where I – I stayed all the time.  So – and 
then he used to insist that I should ask the other people who would be 
10 
staying with me to vacate their bedrooms, their rooms so that him and 
Michael Vorstam would come and stay with me in that house.  I refused 
of course.  So that is where we are now.  And as things goes on then of 
course it is also at that time when there is this orchestrated volatilities, 
protests that are being orchestrated now by those who were associated 
with Mr Montana, Sithau and this other man who was being paid R5 
million 
every 
year 
he 
is 
called 
Stephen 
Sangwen 
organising 
unemployed youth to come and demonstrate and march against the 
Board at PRASA.  So I said to him, look I have an emergency I cannot 
go now.  I am not going to the Masters anymore I have got to deal with 
20 
an emergency back of – here at home but my wife will go.  I have 
invited our friends from Atlanta in the United States.  They will be 
staying in the same house with my wife.  You and Michael can proceed.  
I will give you the details of where you will collect your badges to enter 
Augusta National.  Hearing me saying that I was not going he say, no if 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 113 of 131 
 
you are not going I am also cancelling.  And I must say that actually 
before I told him that I was not going he was beginning to suggest that 
during our trip to the United States we must talk about the business we 
can do together.  And I said, no I do not want to discuss business.  It is 
a golf thing and that is what it is going to be I do not want to talk 
business.  So the effect of what I said was that he cancelled.  Having 
attended to my… 
CHAIRPERSON:  He cancelled his own bookings? 
MR MOLEFE:  For his trip.  He had not – I do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  Well he would have cancelled his…. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He changed his mind about attending. 
MR MOLEFE:  Changing he minds I do not know if he had booked. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  But I had booked badges for him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Which in any event would still have been in the United 
States.  I paid for them and they would be given to friends who came 
there.  So I got worried about what appeared to be a concerted attempt 
to compromise me.  Worry me even more was that companies whose 
20 
relationship with PRASA I did not know were told that they needed to 
pay money to enable me to go to the Masters.  I mean I did not need 
anybody for pay me.  I had been doing it.  By that time I think I had 
been doing it for ten years or so.  So that is what – and Chairperson 
again it is important to situate what I am saying within that which I said 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 114 of 131 
 
is the modus operandi of those intent on capturing people how they 
target decision makers, people in influential positions.  But they also 
manipulate and compromise you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Would it be correct to say in the end it looked like he 
had never intended to go and attend this function until he heard that 
you were planning to attend and then he said he wanted to go as well.  
But when you said you were not going to go he then changed his mind 
also and said he was not going.  Is that a fair? 
MR MOLEFE:  It is a fair conclusion Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes conclusion. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  I doubt. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  If he even knew about the Masters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Just – just on that score Mr Molefe you say that 
one of things he said to you is while you were in the United States you 
could dis – he would – you and he could discuss business.  Did he 
indicate what that would be? 
MR MOLEFE:  No, no I did not even want to entertain that discussion 
because I cannot entertain a discussion of doing business with 
20 
somebody who is doing business with a company that I am the 
Chairman of.  Clearly I mean there would have been conflicts right from 
the beginning.  So conflict of interest so I did not entertain it.  I was 
not interested in taking the discussion further than what he said and 
what I said to him that I – no, I do not want to discuss business.   
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 115 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  To the extent that he may not have intended to or 
plan to attend the Masters prior to him hearing that you were planning 
to go there am I right to say certainly you were not his friend? 
MR MOLEFE:  Certainly he had no intention of going there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  But what was quite clear. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Is that he was looking for an opportunity where he could 
be with me, far away and in circumstances in which he would have 
financed everything so I – we would proceed from day 1 on the basis of 
10 
one who has been compromised. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  You – you were not friends at the time that he – 
when he said that you wanted to go – you were going to attend the 
Masters he then said he was also going to  
MR MOLEFE:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And he wanted to stay where you were staying. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To the extent of him saying ask the other people that 
20 
would have been guests in the house which you were going to – in 
which you were going to stay ask them to leave so that he can come in 
and stay with you? 
MR MOLEFE:  That was his view. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 116 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:  His – his request. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Molefe there is just one further aspect and 
then I am going to turn to a different aspect of your affidavit.  You hear 
from a friend that look Mr Moodley is going around in faraway Spain to 
say I am going to sponsor Mr Molefe and his family to the Masters.  
Obviously that is a slur on your character.  Would I be correct? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Is that simply how you regarded it? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Did you raise it with him at any stage? 
MR MOLEFE:  No I did not go and have any further discussion with 
him.  My recollection is that at one point you know as the other 
witnesses say that he is a powerful man.  He – I run a charitable 
foundation to raise funds to educate young people whose parents are 
unable to pay for in respect of their tuition and books.  So I do it every 
year.  I raise funds and I hold this event at Sun City.  So that same 
year I think shortly after I said I cannot go with him to the Masters he 
comes to my event with Mr Michael Vorstam no they want to play.  And 
so I say no. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  They want to pay? 
MR MOLEFE:  They want to play golf in my event. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To play golf ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  So I said you are not going to play because I have not 
invited you and do not try to go to the dinner either because you will be 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 117 of 131 
 
embarrassed.  Because everyone who is going there is accredited.  So I 
– I sent them away.  So there was no further basis for future discussion 
save where it appeared and maybe I should leave this one.  But quite 
clearly being unhappy with the – what I was doing and also … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do not go far away from the microphone. 
MR MOLEFE:  Oh sorry Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  So it became clear to me that there is no love lost 
between me and Mr Moodley and if anything he would support any 
opportunity to undermine my work and the work of the Board of 
10 
Directors of Trans – of PRASA, PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me ask, are you able to remember around about 
when and in which year the Masters was to which Mr Moodley wanted to 
go? 
MR MOLEFE:  I would not… 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is (indistinct). 
MR MOLEFE:  I would not be able to give the exact date. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Save to say the Masters Event takes place the first week 
– that time it was taking place – let me say the second week of April.  
20 
Normally a week that starts say maybe on the 6 t h or the 5 t h and it is a – 
a five day event. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Which end on Sunday evening. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Would this have been 2015/2016? 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 118 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:  2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  2015. 
MR MOLEFE:  2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay and then the – the function that you were 
hosting golf and – at Sun City that he wanted to attend: 
MR MOLEFE:  It also happened every April. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  But just after my birthday which is on the 25 April – 
towards the end of April. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  It was a two day event. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And – and this particular one that he wanted to attend 
or where he rocked up was it in 2015 or 2016?  The – your golf event 
which you host in Sun City.  The one that Mr Moodley wanted to attend 
was it is 2015 or 2016? 
MR MOLEFE:  It was 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So it was about the Masters and your golf event 
were in April 2015? 
MR MOLEFE:  In 2015 same month. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so April is a big month for you.  It is the 
Masters, it is your golf event, it is your birthday, it is Freedom Day. 
MR MOLEFE:  It is a big day but I have stopped now going to the 
Masters I can no longer afford it.  Maybe this should have been the 
time when I invited Mr Moodley now to take over. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 119 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well actually I wanted to ask you a question and you 
did say that prior to 2015 you may have been attending the Masters for 
about ten years or so.  You had been attending the event a number of 
times.  In terms of – are you able to give an indication of what it would 
have cost Mr Moodley to attend such an event that maybe he might 
never have attended before that he might really not have been 
interested in except for the fact that you were going there – to go there 
and be there for five days and come back.  Is that something easy to 
indicate what kind of cost that would have entailed in terms of amount? 
MR MOLEFE:  Part of the costs I would have told him.  Because the 
10 
way we 
plan 
it 
we normally 
deal 
with accommodation, 
what 
accommodation is going to cost if you rent a house.  Hotels are just too 
expensive so I would – I have never stayed in a hotel.  I ask families 
for that week. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  To leave their house. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  I stay there I leave it in the manner in which I found it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And I come back from holiday. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  The – the – if he was going to fly business class. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  He would have had to pay in the region of R86 000.00.  
If he wanted first class it would have been more. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 120 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  And for the badges for the Masters that time because it 
had not become very expensive at the time for the Masters badges he 
would have had to spend approximately R150 000.00.  If he had wanted 
to add – and that is four days of – but if he had wanted to add Monday, 
Tuesday, Wednesday he would most probably have paid an additional 
R3 000.00 so additional R12 000.00.  And then of course he would have 
had to deal with the transfers from the airport and back to the airport. 
And he would have had to also pay for his accommodation.  I think at 
that time you could get accommodation at 1 800 US Dollars per night at 
10 
the time.  If you were using the hotel accommodation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The hotel. 
MR MOLEFE:  But if you were using a house the ballpark figure would 
have been 6 500.00 and normally we choose a four bedroom house and 
we divide that amount by four which gave us something like say 1 
something like 1 260.00 or so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  1 000 something. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja 1 000 something Dollars. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So this 
CHAIRPERSON: So what is… 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am so sorry – sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  At roughly does that mean he may have to 
spend no less than what R150 000.00 or is it more?  I just want to have 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 121 of 131 
 
an idea. 
MR MOLEFE:  It was more.  If we were to go according to his plan. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Hm.  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  He would have spent more than a million and a half or 
probably 2 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that so? 
MR MOLEFE:  If he included himself, his friends. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Me, my wife. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  And he said children.  I do not know which children he 
was talking about. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And then all these other things and he says he was – he 
would provide subsistence.  So you talking in the region of … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not less than a million. 
MR MOLEFE:    2 million but himself alone it would have cost him – it 
would have cost him just for accommodation and the badges it would 
have – him alone it would have cost him in the region of 300 000.00 
and it is so because he was choosing an accommodation that would 
20 
have been expensive. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Okay.  Thank you.  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So that would have been R300 000.00 per person. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  And that does not include air tickets. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry? 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 122 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:  It does not include air tickets. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  He – oh without air tickets. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja.  Without air tickets. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And that would therefore be another 100 – 
86 000? 
MR MOLEFE:  You would have had to add another 86 000 per person. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And depending on the numbers of course it would 
balloon. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I see Mr Soni we have gone beyond four 
10 
o’clock. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think we were unaware. We are at twenty past.  
Maybe we could go up to half past. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that fine Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:  It is fine Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes maybe let us go to half past. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then we adjourn for the day. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now – one of the contracts that you noted that I 
had mentioned before we started talking about Moodley – Mr Moodley 
was the Siyangena Contact Mr Molefe.   
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The Swifambo I am going to deal with a little later.  
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 123 of 131 
 
I just want to deal with one small aspect of that now.  What from your 
understanding of the relationships did Mr Moodley have to do with the 
Siyangena – Mr Moodley or his companies have to do with the 
Siyangena Contracts? 
MR MOLEFE:  The – these matters Chairperson became that 
relationship 
issue 
became 
apparent 
after 
we 
had 
conducted 
investigations on a number of contracts which included this particular 
one.  And in this one it was clear that he had an association – an 
associate let me not call it interest – association with – with Siyangena.  
And the investigations of course begging the indulgence of counsel that 
10 
are arising out of that contract and as borne by the investigations a 
sum of R500 million was paid to Mr Moodley for no work done for 
PRASA.  For him not being a shareholder either of Siyangena.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now your knowledge of the Siyangena Contract 
arises from the fact that PRASA had brought an application to set aside 
that contract.  Would I be correct? 
MR MOLEFE:  It is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And what was your position in PRASA at the time 
that application was made? 
MR MOLEFE:  At the time when that application was brought up I – I 
20 
think I was still the Chairman of the Board. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  But of course shortly thereafter I – my term ended.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And in regard to … 
MR MOLEFE:  No – I was not Chairman of the Board Chairperson 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 124 of 131 
 
because I remember very well the debate in court where the court 
dismissed our application.  It was based on the Paga Rule of 100 days. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  180 days. 
MR MOLEFE:  And then of course the – the court was saying you 
PRASA you should have brought this application much earlier than 
today.  Of course the court was looking at us as an organisation – as 
an institution. It was not saying the Chairman of the Board joined later 
and the Chairman of the Board became aware only after investigations 
had been conducted.  The Chairman – the court says you are PRASA.  
You have had your own management. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  You should have done it … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Much earlier. 
MR MOLEFE:  Much earlier and of course the Judge was not interested 
in looking at the merits of the case so it was dismissed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  I think I am advised that to PRASA went back to ask for 
an appeal of that judgment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson because it is a legal issue may I 
20 
just put it at the risk of being accused of giving evidence.  What had 
happened is the High Court ruled that PAGA applied even when there is 
a self-review by an organ of state.  Of course in the Gagema Matter 
your court Mr Chairman the Constitutional Court then said that PAGA 
does not apply in self-review matters the principle – the self-review is 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 125 of 131 
 
brought on the basis of the principle of legality and therefore the 180 
day rule does not apply.  And therefore after the Gagema Judgment 
PRASA went back to court with a new application to re-seek the same 
relief that had been rejected by the court then and that is the matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is now before the court.  But Ms Ngoye will 
give evidence about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So I thought I would just complete that part of the 
(indistinct). 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Yes okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now what is the matters that you – well some of 
the matters that you dealt with Mr Molefe when you were saying there 
were disruptions and that is why you – you indicated to Mr Moodley that 
you were not going to go to Augusta.  You remember you said that?  
There were – the disruptions at PRASA. 
MR MOLEFE:  I am saying that the reason I gave him was that I had 
that emergency arising out of those disruptions.  But I must also say 
that that reason was given within the context of me having become 
aware of what he had been doing to try and secure money in my name 
20 
and my family. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But I want to quickly with it for the next couple of 
minutes so we can finish this issue.  If you look at paragraph 47.1 to 
47.6 are those the matters that in general you were referring as 
creating disruptions around that time? 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 126 of 131 
 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson.  These are the matters 
which were create in that climate for disruption.  And I am aware that 
whilst he relayed directly to the conduct – well if there – I am aware 
that they relate also to the conduct of the then Group CEO nevertheless 
they – I am now taking the responsibility of Counsel where I do not 
think they are germane to State Capture per se but they merely show 
that this is what was being fermented at the time to create instability.  
Probably if people were not really intimidated some of them would have 
come to say, we were actually advised in a teleconference with one of 
the Ministers that we needed to keep the heat up so that government 
10 
can justify removing this Board.  But in the absence of people with 
courage to say these things there is very little I can – I can do about 
them. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So what you are saying Mr Molefe is this that 
around the time the Board was removed you were told and I know the 
people are not going to come and say this. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But you were told that the government was putting 
on the heat on people – well I mean encouraging people to put the heat 
on the Board? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  So that they could justify removing the Board 
because to just come in and say go they could not.  So you needed to 
create a climate and you say, this organisation is unstable, the Board is 
not operating properly.  It does not enjoy the loyalty and allegiance of 
the employees and the unions – remove them.   
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 127 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you say from what you were told that a Cabinet 
Minister was involved.  
MR MOLEFE:   I beg your pardon? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you saying from what you were told a Cabinet 
Minister was to be part? 
MR MOLEFE:   I was told so, and to be specific I was told that it was a 
teleconference with Mr Jeff Radebe, and I wish the individuals who 
were there in that discussion were willing to give that evidence because 
what it does it shows just how determined at a very high level, political 
level, people whose responsibility it was to run government and ensure 
10 
that there is effective delivery of services to the poor people of this 
country were determined to remove those who wanted order in these 
institutions ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...in these institutions and that of course one will see 
later on even the behaviour of members of Parliament when we come to 
that later on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Just on that score, and I am going to end on this 
note Mr Chairperson, if you look at paragraph 46.6 this is a document 
20 
that you say is indicative, this is the document PRASA in turmoil which 
is indicative of those attempts to put the heat on the Board. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson, that is what I am saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well Mr Soni whoever is watching or listening here 
doesn’t know what you are talking about. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 128 of 131 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I beg your pardon, I am sorry.  Mr Molefe in – 
what is the issue you raised in paragraph 47.6, I am sorry I should have 
asked for those details first. 
MR MOLEFE:   The issue I am raising is that we have a Board meeting 
and that meeting was in May of 2015, we expect management led by Mr 
Montana to present a report, management report, which in normal 
companies would reflect performance in accordance with the targets of 
management, give a status of where we are with the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   State of the company. 
MR MOLEFE:   The State of the company. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm. 
MR MOLEFE:   But suddenly in that report there’s this section that says 
PRASA is in turmoil, out of the blue and we get told by the Group CEO 
that PRASA is in turmoil.  That day as he is telling the Board that 
PRASA is in turmoil he is privy to the arrangement of a much and a 
demonstration and ...[indistinct] that was to happen at the headquarters 
of PRASA of which we got wind a day or so before and we decided that 
we are not going to sit there and have the meeting of the Board 
disrupted so we’re going to choose another venue, so we took the 
meeting to a different venue, because there were people holdings 
20 
placards, inciting the Chair of the Board and the Minister with lots of 
media coverage and Mr Montana says to me the marchers have asked 
that you must come and receive the memorandum, so I said I am not 
going there, I am not going to go there, we have a board meeting here 
you knew that this much was happening, you have been briefed about 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 129 of 131 
 
everything, you now go on behalf of the Board to receive that 
memorandum and address those people. 
 
So we had all of these kinds of activities that were happening 
and of course as that report was given, as PRASA in Turmoil I had also 
found a much more detailed one which was leaked by the media and 
they got it from the office of Minister Jeff Radebe, a copy of which at 
the time I gave to Minister Dipau Peters to say look this is what is 
happening and this document comes from this office, has the Minister 
in the Presidency advised you of this.  She had not heard about it until 
I gave it to her. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And she confirmed that to you, that she didn’t 
have the document. 
MR MOLEFE:   She confirmed that she didn’t have the document, then 
at the meeting convened by Mr Jeff Radebe, Minister Jeff Radebe on 
behalf of the President on or about the 20 t h of August Minister Peters 
pointedly asked Minister Radebe you have this kind of document, it 
deals with matters that pertains to the State Owned Company that 
reports to me, why are you not sharing that document with me, I need 
that document.  Of course Mr Radebe denied that he had the document, 
he says no, he didn’t have it, but I would imagine part of that 
20 
discussion is for later on in the evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, we need to stop now, it is beyond half past four, 
but after I had read your affidavit I mentioned to, I asked Mr Soni 
whether we do have a copy of that document and I understood that 
attempts to try and get a copy had not been successful, I am hoping 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 130 of 131 
 
that at some stage we will get it, so I just mentioned that because it 
might be important. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes it is true that attempts to find it were unsuccessful 
but we do have a document that refers briefly to the section in the 
report of the Group CEO that said PRASA was in turmoil. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   But it is a separate document, I am sure we can find 
that one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, is it a document that should be here already in 
the bundle or not? 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It is not yet in the bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But attempts will be made to let us see whatever we 
can see in terms of whatever was referred to or quoted, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson just for your information we have 
decided to ask Mr Montana, who appears to have been the author of the 
document for a copy of the document.  He has been cited in the 32 
Notices and there is no reason we can’t formally ask him for that 
document. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no that’s fine, but obviously I don’t know what 
other attempts were made but every attempt should be made to get a 
20 
copy of that document because it might throw light on certain issues. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That we have to look into.  Okay, we are going to 
adjourn for the day, it is twenty to five and we will resume at normal 
time tomorrow at ten am. 
12 MARCH 2020 – DAY 222 
 
Page 131 of 131 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As it pleases. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 13 MARCH 2020 
 
  
 
 
