 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
13 JUNE 2019 
 
 
 
DAY 112 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 2 of 171 
 
PROCEEDINGS ON 13 JUNE 2019 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Ms Hofmeyr, good morning everybody. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  We are indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Chair we commence with the 
aviation evidence and its work stream today.  This evidence will run 
from today until the end of June and Chair at the outset with your leave 
I propose to give a broad outline of what will be covered over the next 
10 
two and some weeks. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you may do so. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  I will also indicate Chair what is not going to be 
covered in the evidence because there are envisaged to be two 
evidence sessions for aviation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And so it is important that we get clear what 
will be covered now and what will come in due course.  Thirdly I 
propose to deal with certain procedural aspects and then finally to 
address you Chair on certain of the themes that appear to have 
20 
emerged in the preparation of the evidence so that they can be a 
reference point for the next two and a half weeks.  So with your leave if 
I many commence with that outline? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes please do so. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  Chair the aviation evidence 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 3 of 171 
 
that you will hear over the next two and a bit weeks will cover four 
focus areas of the aviation investigation.  Chair we talk about aviation 
broadly because the mandate of this commission is to look generally at 
state capture, corruption and fraud in amongst other things state owned 
entities and there are more than one state owned entity that falls under 
the umbrella of aviation.  There is SAA itself.  There is SA Express. 
There is ACSA and there are also certain subsidiary divisions of SAA 
which have fallen within the mandate of the investigation.  For this 
evidence session and those four focus areas we will be concentrating 
on aspects of the investigation in SAA and in SA Express.   
10 
We will not be dealing with ACSA and other related divisions 
that will come in due course.  In respect of those four areas Chair just 
to outline them at the outset.   
The first area relates to a R15 billion capital raising that SAA 
embarked upon in 2015 and 2016.   
The second area involves a transaction between the North 
West Department of Transport and South African Express Airways.  
The third area of investigation relates to jet fuel procurement 
that was engaged in by both SA Express and SAA with a particular 
company called EML Energy.  That investigation will take us to some 
20 
extent beyond the aviation sector because there was also a funding 
component of that area of investigation that involved the IDC and so 
there will be some evidence in relation to that.   
And Chair the fourth area will be a topic of governance 
generally.  In that fourth topic we return to SAA and we look at aspects 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 4 of 171 
 
of the manner in which governance was misapplied and procurement 
was intervened with over periods of the various memberships of the 
board of SAA and we track that over a period.  So Chair if I may just 
delve into each of those which I have highlighted in summary? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe I just want to note those just repeat them. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Firstly the focus areas? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So the first is the R15 billion debt consolidation 
of SAA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  The second is the North West Department of 
Transport’s agreement with SA Express.  That related to the 
Pilanesberg and Mafikeng airports. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  The third area relates to jet fuel procurement 
by SAA and SA Express with EML Energy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And as I highlighted there is a related link 
there to the IDC and funding. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then the final topic Chair is governance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So just to give a little bit of background into 
each of them and what the evidence that will be presented to you will 
cover over the next matter of weeks.   
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 5 of 171 
 
Chair the R15 billion debt consolidation that SAA embarked 
upon in 2015 and then continued with in 2016 has been the subject 
matter of much media attention previously as well as at least two 
reports which I will come to in due course.  The investigation has 
uncovered that there were various stages of this debt consolidation 
exercise and you will see through our witness today that it spans a 
good period of a year and there is some complexity in the nature of the 
various transactions at points.  But the upshot of the evidence is that 
but for the actions of the witness you will hear from today who was a 
whistle blower South African Airways would have either paid 325 million 
10 
for funding in circumstances that it could have got that funding for in 
the region of 85 million or R50 million would have been paid to an 
entity for no value whatsoever.   
So but for the actions of Ms Cynthia Stimpel who will be our 
first witness today those funds would have left SAA and arrived in the 
hands of parties who will in due course come and give evidence and 
account for the possession.  Chair this aspect of the investigation will 
also take us to the Free State because there is an element of this 
funding arrangement that involved the Free State Development 
Corporation who presented itself as a potential funder to SAA in 
20 
circumstances where that was clearly beyond its mandate legislatively 
prescribed.   
It also takes us to the Free State because there is a particular 
entity called Grissag AG who is the consistent funder over this period 
from 2015 to 2016 albeit that it keeps returning through the guise of 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 6 of 171 
 
different entities who are the interface between SAA and the sourcer of 
funds and there will be evidence indeed also from the director of 
Grissag in due course about its involvement in this debt consolidation.  
Chair that is a broad overview of that first area of evidence we will 
cover it today, tomorrow and for at least the duration of Tuesday 
because Monday is a public holiday as the schedule currently stands.  
Chair the second area involves the North West and its Department of 
Transport and an arrangement it entered into with South African 
Express Airways in order for South African Express Airways to fly 
routes to Pilanesberg and Mafikeng airports.   
10 
This too has been an aspect that has received public attention 
most notably in an article in the Financial Mail in May of 2018 last year 
by Karen Moran.  It is an article that really formed the basis for much 
of the commission’s investigation in this area.  There has also been 
litigation in relation to this aspect but the upshot of the evidence that 
you will hear in the course of next week is that the agreement that was 
concluded between the North West Government and South African 
Express Airways was envisaged to move R400 million out of the North 
West government into SA Express and a third party that SA Express 
nominated to do certain ground handling services at those two airports.  
20 
What the investigation has shown and what the evidence will cover is 
that a total of 97 million of that total amount of the order of 400 million 
was paid out of the North West government and then syphoned off 
through a detailed scheme of money laundering.   
Where precisely the cash ended up in that scheme is not 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 7 of 171 
 
entirely clear but the evidence will indicate at least three possible 
destinations for the monies.   
The evidence will include a tape recorded conversation 
between the previous South African Express Commercial Manager and 
one of the witnesses who will be testifying before you in which he says 
that he used the cash to pay off two ministers, a premier, an MEC, an 
HOD and a CFO in the North West.   
The second possible destination will come from testimony from 
the then security manager of South African Express who will also be a 
witness in these proceedings who was offered a R3 million bribe to 
10 
drop his investigation into the matter and who was told that the money 
was being used to fund the ANC’s political campaigning.   
And the third possible destination will arise from testimony 
from persons whose companies were used to quote ‘clean the money’ 
and they will give us insight as to where that money ultimately ended 
up.  Chair this aspect of the investigation has highlighted one 
concerning feature and that has been the slow pace at which criminal 
prosecutions have progressed in relation to these events because Chair 
the evidence will show that as early as 2016 charges were laid in 
relation to this conduct and there has been an investigation.   
20 
Last week in fact the commission engaged with the head, the 
national head of the Directorate of Priority Crime Investigation 
Lieutenant General Lebeya and he has provided a report to the 
commission which details what has happened in this investigation.   
Of concern and we will raise with you in due course in the 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 8 of 171 
 
evidence Chair is what appears from that report to be the case is that it 
has taken approximately two years to get bank statements from one 
bank in relation to one entity and during that period there has been 
very little progress in these cases.  We raise that as an aspect of 
concern and we thought it appropriate to get an update from the 
Directorate as to where the case is.  Chair the third aspect which is the 
jet fuel arrangements between SA Express, SAA and EML Energy will 
involve evidence that relates to a contract that EML Energy procured 
first with South African Express Airways.   
Now that contract appointed EML who was a company 
10 
stationed at the Denel precinct next to OR Tambo airport to supply 18 
times more fuel at Pilanesberg airport than the airport could use.  It 
was also a contract to supply OR Tambo airport with 25 million litres of 
jet fuel when EML Energy had in fact not been formerly appointed to 
provide those litres at all it is only formal appointment related to 
fuelling and defueling two aircraft in hangers at OR Tambo airport.  So 
the upshot of that evidence will be that EML Energy obtained a grossly 
inflated contract for jet fuel from South African Express which it then 
presented to the IDC as a basis to secure funding from IDC.   
IDC granted a total of R12.5 million worth of funding.  Chair in 
20 
the context of the numbers that are generally flown around this 
commission 12.5 million is paltry but our approach in the investigation 
has been to uncover any monies that have been corruptly or 
fraudulently taken from the public purse and in pursuit of that aspect of 
this part of the investigation it – evidence will be presented that 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 9 of 171 
 
indicates that the IDC official who first brought this funding application 
to the IDC ended up as a beneficiary of the IDC money.   
The second aspect that will be traversed with the IDC through 
its evidence is that n the basis of the documents presented to the 
commission relating to that funding decision it ought never to have 
been approved.   And it ought never to have been approved for a 
number of reasons.   
The first is that EML Energy did not originally qualify for the 
preferential pricing it obtained.   
Secondly the finance team which assessed the application and 
10 
determined whether EML would be able to service the loan that it was 
to receive from the IDC erroneously added a R6 million to the cash 
position of EML that simply did not exist.  And furthermore the IDC’s 
entire due diligence of the arrangement for funding was premised on a 
contract that EML was supposed to be awarded by SAA which had 
ended up not being awarded but then when it presented this alternative 
inflated South African Express contract to the IDC no further due 
diligence was done at that point.   
The IDC’s chief risk manager will give evidence and those 
points will be put to him in the course of his evidence for comment.  
20 
Chair the final aspect is governance and the evidence that you will hear 
in relation to this topic will deal firstly with the extinctive interference 
both from shareholder level sitting in the ministry of Public Enterprises 
as well as at board level in the management functions within SAA.  
Chair you have already heard some evidence on that from Ms Carolus.  
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 10 of 171 
 
She gave evidence towards the end of last year.   
You will recall that much of her evidence related to meetings 
that were taking place with Minister Gigaba, his advisors which she in 
fact did not attend.  Those were attended by the then CEO of SAA and 
we will have evidence from her directly about those events and others.  
Chair you will also hear evidence in relation to the culture of 
intimidation and threats that pervaded South African Airways for some 
period of time under Ms Myeni’s leadership.   
You will hear evidence how members of the board instructed 
management to conclude certain contracts without processes having 
10 
been followed and you will also hear evidence of board members 
cancelling contracts after due procurement processes had been 
complied with.  Only then to put South African Airways in a position as 
a defendant in legal proceedings when the originally successful 
tenderer sues because of the unlawful revocation of its award.   
Chair you will also hear evidence from the former head of 
procurement at SAA who was threatened with violence if he did not 
comply with the demands made of him.  And who was suspended the 
day after he met Mr Des Van Rooyen on the 2 December 2015.  Chair at 
that meeting on the 2 December 2015 Mr Van Rooyen on the account of 
20 
this witness demanded that two contracts be awarded to companies 
with whom he had connections and displayed a level of knowledge of 
the internal decision making of SAA at the time which was not public 
knowledge.  The day after that interaction the former head of 
procurement was summarily suspended and he left the country.  Most 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 11 of 171 
 
notably because he was concerned for his safety.   
Chair the evidence will also focus on the human toll of some of 
these acts and conduct.  The procurement manager whom I have 
referred to who fled to Zimbabwe has not found employment since then 
and that was in 2015.  Each of the managers who stood up to the 
attempts to interfere with processes were generally suspended at a 
point and engaged in lengthy periods to fight those suspensions but by 
and large gave up at a point because it became simply too long and too 
arduous.  The consequence of which was that they often lost out on 
benefits to which they would have been entitled if they had had it in 
10 
them to continue fighting.   
Chair that provides a brief overview of the course of the 
evidence.  The witnesses will follow in that order.  We will deal first 
with the R15 billion then the North West engagement, the jet fuel deal 
and we would conclude with your leave on the governance aspects.  
Chair it is then important for me just to highlight what will not be 
presented in this evidence session.   
I have indicated previously there is this session of about two 
and a half weeks and then the intention is to have a second session at 
some later point in the course of the year.  As I have indicated already 
20 
there are particular other companies and divisions which will not yet be 
covered in this evidence but there are also important follow ons 
particularly from the theme you will hear in the last session on 
governance that need to be rounded up and will be concluded in the 
presentation in the second session.   
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 12 of 171 
 
Chair in terms of forensic reports the evidence before this 
commission previously has included often either evidence from those 
who prepared the forensic reports or submission of the reports to you 
Chair.  The approach that has been taken in the aviation work stream 
was to use those reports where they exist to form a basis for the 
investigation and through the course of the investigation and the 
witnesses from whom you will hear those aspects that have been 
highlighted, have been probed, verified, interrogated so you will not be 
hearing evidence from the investigator you will instead Chair be 
hearing evidence either from those who participated in this conduct or 
10 
those who stood up to it at portions of their engagements at SAA and 
SA Express.   
Chair in terms of the reports just for your records in relation to 
the first theme there were two reports I say reports I must say that 
broadly because there is a forensic investigation report dated 24 
October 2017 that is an MJS Report.  As I said it has been the basis for 
investigation and you will hear first-hand evidence from those who were 
involved in the 15 billion capital raising enterprise.   
The second report I am using that broadly is actually a set of 
disciplinary findings by Advocate Nazeer Cassim SC who sat as the 
20 
chairperson in the disciplinary enquiries that were brought against the 
former CEO and CFO of SAA.  Those findings have been included in 
fact in the evidence pack you will be working with today Chair. 
In relation to North West ground handling there is a 
preliminary report of the security manager at South African Express 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 13 of 171 
 
Airways which also formed a basis for our investigations he himself will 
be giving evidence so that report will be an annexure to his statement. 
And then there was a report done by Matlala Von Metzinger 
Attorneys for South African Express that was finalised on the 10 May 
2018 but again you will hear evidence from the very people involved in 
those engagements. 
And then finally on the ELM jet fuel deal there was a report 
done for South African Express on the 4 December 2018 by the attorney 
firm Hogan Lovells and that again was the basis for investigation. 
Interestingly that report itself referenced the IDC leg of the 
10 
funding arrangement but could not go further.  We have endeavoured in 
the investigation to do just that and understand precisely how that 
funding did – was secured from the IDC. 
Chair then just in relation to process aspects.  Chair in 
advance of this hearing today numerous Rule 3.3 Notices have been 
sent to implicated persons.  The tally as I have it at the moment is that 
there are a total of 69 notices that have been prepared.  61 of those 
have been processed.  8 of them are as we speak still in the process of 
being issued because we still have two weeks in the course of the 
investigation – evidence.   
20 
Chair the successful delivery of those Rule 3.3 Notices has in 
general been good.  There have been occasions where issues with 
annexures not arriving at implicated persons have been raised.  There 
have been steps taken to remedy that.  And should it become pertinent 
at any point I will delve into those details for your benefit Chair. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 14 of 171 
 
Arising from those Rule 3.3 Notices there – we have only at 
this point received two applications for cross-examination.  Chair those 
have come from the former CEO and CFO of SAA and they relate to the 
evidence of the witness today Ms Cynthia Stimpel. 
Chair with your leave it is our proposal that in the course of 
Ms Stimpel’s evidence she will be asked about the contrary versions 
that have been put up by those two applicants for cross-examination so 
that her answer to them can be provided.  Thereafter one of the two 
applicants for cross-examination is herself giving evidence the former 
CFO.  So we will endeavour with your leave to probe with her those 
10 
aspects that emerge from Ms Simpel’s evidence and it is our suggestion 
at the conclusion of that process that Chair you then consider the 
applications. 
Our sense is that it may be that some of the points of 
contention are resolved through putting those questions in the course 
of evidence because we now have the benefit of the implicated person’s 
version given that they have produced a statement in both cases to the 
commission. 
And it may even be appropriate at that point to enquire from 
them whether they persist with the applications and then those can be 
20 
dealt with in due course. 
That is our proposal in relation to that aspect. 
Chair finally on process matters.  All of the witnesses so – well 
15 of the witnesses there are 16 in total.  The 16 t h witness has not 
been summonsed because he is resident in Zimbabwe but arrangements 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 15 of 171 
 
have been made for him to come to South Africa for his evidence. 
The remaining 15 witnesses have all been issued summonses 
in terms of the effective service of those summonses I can report that 
we have received confirmation of effective service in 11 of the 15 cases 
and in the 4 that remain outstanding efforts are being made as we 
speak to secure successful service in relation to those summonses. 
Chair just a moment on the witnesses and the summons 
process and the type of evidence that will be received in the next two 
weeks.  Chair the witnesses come with different levels of eagerness to 
this commission.  There are those witnesses who come voluntarily.  
10 
There are other witnesses who come with caution. There are witnesses 
who also come with some level of fear and that has been relayed to the 
commission and the security procedures have been engaged for that 
purpose 
for 
assessment 
and 
wherever 
necessary 
– 
necessary 
protection. 
They also however Chair come reluctantly in some respects to 
the commission and it is in that context that we thought it appropriate 
at the outset simply to highlight the Provisions of Regulation 8 of the 
Commission’s Regulations Chair.  You will recall that is the provision of 
the regulations that speaks to the requirements of witnesses to answer 
20 
the questions that are put to them.  The only caveat to that is where the 
answer will divulge or fall within the ambit of legal professional 
privilege. But even self-incriminating answers in the context of this 
commission must be given because there is a use immunity provided in 
Regulation 8.2. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 16 of 171 
 
Regulation 8.2 says that any self-incriminating answer will not 
be admissible in evidence in criminal proceedings against that person 
except on a charge of perjury. 
Chair you will well know with respect that the constitutionality 
of those provisions has already been engaged by the constitutional 
court.  In its 1996 Ferreira versus Levine decision it looked at the 
equivalent type of provision in the insolvency context and it determined 
that while there was a limitation to the fair trial rights of the witness 
who may subsequently become an accused in criminal proceedings it 
was nonetheless a reasonable and justifiable limitation of their right.  
10 
And the reason why is because there is a hefty public interest.  In that 
context in insolvency in unearthing what happened with inside a 
company where people are only third parties to the company and may 
have claims against it the constitutional court ultimately concluded that 
the balance there meant that the public interest in the pursuit of truth 
provided the compelled answer was coupled with a use immunity was 
sufficient to survive constitutional scrutiny.  And we would submit a 
similar legal position obtains in Regulation 8.1 and 8.2 in these 
proceedings because they are replicas of those provisions with the 
constitutional court found to be constitutionally consistent in Ferreira 
20 
and Levine. 
Chair finally just in terms of the themes of the evidence that you will 
hear over the next two weeks Chair the evidence appears to indicate 
five themes about not only what happened in the last many years in this 
country but what the enablers were for state capture, corruption and 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 17 of 171 
 
fraud in the public sector.  That topic is squarely within the mandate of 
the Commission and one of the things we have searched for in the 
course of this investigation what are the key enablers of that type of 
conduct taking root and permeating our public institutions. 
Chair you will of course in due course make the final 
determination as to what the evidence shows in relation to those but at 
the outset we thought it appropriate to highlight five potential enablers 
what we call the facilitators of malfeasance in the – in our systems.  
Chair the first of those is when priority crime investigations stall for 
unthinkably long periods and are not brought to resolution. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is – is that the Hawks? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  That is the Hawks indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  In this case you will have a report from the 
Hawks that shows that for two years they were getting bank statements 
from a single bank in relation to a single company.  That just does not 
stack up as the – the product of diligent investigative and prosecutorial 
work. 
That is an enabler because it results in a situation where 
perpetrators are not brought to justice in any reasonable stretch of 
20 
time.  The second – Chair – is companies who allow their businesses to 
be used to hide the proceeds of unlawful activities.  When they do so 
they facilitate theft of the public purse and so they are a second 
enabler of this type of conduct. 
Chair the fourth is funding institutions who are not rigorous 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 18 of 171 
 
enough in their funding decisions and as a consequence of which end 
up handing out money to those who should not receive them and 
ultimately in this case to a beneficiary who was within the IDC at the 
point in time.  Chair the fourth enabler is Ministers. 
Ministers who sit in the Department of Public Enterprises and 
retain Members of Boards in their positions despite sustained evidence 
that they are not complying with their fiduciary duties and who do not 
act swiftly enough to ensure proper governance within those state 
owned enterprises and Chair the fifty and the one that brings us focally 
to the evidence of today is when Ministries who receive whistleblowing 
10 
reports from people who are trying to stand up to the assault within 
SOEs do not act on those whistle-blower reports. 
The consequence of that and you will hear it in the evidence 
today is that civil society organisations have to step in but they have 
limited funds.  They are not available to everyone at all times and there 
is a concerning respect in which the attention to and the response to 
whistleblowing action in the course of the evidence - you will hear – 
seems to be somewhat wanting. 
Chair those in our submission are five of the enabler themes 
that you will hear over the course of the two weeks of this evidence and 
20 
Chair with that background in place if I could just deal with the files 
and how they are arranged for the purposes of the evidence.  Chair, we 
now in what I am told on good authority is EXHIBIT DD in the 
sequence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 19 of 171 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Now yesterday I am also told became EE but 
that is because of an unusual arrangement in the scheme. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  All of the aviation evidence will be EXHIBIT DD 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then each of the witnesses will follow in 
the sequence from one to 16. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair today you have three files of evidence for 
10 
Ms Stimpel’s testimony.  They are arranged A, B and C and I will 
indicate at any point which of the files we are in. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR: 
 
Chair 
you 
also 
have 
a 
copy 
of 
the 
cross-examination application that have been received by the former 
CEO and CFO … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But I have already indicated our proposal for 
how that aspect is managed in the course of the evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair that brings me to the end of the initial 
background opening remarks.  We have Ms Stimpel here and she is 
ready to give evidence if that is suitable. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Does Mr Zwane wish to place himself on 
record? 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 20 of 171 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or does he wish to just be present?  Mr Zwane come 
forward and tell me whether you want to place yourself on record or 
whether you just want to be present. 
MR NDUMISO ZWANE:  Thank you Chair.  Indeed with your leave I 
would like to place myself on record on behalf of Ms Stimpel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, please do so. 
MR NDUMISO ZWANE:  I am a practicing attorney from the law firm 
Zwane Incorporated Attorneys.  We are based in Sandton. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and once again you represent who? 
10 
MR NDUMISO ZWANE:  Ms Cynthia Stimpel the first witness this 
morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No thank you very much. 
MR NDUMISO ZWANE:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Okay.  Ms Hofmeyr the lever arch file 
which 
contains 
the 
evidence 
– 
the 
statement 
– 
of 
Ms Cynthia Soraya Stimpel will be marked EXHIBIT DD1A (off record) 
marked EXHIBIT DD1B and the third one DD1C and (off record) – oh, 
was I not on record? 
The first one will be marked EXHIBIT DD1A that is the one 
20 
that contains Ms Stimpel’s statement.  The two other lever arch files 
will respectively be marked EXHIBIT DD1B and DD1C and the (off 
record) – we do not – we do not need to these marked the small ones 
here? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  No Chair that will not be necessary. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 21 of 171 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you and thank you for that opening 
statement.  Yes please administer the oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL: 
 
My 
name 
is 
Cynthia Agnes Soraya Stimpel. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections to taking the prescribed 
oath? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  No, I do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on your 
conscience? 
10 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes, I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that all the evidence that you will 
give will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth if so 
please raise your right hand and say so help me God. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  So help me God. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  (duly sworn, states) 
REGISTRAR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Yes you may proceed Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Stimpel you would have 
heard my indication to the Chair about the files that appear in front of 
20 
you. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Just so that you can orientate yourself there 
are three files which compromise your evidence.  The one open in front 
of you is File A and then you will see B and C are also available to you.  
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 22 of 171 
 
When relevant I will ask you to move between those files.  Ms Stimpel 
there are a few corrections in relation to your affidavit that you have 
brought to our attention. 
My proposal is to deal with them as and when they arise in 
the course of your evidence.  I have made a note of them and so I will 
direct you to them at the relevant page when we are there in your – in 
your affidavit.  My proposal for the course of the evidence Chair is to 
move pretty much in line with the development of the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Stimpel the first correction however appears 
10 
on page 1 and it is in fact in the spelling of your name. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Could you please correct that for us for the 
record? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes.  It should be S-T-I-M-P-
E-L. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Not L-E as it appears on page 1 of your 
affidavit.  Is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Just repeat that spelling. 
20 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  S-T-I-M-P-E-L. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair you will see in due course many of the 
Rule 3.3 Notices even went out with that error because … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 23 of 171 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  We working on the – on the name as it 
appeared here … 
CHAIRPERSON: Yes.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But we do apologise for that error Ms Stimpel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No that is fine and maybe a new copy can be … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of page 1 can be arranged … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then the – what is written on the spine – oh this 
one is written correctly. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  I think we caught it in time … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  For the spine labels. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay alright.  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Stimpel I would like to 
begin if we may with just some background … 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  To your employment and – and credentials in 
relation to you studies.  Would you give the Chair some background as 
to that? 
20 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Thank you.  I have an MBA 
from a – ja from - the highest qualification is an MBA and I have also 
got Certified Director which I studied recently.  From an experience 
perspective I started working in the bank and then – in 1975 and I have 
over 35 years banking experience having worked in various retail and 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 24 of 171 
 
merchant banking with City Bank at the time and then corporate 
banking and then worked at DBSA which is development funding and my 
last 10 years of my career was spent at SAA as the Head of Financial 
Risk Manager and the last year and a bit was as partly Acting Group 
Treasurer and then as Group Treasurer, thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  If you turn over to page 2 of your 
affidavit Ms Stimpel you have a heading there entitled the Boards and 
under that section of your affidavit you deal with your experience of 
different Boards while you served at SAA from 2006 to 2016 as I have 
it.  Could you please tell the Chair about your experience of those 
10 
different governance and management styles as a result of the Boards 
different composition over time? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  With the earlier Boards 
under Ms Cheryl Carolus and Mr Richard Laubscher and others there 
was a – a focus on them making – wanting the company to work.  
Ensuring that we work on a strategic direction for the organisation and 
that the entire team of SAA worked together towards this vision and I 
recall that time being quite positive for SAA even though SAA had come 
out of doldrums. 
They have always been in some problems but there was 
20 
energy in the organisation and the focus was willing to make it work.  
Ms Susan Simela had come in then also as the CEO and she worked 
with each different department also trying to understand where the 
issues were and how we can get SAA working at a coordinated 
organisation and make sure that we do achieve the strategy and the 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 25 of 171 
 
vision of the organisation. 
Subsequent to Ms Carolus leaving and part of the Board 
leaving at the time there was constituted a new Board and obviously we 
got a few Acting CEOs over the time and what I noted then is that there 
were interference from our Board who directly wanted to know about 
certain contracts.  The way we operated is that each division was 
responsible for their specific activity or business role which then you 
had to go from a corporate governance perspective to the Board for – 
for approvals and this somehow the change was that the Board was 
directing how the procurement should be going and where it should be 
10 
going, thank you Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Stimpel you – you then at page 3 take up 
the topic of debt consolidation which is really the subject matter and 
the focus of the evidence in this first part of the session.  Could you 
please explain to us what the debt position was and – and really the 
financial precariousness of SAA around the time February 2015 which 
is where you begin at – at paragraph 12 on that page. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  So at that time SAA was – 
we had government guarantees of up to about 14 billion at the time and 
we had borrowed roughly about 11 billion.  However our borrowing was 
20 
always short term.  Meaning that when they came up for maturity they 
had to be rolled over and it was not a simple process for us in Treasury 
to do that. 
One had to as the loans were coming to maturity we had to 
write a submission to Board to ask permission to state that these loans 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 26 of 171 
 
are now maturing and that we are going to roll it over.  Board would 
give us the – the approval and then we would roll the debt over.  
Obviously at that time of continuous rolling over debt being short term 
you pay a higher – higher interest rate. 
You also then in a continuous cycle of having to repay debt 
you have got three months, you have got six months, you have got one 
year and before you know it the months have passed.  You have to roll 
over the new debt and you have to roll over the new debt.  So we were 
always in the cycle constantly busy doing these submissions to get the 
debt going. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  You say in paragraph 12 that in 
February 2015 you were appointed as the Acting Group Treasurer after 
the resignation of Mr Phetolo Ramosebudi who went to work for 
Transnet.  Can you tell us about your occupying of that position and 
with particular reference - if I may Chair this is the first point at which 
one of the allegations against Ms Stimpel is relevant from the 
cross-examination application of Ms Nhantsi who will come next week 
to give evidence. 
She criticises you and your lack of experience as a 
consequence of only being appointed as Acting Group Treasurer in 
20 
February 2015.  What is your comment in response to that? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Okay.  So I started at SAA 
December 2006 and in March 2007 was when we first borrowed 1.3 
billion from Nedbank as SAA and SAA received the guarantee – a 
government guarantee – from National Treasury at that time.  
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 27 of 171 
 
Subsequent years that followed SAA kept borrowing.  So we needed to 
get new Government guarantees and then borrow funds from that. 
My role of Head of Financial Risk was always being involved 
a, with the funding and b, I deputised for whoever the Group Treasurer 
was.  So when I started there Ricky Thirion was the Group Treasurer.  
He resigned in the middle of 2007 and I deputised for six – roughly six 
- months at that time. 
A new Group Treasurer was appointed and whenever he was 
away I deputised for him and when he resigned I deputised for him.  
Subsequently a new Group Treasurer came in by the name of 
10 
Lourens Van Der Merwe.  I also deputised for him.  In fact I - I 
presented at Board.  I presented at Exco.  At Audit and Risk 
Committees on – on his behalf at times especially from a hedging 
perspective and on the financial side. 
Subsequent to Lourens resigning we then brought in Phetolo 
and even then I deputised for Phetolo.  After Phetolo resigned is when I 
was acting and because at that time SAA had also gone through a 
reduction of staff earlier – about a year or two earlier – and had to go 
on a process of finding staff that are skilled within the organisation and 
employ them and that is how I got employed as Group Treasurer of 
20 
SAA. 
I went through a full process of – of interviewing panels’ 
etcetera and I was then chosen.  You mentioned something else. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes.  Just the lack of experience is really 
where the nub of the criticism lies.  What is your response to a lack of 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 28 of 171 
 
experience in the role of Group Treasurer as a consequence of only 
taking up the positon of Acting Group Treasurer in February 2016? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  So I feel that I have had the 
experience having been 10 years at SAA.  Secondly is that I have 
worked in banking my entire career and I have worked in a Treasury 
environment.  So I know how the Treasury environment works.  I know 
how we need to source funding I know now we manage the risks around 
the hedging processes and I also managed the risks there for the 10 
years at SAA. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  At paragraph 13 you talk about a 
10 
clash between the DPE and the Board and you also then go on to deal 
with the movement of your reporting lines between the Department of 
Public Enterprises and National Treasury.  Can you tell us about that?  
What – what was happening at that time? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  So in previous years SAA or 
may – all State Owned Enterprises report to a Ministry and SAA 
reported to the department – Department of Public Enterprises at that 
time over the many years and then during this period there was 
Mr Gigaba and there was Ms Lynn Brown who we had reported to and 
suddenly there was a change. 
20 
We were told that we will no longer be reporting to DPE but 
rather to – directly to National Treasury and our process and our 
working relationship with Department of Public Enterprises at that time 
was to have monthly meetings of reporting on certain activities and 
quarterly meetings on the whole organisation reporting where we were 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 29 of 171 
 
financially, where we were with strategy etcetera and with National 
Treasury having come in SAA was in a crisis situation at the time and 
they directed us to say we will meet on a weekly basis in that we try 
and solve the problems that is creating the – the crisis for SAA which 
was a, the financial side. 
The b, was on the air (indistinct) and then there were various 
other air routes and so we met with them on a weekly basis and on a 
monthly basis as well and then there was the full quarterly which 
responded to the full turnaround strategy and the vision of the 
organisation. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Ms Stimpel.  I have been asked to 
request that you bring the mic slightly closer to you so that we can get 
an accurate record for the transcription.  Ms Stimpel if you then move 
to page 4 of your affidavit and paragraph 15.  You then talk about your 
first task been to write a borrowing plan.  Can you explain to us what 
that involved? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Than you.  I was given the 
task to draw a borrowing plan because SAA in the past have gone to 
National Treasurer and via DPE at the time – Department of Public 
Enterprises – to get Government guarantees and on the back of the 
20 
Government guarantees we went to the bank to borrow funds. 
However we never had a formal borrowing plan like Transnet 
had or Eskom had and National Treasury directed us to – to draw up 
this borrowing plan a and see how we can manage our funds and also 
look at – they wanted three to five years.  They said we would keep 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 30 of 171 
 
coming – which was true.  We were coming there on a regular basis 
every year wanting to borrow but we had no future planning it. 
So that was my task to find out what we needed for SAA.  
What I did was I did some research through Transnet’s borrowing plan.  
I also did it through various others – state owned companies.  I looked 
at DBSAs and then see what would be a best for – for SAA.  I drew that 
up.  I shared the knowledge with – in our team we have a financial risk 
subcommittee that we look at all the financial risks within the 
organisation and the borrowing plan would form part of that. 
So it went to them for review and therefore we sent it – I sent 
10 
it to my boss at the time who was Mr Wolf Meyer and he also gave 
some constructive criticism of it then we sent it to National Treasury to 
give a review and add any changes that they would like to.  They 
subsequently did do that.  They sent it via email via track changes and 
once we did that we then put it through to our Exco Committee and our 
corporate governance levels which would have been Exco Audit and 
Risk Committee and Board.  Board subsequently approved that in 
April 2015, thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Could we just focus on paragraph 
17 on that page because you summarise there what your analysis 
20 
showed during the course of your devising of the borrowing plan.  Can 
you explain to us with particular reference to the saving that you 
reference there? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Thank you.  So if we looked 
at our total maturity profile we had various debts maturing at different 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 31 of 171 
 
periods and different rates and short term and we looked at if we 
borrowed longer term for instance taking a five to 10 year tenure and – 
and take that full debt of 15 billion or – which was our guarantees. 
It was the time roughly 14-odd million but we rounded the 
number up to 15 billion and we did a calculation that if we did that 15 
billion over a longer team 10 years at a fixed rate and we worked on 
the JIBAR rate at the time because that is the rates that our banks 
quoted us we would have saved approximately roughly 400 million and 
that was our calculation on it. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And you mentioned at the end of your previous 
10 
answer that the borrowing plan was submitted to the Board and that it 
was approved by the Board as I have it at paragraph 18 there on 
22 April.  Is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That is correct, yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Now at paragraph 19 you – you give us a bit of 
background as to the nature of funding decisions within SAA as 
contrasted with procurement that is governed by the Supply Chain 
Management Policy.  Could you explain to the Chair what the distinction 
is that you draw between those two areas of decision making? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Thank you.  With SAA and 
20 
through our borrowing process we followed the Financial Risk 
Management Policy and there is a section in there which covered the 
funding and in the history of SAA having borrowed funds since 2007 we 
have borrowed funds directly through the banks.  Yes we did follow an 
RFP but it only went to the five major banks at the time. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 32 of 171 
 
The amounts were huge.  Our first amount in 2007 was 
roughly 1.3 billion and subsequent to that there were similar amounts.  
The reason why we chose the banks because they were our relationship 
supplier for funding and they could supply funding.  We knew that.  The 
SCM Policy which is the Supply Chain Management Policy of SAA 
always focused on the supply chain. 
So any vendors or any other activities that SAA was involved 
in those – that is where the policy complied with.  As S – as SAA 
Treasury we did not go through the SCM Policy for funding and so when 
it came to this transaction this is the first time that the BNP transaction 
10 
had gone through the SCM Policy but historically SAA followed the 
Financial Risk Management Policy and even when one went through our 
process we went through the financial risk subcommittee. 
From there it went Exco Committee.  From Exco it went to 
Audit and Risk and Board whereas the SMP Policy went through firstly 
a CFST which is a Cross Function Sourcing Team.  Then it would go to 
the Bid Adjudication Committee and then only it would go to Audit and 
Risk and Board.  In fact there was another Committee called FIPCO 
which went into that and it did not follow the – the route that the 
Financial Risk Committee went, thank you. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Stimpel how if you were not using the 
Supply Chain Management Policy for these funding pursuits of SAA how 
would you ensure competitiveness in your approaches for funding? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Because we only used the 
banks.  We used the five major banks.  There were – we did not even 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 33 of 171 
 
attempt to try Capitec which was a new bank that came on.  We knew 
the history of the other banks.  They were solid and they could borrow 
huge amounts - at least lend huge amounts to – to corporates and to 
State Owned Companies and if one looked at the – the entities like 
Transnet, DBSA, Eskom the banks were involved with those. 
Transnet in its – in its own could go into the money market 
and issue its own bonds.  SAA was not at that level yet to issue its 
bonds.  So for the best method for SAA at that time was to go to banks 
and seek recourse and funds from them. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Did you chase competitive rates from the 
10 
banks? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Oh yes we did, and that’s 
why we went, if we – we went to all five and we would do a full analysis 
on each of the banks, what they offered before we made our final 
decision, correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Thank you, if we then go over the page to 
page five of your affidavit, I’d like to pick up the point at paragraph 24 
because as I understand your evidence until now you devised a 
borrowing plan, you took it through the various levels for approval both 
to Mr Meyer, the then CFO, you got National Treasury’s input, it was 
20 
then placed before the Board and the Board approved it on the 22 n d of 
April 2015, but what you start to deal with at paragraph 24 on page five 
is concerns being expressed by the Board of SAA at the time about the 
process that you are embarked upon.  Can you tell us about what those 
concerns related to? 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 34 of 171 
 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     So what had happened is 
that, after the borrowing plan having been approved and in our 
discussion with our, then CFO we were having maturities come up again 
of our loan book and we needed to go out and borrow again or roll-over 
the debt which is the other alternative and we then used that 
opportunity to go out and see if we can do the debt consolidation. See 
what prices the market could offer us, what the banks had, if they had 
the appetite for 15billion because most banks wouldn’t just go out and 
put the entire risk on one entity and they would try and manage that 
risk.  So  we went out on a RFP for 15billion at the time, our Board then 
10 
was very – because what happens is we’ve got to put the information 
back to Board and they were uncomfortable, they said why are we going 
out on debt consolidation, they are unaware of the debt consolidation, 
they – it’s never been approved and can we write a paper on debt 
consolidation. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Let’s go if we may to the actual email that you 
reference at paragraph 24 because that’s an email that comes from, 
then member of the Board, Ms Yakhe Kwinana and you will find it at 
page 170 of the file in front of you, that is Annexure Three Chair, it 
should be under that tab and its page 170 it commences. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Have you got page 170, Ms Stimpel? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     I’ll find it thank you, yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Can you tell us what that email is and what it 
deals with? 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 35 of 171 
 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Yes so this is when we had 
gone out and put out the debt consolidation process for the first time 
and then Ms Kwinana had come back to the, then CFO saying that we 
should follow proper processes and that we should cancel the tender.  
So we had gone out already on that trying to illicit information and to 
sense the appetite of the of the potential funders which were only 
banks at the time and the – she writes there that we didn’t follow the 
processes and that it needed to be cancelled. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And in the second sentence there as I read it, 
she’s querying with Mr Meyer how he determined which funders to 
10 
approach and if you close it to selected funders she queries how are 
other new entrants expected to participate in South African Airways.  
Did you understand that to be part of the concern at the time, that your 
pool of recipients for the RFP was too limited? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Yes we always felt that we 
should be going to banks because the banks would have the capacity to 
lend such huge amounts, even the banks borrow from Sanlam and an 
Old Mutual, we wouldn’t go directly to those institutions to borrow funds 
and we didn’t add any others because we felt that they wouldn’t have 
the capacity to be able to fund SAA, but yes that was the concern. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   You responded to that email of Ms Kwinana’s 
and that is over the page in the next Annexure at 178 of the file, I’d like 
to pick up a few points to emphasise in relation to your response.  You 
deal in the third paragraph with the background to the RFP and you say 
there, and I quote, 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 36 of 171 
 
 
“The reason the RFP was sent out at that time was because 
 
the Chairperson had instructed the CFO to send the RFP out 
 
and he in turn instructed the treasury team to send it out. We 
 
sent the RFP on the Friday the 26 t h of June 2015”. 
 
Is that your recollection of the events, that there was in fact, 
approval for this RFP to go out? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Yes we got our instruction 
from the CFO to go ahead and send it. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And you go down at the 7 t h paragraph which is 
just below the middle of the page to talk about the utility of sending out 
10 
the RFP and as I read this in general terms Ms Stimpel, and you’ll 
correct me if I’m wrong it reads as though a response to the Board in 
which you’re trying to motivate for the sense behind the process that 
you’ve adopted and to try and dissuade them from cancelling the RFP, 
is that a fair summary?  
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     That would be a fair 
summary.  I felt that the company’s reputation would be at risk, so if 
you go out and put a RFP then you withdraw it and you come back later 
and produce another and you withdraw it, the banks will look at you and 
say, can’t you manage your finances, so I was looking at it, yes it was 
20 
out of concern for the organisation and its reputation. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Towards the bottom of that page you deal with 
this question of new entrants, its your penultimate paragraph there.  
Can you tell us what your comments were in relation to Ms Kwinana’s 
query that it shouldn’t be confined and that it needed to be expanded to 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 37 of 171 
 
“new entrants” on the funding spectrum? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:   Yes so we primarily only 
went to the banks mainly because they kept everything confidential and 
we didn’t open the RFP to any non-banking institutions even though we 
knew about Sanlam or the Old Mutuals and with the email that we 
received from Ms Kwinana stating that, had we considered any new 
entrants, in my response then to Board on this was that, if we go with 
new entrants we don’t know how confidential they’ll be regarding the 
information and the sensitivity of our information and so that was my 
concern which I put out there.   
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Over the page, however, at 179 you do record 
some of your experience around that time which related to receiving 
unsolicited approaches from non-banking institutions despite the RFP 
being confined to the five banks, can you tell us about that, what was 
happening at the time? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Correct, so we did – we 
were getting calls – actually they were firstly going directly to Mr Meyer 
who then called myself and Michael Klein in who was the head of cash 
management and we set up meetings with them.  People came in many, 
from different organisations, all different business cards all wanting – 
20 
saying that SAA is seeking funding, we can help you and when we told 
them the quantum of the amount being 15billion, some of them said, we 
can do it and others said oh that’s too much but those that could do it 
was – they – some people couldn’t even – we said to them then send us 
a term sheet, we’re going to put a RFP out, respond to the RFP and 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 38 of 171 
 
send us your term sheet, they asked us what is a term sheet.  So that 
was the level, when I realised they don’t even understand how to 
manage funding, how to put forward a proposal of how you’re going to 
express the amount, the duration, the term, the tenure, the interest rate 
etcetera on the term sheet and we had many of these discussions over 
time, which we felt at the time was a waste of our time, we were trying 
to get the funding going and now we’re being held back by having to 
speak to individuals. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   You raise a concern in the second paragraph 
on that page about how these entities even got knowledge of the RFP 
10 
letter, what did you make of that at the time? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Ja I was surprised 
because I asked Wolf, they were calling his number mostly and I asked 
him, how do they know because we are responsible for it in treasury 
and we sent it out  only via email, so how would they know and he said 
it could come from the Board, those were his words and I would suspect 
they were the other ones that knew or it was the CFO or any in our 
EXEC team but the EXEC team have been there at the time, long 
enough who have never then disclosed information on our borrowing 
because we’ve been borrowing since 2007.  So the summation that I 
20 
made and at the time based on what Wolf Meyer told me that he 
suspects that it’s from the Board. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And where does this culminate you – Ms 
Kwinana comes in and says to Mr Meyer that she’s dissatisfied with the 
process that’s been followed, you are told that there’s an issue that 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 39 of 171 
 
they want to broaden the ambit of those that have been formerly 
provided with the request for proposal, what then happens and you may 
make reference to paragraph 26 on that page because it seems from 
that paragraph that Ms Myeni and the Board then took matters further. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Yes they – we then had to 
cancel the RFP which we did and we then put – because the funds 
needed to roll-over we put in another submission through to the normal 
process of RFRC, Audit Risk and Board and this time we only put in an 
amount of the amounts that were due to be rolled-over which is roughly 
over 6billion so we put a round number of 7billion which we’re going to 
10 
roll-over and once it got to our Board, our Board changed the Board 
resolution and changed it to go out and do 15billion debt consolidation. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Mr Stimpel we’ll go through that if we may in 
some detail because I’d like to look at the documents relevant there but 
if we could just go to this email communication between Ms Myeni and 
Mr Meyer, you’ll find it at page 181 under tab five which is the relevant 
Annexure number. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   You’ll see there, the bottom of the page is 
what I understand to be the first email from Ms Myeni to Mr Meyer and 
20 
then his response at the top.  Could you just indicate to us what Ms 
Myeni is saying in the second half of that page in her email on the 16 t h 
of July 2015? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     She has written to Mr Wolf 
Meyer, the then CFO stating that the Board has decided that they shall 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 40 of 171 
 
withdraw the RFP for long-term funding and that they will need to get 
formal paper on the debt consolidation if this RFP is aimed at 
addressing the same. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Ms Stimpel can I just stop you there, had the 
Board not received anything from you at this point about your planned 
debt consolidation? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     They had received the 
borrowing plan and I did write a document on debt consolidation and 
explained the – did the comparisons that if we stayed rolling-over debt 
we incurred this interest continuously and if we consolidated our debt 
10 
we would be saving and we would have less stress in the organisation 
always running for every maturity and trying to find out how we’re going 
to roll-over the next maturity. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   So what do make of her request now for a 
formal paper on that which, as I understand your evidence, you’d 
already provided? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     I don’t think they read it 
otherwise I’m not sure why it was brought in again. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And if we go to Mr Meyer’s response at the 
top, you see he there says, 
20 
 
“Dear Chair, following the decision of the Board to withdraw 
 
the RFP, we have formally in writing advised all the recipients 
 
of the RFP that has been withdrawn.  We shall work on and 
 
provide the Board with a formal paper on debt consolidation as 
 
a matter of urgency”, 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 41 of 171 
 
 
Did you follow through with that? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:    We did yes.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   So that would have been your second paper so 
to speak, on debt consolidation. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Thank you.  I’d then like to move to that 
process which you summarised for us a moment ago, lets go first of all 
to the Audit and Risk Committees recommendation to the Board, that is 
Annexure 7 and you will find it at page 3 – sorry 203, can you talk us 
through this decision record of the Audit and Risk Committee which is 
10 
dated 24 August 2015. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Thank you, this – we, as 
treasury, we would do submissions through the various corporate 
governance levels and this particular one had gone to Audit and Risk 
Committee and that is when our loans were maturing and we  had the 
7billion amount which we were going to roll-over and we stated there 
the funding requirement for August of 1.5, funding requirement for 
November maturing 2.5 and then because we had the general short-
term banking facilities which was our overdraft we had with various 
banks at 1.3 and then Nedbank so the total was roughly about 7billion.  
20 
This is the submission that went through the FRFC which is the 
Financial Risk sub-committee and then it went to the Audit and Risk 
Committee.  At the Audit and Risk Committee was when the Board 
changed the Board resolution because this decision record is a Board 
resolution at least the  Audit and Risk resolution whereby they state 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 42 of 171 
 
and change the amount, if you turn over the page Chair on 204 you see 
that it was changed to 15billion and in that, the Board members who sit 
at the Audit and Risk Committee and the same Board members also sit 
at the  full Board, stated that we should put out a RFP for 15billion and 
that the Board as a whole and the acting CEO should be included in the 
process of issuing a RFP. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Could I just pause there was that customary? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     No that was the first time 
I’ve seen that because you get a directive, Boards role is oversight that 
they will, obviously have the best interest of the organisation at heart 
10 
and direct management of what to do and how best to do it but they 
don’t go to the level that they want to be involved in a RFP process.  
They could have directed and say include external parties or broaden 
your RFP but they wanted to be involved and they wanted to add on 
additional parties.  So once we did the RFP we had to send it to Board 
and they then added on interested parties which we had to then send 
the RFP to. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Well let’s…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:     What – I’m sorry what did you understand this 
request or directive or instruction to mean that the Board wanted to be 
20 
involved in the RFP, did that mean they wanted to be involved in the 
actual formulation of the RFP, what exactly did it mean as you 
understood it? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     How I understood it, 
because I did seek clarification from our company’s secretary’s office 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 43 of 171 
 
asking them how do they want me to proceed and they wanted me to 
write the RFP, once I’ve written it I had to send it to Board, Board 
needed to review it, I also had to list the clients that we were going to 
send it to, the service providers for funding and send that to them and 
they also instructed that we use previous suppliers that we had on our 
list from February already from earlier times so it wasn’t only the 
banks, it was all those other funders – potential funders who had come 
to SAA unsolicited seeking through financing SAA and so my 
understanding was that nowhere before did a RFP document go to a 
Board first for approval, not anywhere not even the Supply Chain 
10 
Management process.  So we had to send that to Board, Board then 
approved it with the list and we subsequently, through Dr Tambi 
received a couple of other clients which we needed to add on to the list 
and only then could we send out the RFP to the suppliers, thanks. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Chair if I may ask Ms Stimpel to go to two of 
the documents which will actually show you that list and the draft RFP 
that was sent, lets start at page 207 because 207 as I have it is the 
CFO’s document that goes to the Board seeking the Board’s approval 
and you’ll see under item one there it says, well preceding that, 
 
 
“The purpose of the submission is to 1) request the Board to 
20 
 
approve the RFP for financing of 15billion, Annexure A”,  
 
and if you go over to 210 which is under the next tab, I take 
that to be the Annexure A which they were asked to approve is that 
correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Correct. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 44 of 171 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And then if you go back to 207 you’ll see that 
the second thing that the Board is asked to confirm the list of 
counterparties to be included in the RFP and then if I can ask you to 
flick over to 212, is that the Annexure B referred to? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Okay so let’s go down on the page at 207 just 
to understand what the Board was resolving here. You’ve made the 
point earlier that there was already a change at the Audit and Risk 
Committee of the 7billion that you had proposed was required to source 
to a 15billion and you see that reflected, again in the Board’s request 
10 
under A, under three sort of below the midway of the page.  The issuing 
of the RFP for the long-term funding to banking and non-banking 
financial institutions as per Annexure B for the financing of a total 
amount of 15billiion in order to consolidate the current debt portfolio of 
the company, is that what the Board then approved to do? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And then you’ll see under D this point is 
picked up again about who is going to determine who the recipients are 
of the RFP, D records, 
 
“ensure that the RFP is limited to the counterparties that 
20 
 
responded to SAA in the February 2015 RFP”, 
 
Now can we just pause there, that’s the RFP that you were told 
to withdraw? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Right so now they want this RFP that they 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 45 of 171 
 
have approved to go to those very same institutions as well as other 
institutions that can be recommended by the Board members and 
attendees, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   So let’s go to the list and let’s look at who we 
have there if we may, that was at page 212. So tell us about the 
compilation of this list, you indicated that it would include those who 
had responded to the February 2015 RFP and then others, where did 
the other suggested entities come from? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Okay so the first five are 
10 
the banks we normally deal with the Deutsche bank and the others – 
well I won’t say the first five there’s various but not everyone responds, 
so there’s the banks that come in, we opened it to broader banks which 
we don’t normally do like your Goldman Sachs  or HSBC or JP Morgan 
because they normally wouldn’t lend rand directly to SAA they would 
perhaps fund like aircraft and other initiatives within SAA or other 
needs but they were our clients as well so we opened it to them.  The 
latter parts, the ones – the non-banking institutions for instance, the 
(indistinct) Holdings, these were all new clients to us we had – we met 
them all over the time the first coming for unsolicited or at the time of 
20 
the RFP sending in information or just giving the names to either Mr 
Meyer or via Mr – Dr Tambi and those are how we managed to put all 
these together. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And then what happened did you act in 
accordance with the Board’s decision? 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 46 of 171 
 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:    We then did, we sent out 
the RFP, we sent it only to those on this particular list that were there 
and we gave a timeline for them to respond to our – the date we gave 
them, ja closing date was the  2 n d of October to respond to the RFP and 
that gave us time then to analyse all the term sheets once we received 
them then put a formal – we normally put it in a spreadsheet format 
where  you list each of your clients and you list the amounts and the 
duration and the interest rates that they’re prepared to fund SAA and 
that them made into a summary and then we wrote our submission of 
who we should choose.  We normally look at who is the best client that 
10 
offers you the best interest rate and would then offer some interest 
relief for SAA.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Thank you before we get to the details of that 
evaluation, I’d like to deal with page six of your affidavit starting from 
paragraph 33 because there you record what Mr Meyer, at the time, 
recounted to you about a meeting with a potential funder.  Chair Mr 
Meyer is not scheduled to give evidence in this (indistinct) session but 
is more likely than not going to give evidence in the second session so 
to the extent that there is any aspect of hearsay evidence here we 
would ask him to assist us on that. If it becomes such that oral 
20 
evidence is not required he can of course also provide an affidavit but 
what is important is, what Ms Stimpel does in these paragraphs as a 
habit is recounts what you were told by Mr Meyer about his meeting 
with the potential funder is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Correct. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 47 of 171 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And tell us about that, what did Mr Meyer tell 
you? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     So we were called in, we 
were direct reports obviously so from a treasure perspective he would 
call myself and Michael in and – or Lindsay or whoever else.  We were 
called in as a team of managers at the time, he raised his concern 
about the funding, he said that he’s been called to a meeting by one of 
the potential funders on this list and he went to the meeting, obviously 
he thought they were going to discuss how much – how big – the 
maximum amount they could offer or anything like that or they were 
10 
struggling with how to complete the term sheet, he went there and he 
said, he was told that they must ensure that SAA gives this client the 
deal because number one wants this deal to happen.  I frowned and 
asked him, what do you mean and he did explain saying that he was in 
this room and he understood that number one meant to be the 
President at the time, Mr Jacob Zuma.  The client then was Mr 
Jahinrin? Naidoo who worked for – I think the company was either First 
Self? because they were the financial institution at the time and they 
are on the list, I think if you look at the list here First Self Financial 
Services. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   As I, just to be clear, as I record – as I read 
what you have said here at paragraph 33 you indicate that Mr Naidoo 
was present at the meeting but you go on and say, he, Mr Meyer was 
called outside by one of the men present, it’s not clear to me that, 
that’s necessarily Mr Naidoo, is that correct. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 48 of 171 
 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Ja. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Thank you and then …(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:     I’m sorry does that mean you didn’t ask him who 
the other person – who the person was that called him? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     No I didn’t. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You didn’t and he didn’t offer the information? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   At paragraph 34 you indicate what Mr Meyer 
said in response or at least what he relayed to you he said in response, 
10 
what was that? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     That he wasn’t part of the 
contract, I mean – he doesn’t – he’s not part of the decision making 
because it’s done outside the CFO and that it’s done in a team and 
obviously full analysis is done and so he couldn’t play a role in it. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And then at paragraph 35 you talk about the 
fact that he relayed to you that he’d recorded the conversation, tell us 
about that, if you will? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Yes he said he had his 
own personal reservations when he went into the meeting and he had 
20 
got himself a pen which he could record with and he had it in his pocket 
when he went into the meeting so he said he had recorded the full 
meeting. He only told us, who were in his office at the time who he had 
called to this meeting on that morning and I still said, well done, you 
know on it and then we left because we had work to do. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 49 of 171 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And when about in time was this, can you 
recall, when did he give you this feedback about the meeting? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     I think it was around 
October. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   2015? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Ja 2015 correct, before he 
resigned, he resigned in November. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Right and then I’d like to pick it up over the 
page at paragraph 36 because that recording pen has some later 
significance, what do you recount at paragraph 36 there about the 
10 
circumstances preceding Mr Meyer’s departure from SAA? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     There was a Board 
meeting held and they – sometimes it was separate where only the 
Board members attended and they excluded Mr Meyer and at the time I 
think Nico Bezuidenhout was acting CEO and after that sort of in 
meeting – Board meeting, they then called Mr Meyer. When they called 
him, he was then searched by the security, his pen was taken from him 
and he had to hand in his laptop – I think he had to hand in his laptop 
but they had taken his pen at the time from him by the security guard 
as he entered the meeting. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Can I just ask you about that process, was 
that usual that people would have to part with their laptops and pens 
and other devices when they went to attend Board meetings? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     It was most unusual, that’s 
the first time I heard about it, when he told us and we even made a joke 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 50 of 171 
 
later saying, go into meetings with a pencil and not a pen, you know, 
and – but subsequent to that there were – there was a meeting that Ms 
Myeni called to all attendees at National Treasury in February 2016 
when we attended there and also when we came in she – there was 
someone waiting at the door and she said, hand your computer and 
your cell phone to this person and then only we could come into the 
Boardroom and sit down, so that was the first time I’ve seen that.  Even 
at National Treasury, I’ve been there for many meetings, I’ve never had 
to hand in – obviously you go through a scanning process but I never 
had to part with my laptop or my cell phone. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   What did you make of that instruction at the 
time? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     I found it very unusual and 
I found it – ja for me there was the suspicion, how did they know that 
Mr Wolf had a pen which could record and then took it and who would 
take a ball pen from your pocket, so that was a suspicion.  Secondly is, 
I felt that when you – there was obviously something not right going on 
that you start meddling with people’s cell phones or their – and you 
don’t want people to record your conversation or use your laptop for 
whatever reason while you’re in a meeting, thanks. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   The persons as to whom you had to hand over 
these devices, do you recall who they were or what status they had? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     They were security, I don’t 
know them because they’re not familiar to our normal standard security 
that we see at SAA you get to them over the years and you get to know 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 51 of 171 
 
them by name, fortunately I normally don’t go in with my cell phone or 
my laptop so I didn’t have to – they just asked me, do you have 
anything, I said no and I walked through. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   So just to be clear were they not SAA regular 
security personnel? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:    Not that I recognised them 
no. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And you can’t assist us any further as to where 
they may have come from? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     No sorry. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Thank you, you then go to paragraph 37 where 
you record that Mr Meyer left in mid November 2015, what were his 
circumstances when he left? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:   Prior to that there was some 
article in the newspaper regarding Mr Meyer, we had some trapped 
funds, we called it trapped funds within Nigeria, Angolo and in Africa in 
that – because of the oil crisis, remember the price of fuel had gone 
down to 50 dollars at the time and Nigeria and Angola were suffering 
from it because they also – besides using their own domestic currency 
they were also using the Dollar as their legal tender within the country 
20 
which impacted them on their entire operations.  The impact for SAA 
and many other airlines was that we couldn’t get funds out of the 
country either and so there these trapped funds and he was accused 
that he wasn’t managing these trapped funds efficiently within Africa 
but it was written in the negative light and he then had also called a 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 52 of 171 
 
subsequent meeting to that saying that he had gone to see his lawyer 
about it, whether he should challenge this because it was just out there 
in the paper which was deformation to his career and his character and 
his lawyer had advised him to walk away and resign and so he had told 
us, and I only heard that on the day he told us he was resigning, telling 
us that because of what had happened we’d gone to – I’d gone to my 
lawyer he advised me to resign and I find it safer and so I’m going to 
resign and I have already found a subsequent employment.     
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And then at paragraph 38 you record who Mr 
Meyer’s replacement was but that is one point at which I have a note 
10 
that there’s a correction that you want to make, the sentence as it 
reads currently is that, 
 
“Ms Phumeza Nhantsi replaced Mr Meyer as the interim CFO at 
 
the beginning of December 2015” 
 
What is the correction you’d like to make there? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:    She – I’ve confirmed after 
this so my apologies that it’s December but it was the 27 t h of November 
when she started 2015.  
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry what was the date? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     The 27 t h of November 
20 
2015 when Ms Phumeza Nhantsi started at SAA as interim CFO. I put 
the beginning of December because that’s when we met her. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   So we’ll change beginning of December just to 
correctly reflect 27 November 2015, is that right? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Correct. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 53 of 171 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Chair we’re about to move to a new topic and I 
see we’re just in advance of the tea time, happy to take the 
adjournment now if that suits you or shall we continue? 
CHAIRPERSON:    On mine we have five minutes more, I don’t know if 
it’s correct, is yours…(intervention).  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Mine is five but I was moving to a new topic so 
I thought we may want to break otherwise we can proceed 
until…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
 
 
But 
our 
watches 
are 
they 
on 
the 
same…(intervention). 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   They are on the same I am also at ten past 
eleven. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Oh okay, no let’s use the five minutes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Excellent. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Okay.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   We then start in your affidavit with a topic 
headed, responses to the RFP, so just to orientate ourselves because 
we had a bit of an interlude with Mr Meyer’s call to the particular 
funder, at this point in time in your evidence, you’ve had approval of 
the RFP, that had to go before the Board to source 15billion rands 
20 
worth of funding, they’ve approved the list and you’ve gone out, you’ve 
issued that RFP to that list that we saw, Annexure B at page – let me 
just get it again, page 212, is that correct. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And now you enter a part of your evidence in 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 54 of 171 
 
which you talk about the responses to the RFP, can you take us through 
paragraph 39 on page 7 from whom SAA received responses to the 
RFP. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:    So not everyone responded 
to the RFP and we received it from a few banks and the main client that 
was able to supply the full 15billion was SeaCrest, the other client was 
Confedi?, Inovex?, Hamaghla?, Standard Chartered, Absa and Nedbank 
and those were the ones that – the others didn’t fit in that we got but 
these were the main respondees that we got from  the RFP. 
CHAIRPERSON:   One second, sometimes your voice seems to be low 
10 
sometimes it seems to be fine I want to check if everybody can hear. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     It’s probably my voice I’ve 
got a bit of a cold, I do apologise I’ll bring this closer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No it looks like they do hear you it’s okay thank you. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Okay, and I think it’s when 
I turn my head to you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   It might be useful, just in relation to the 
responses to take you to what comes later actually as an Annexure but 
it’s a sort of summary page as I have it of the analysis that was done of 
the responses, you’ll find that at page 256 which is under tab 13 if we 
20 
could just look at this page, could you talk us through what is reflected 
there in relation to the entities as well as what is being evaluated. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     So as we look at this 
summary, the first two pages prior to that which is Annexure A, B and 
then into C, C summarises everything that we have.  So we had to look 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 55 of 171 
 
at the critical criteria at the tie and then the tenure and the funding 
instrument and the currency, so on the left-hand side is the detail of the 
loan. Moving to your right, from left to right is a list of each of the 
clients that responded, so there was SeaCrest Investments that came 
up with the top, they came with the interest rate of 5.8% and they 
offered a full amount of 15billion.  The calculated interest we did then, 
based on the loan, because their loan was fixed at 740million cost for 
SAA, the next was Confedi, Inovex, Humagla, Stand Chart, Absa and 
Nedbank.  If you look at Confedi, they offered a big amount of 2.1billion 
but their base rate was 6.5% meaning that the interest would be 
10 
1.7billion, it wasn’t at the best interest of SAA to go in for higher 
paying interest loan, Inovex offered only 1.62billionn at a rate of 2.5%, 
whereas Humagla also went in 15billion at a 6.5% and they had other 
terms like arrangement fees, upfront fees of 5.25% so that was a fee 
we had to pay for them for advisory so that would have also been 
expensive and then Stand Chart offered the 1.5 and Absa offered 1.3 
there the 6.5 is the Jiba rate at the time which is the Johannesburg 
Interbank offered rate, accepted rate through all the banks and then 
they put on a margin of 2.35, Absa put 2.5, Nedbank offered 1.5 at 6.5 
same Jiba rate and theirs was shorter term. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   We’ll get to this point in due course and 
possible Chair with your leave, after the break. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Yes we’ll take the tea adjournment we’ll resume at 
half past eleven we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 56 of 171 
 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may proceed Mr Hofmeyr. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Stimpel before the break 
we were looking at the analysis table at page 256 where you were 
taking us through the analysis that was done of the various entities 
which had responded to the RFP.  The point I was wanted to pick up on 
just before the break was you have got three banks reflected there in 
the last three columns, Standard, Charter, ABSA and Nedbank and the 
point you were making was that the amounts that they were willing to 
fund came in under the 15 billion.  They were 1.5, 1,5 and 1.3 which if 
10 
my maths will do me justice is 4.3 billion in total, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Now that was less – Mr Stimpel if you would 
not mind just turning on your microphone so that we – sorry your 
answer to that – the 4.3 was the total amount that the banks were 
willing to fund, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  We will come to that in a moment but that was 
less than the total that the RFP had indicated SAA was looking for, is 
that correct? 
20 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That is correct.  Our 
summation of it that if we cannot get the full 15 billion we will then 
work with what we have because we can always go out for another RFP 
or for the amounts we have not covered. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Okay so let us come to that analysis and the 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 57 of 171 
 
position that you then recommended should be adopted in relation to 
this RFP because you are highlighting both that Seacrest Investments 
which is in the first column there was indicating a willingness to fund 
for the full 15 billion and as I look across there had the best rate on 
that 15 billion as compared with the other responders, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then you spoke about an alternative in 
relation to the banks who together were willing to fund 4.3 billion, is 
that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So what was your recommendation after having 
assessed these various responses?  What did you go to board with as a 
recommendation in relation to your assessment? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  So our final recommendation 
after assessing all the – the respondee’s term sheets that we received 
we recommended that Seacrest be chosen for 15 billion because they 
looked at the full consolidated amount and their interest rate was the 
better rate.  However while we were still doing our analysis we did our 
own internal research on Seacrest and we were uncomfortable that we 
could not get enough information and so we asked our legal department 
20 
to do a full due diligence on the client which they did.  The client… 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Stimpel sorry I may just… 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  I am sorry. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  If I may just stop you there I would like to take 
you to precisely where that is recorded in your recommendation.  So let 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 58 of 171 
 
us go to page 226 if we may that is under Tab 12. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Got it. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  This is a document from the Group Treasurer 
that is you, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And it is to the Finance Risk Sub Committee or 
FRSC for short, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct.  This was the first 
one. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Correct.  So this is your first recommendation 
10 
and that is to the Finance Risk Sub Committee.  You made a point in 
your evidence a moment ago about wanting a due diligence? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Hm. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  To be done.  I would like to take you to page 
234 to find that recorded.  If you look at page 234 you will see it begins 
with a heading E Conclusion. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And what you are setting out there is at 
paragraph 25: 
“The secured facility offered by Seacrest emerged as 
20 
the preferred option for SAA as it provides SAA with 
the following benefits” 
And then you list a number of those benefits but at 26 you record there: 
“Before any bid is awarded the necessary due 
diligence will be done on the preferred bidder.” 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 59 of 171 
 
Is that what you were referring to? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Right and then if you go over the page to 235 
you will see your ultimate recommendations being recorded there which 
I take to be consistent with what you have indicated already in your 
testimony.  At paragraph 33 the recommendation reads that: 
“FRSC should mandate the acting Chief Financial 
Officer as chairperson of the FRSC to recommend to 
the SA EXCO for approval of the secured term loan 
financing of 15 billion for a period of ten years 
10 
offered to SAA by Seacrest Investments.” 
And then moving up the levels of at least authority to the SAA audit 
committee and then to the board of directors.  So that is I take it was 
your first choice, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then tell us about 34?  What does 34 cater 
for?  Sorry paragraph 34 on that page.  We were looking at the 
recommendations page 235. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  235 sorry I just went one 
page ahead.   
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So as I have it paragraph 33 … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry is that 335? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  235 Chair the page. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then we were first looking at paragraph 33. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 60 of 171 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Which captured your first choice so to speak in 
terms of the analysis of the funders.  But then at 34 you catered for an 
alternative position and I was asking you to explain that? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct.  So because we 
knew that we still needed to do the due diligence at the time and that 
end we put a contingency in that should Seacrest for whatever reason 
not be approved by board we would then recommend – make a second 
recommendation and we then recommended the combined of the other 
bankers and their total offer of [indistinct] it was 4.3 billion in what they 
10 
had on offer in their term sheets at the time.  So we made a second 
recommendation but as a contingency.  So it is – ja. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then you made reference to the due 
diligence that needed to be conducted.  I would like to take you to that 
if we may?  That you will find at page 274 under Tab 14.  What is this 
document? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  So we had asked our legal 
department to compile a due diligence report on Seacrest because 
when we received Seacrest term sheet we found that they were not 
going to be the providers of the funding directly.  They were using two 
20 
other funders. One was called Mars Capital but on a very small 
percentage and the massive part of this was the – primarily the big 
amount 15 billion from Grissag and so we then asked for them to 
complete and compile a due diligence report and based on that we 
could then recommend them further. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 61 of 171 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   I would like to pick up a few points of that 
report.  If you look at page 274 under the heading “Background” item 2 
background.  In the second paragraph under that heading there is just a 
recount initially about how they were requested to do this due diligence 
and then from the third sentence it reads: 
“It appears from the report that Seacrest and its 
investors are reluctant to release the required 
information and documentation pending the outcome 
of the tender evaluation and announcement of the 
successful bidder.  The requested information and 
10 
documentation is critical in this type of transaction 
for SAA to make an informed decision on the 
contracting parties.  Of more concern to SAA is the 
origin and availability of the funds.” 
And then if you go over the page to 275 there is what I take to be the 
legal review committee’s recommendation in relation to that aspect.  
They recorded the first sentence there: 
“The due diligence process may be finalised post the 
award of the tender and during the contracting 
process and crafting of conditions precedent in the 
20 
agreement.” 
What do you understand that to mean? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That we would first look at 
any conditions that they need to comply with before we even enter into 
a contract.  Should they fail passing that conditions precedent then 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 62 of 171 
 
there would no agreement and no transaction. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And it goes on I think correctly to reflect your 
understanding because what I take the review committee to have done 
is to prepare a draft agreement for the proposed transaction with 
Seacrest and with a copy of that attached.  Now oddly we have to go 
backwards in the papers to find that attached agreement because it was 
in fact inserted after your previous analysis document.  If you would go 
backward to 258 in the papers?  That is under Tab 13.   
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  I have it. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So you will see that is a page marked Seacrest 
10 
Investments Loan Agreement and it appears to be a draft of an 
agreement that would be entered into between Seacrest Investments 
and South African Airways SOC Limited.  I would like to take you to 
page 263 because that is where the very conditions precedent that we 
were looking at in the summary of the legal review appeared to have 
been incorporated in the draft of the agreement.  Do you see Clause 7 
there is headed “Conditions Precedent”?  So we are at page 263. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  263 okay.  Hm. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  If you look at Clause 7 on that page it is 
headed Conditions Precedent and then you see further down from 7.1 
20 
and 7.2 what appeared to be a whole host of track changed additional 
conditions precedent that have been added to the draft agreement.  Let 
us just look at those because recall as we looked at the legal review 
what they were concerned about as we have it from their report is that 
they could not get more information about the sourcer funds, what was 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 63 of 171 
 
in a sense standing behind Seacrest as the funder and so their 
proposal was during the negotiation process you could secure SAA’s 
position by adding as conditions precedent to the agreement these very 
aspects.  As a legal matter if they were not fulfilled the agreement 
would not come to operate.  So let us go through some of them.  They 
wanted at 7.2.2 a certified copy of the resolution of the board of 
directors of the lender.  So they wanted some satisfaction it appears as 
to the board of directors approving the terms on which the transaction 
was to be fulfilled.  At 7.4 over the page – no 7.4 deals with the 
borrower.  Let us rather go to 7.5 they wanted original copies of a 
10 
report from an insurance advisor certifying that all required insurances 
would be in place.  At 7.6 they wanted copies of all cover notes and 
statements issued in respect of insurances required to be in place.  
They wanted at 7.7 evidence that the bank account had been opened 
with the bank and that all applicable mandates were in place.  They 
wanted at 7.9 oddly numbered because it comes of order the approval 
of the credit committees and boards of directors of each funder of the 
grant of the facilities to the borrower.  The next 7.8 they wanted such 
document and other evidence as is reasonably requested by the facility 
agent to carry out and be satisfied that it complied with all necessary 
20 
know your customer and similar identification procedures under 
applicable laws and regulations under the FIC Act.  What would that 
have to do with?  Why would know your customer and similar 
identification be relevant? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Because you needed to know 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 64 of 171 
 
who you were dealing with.  We did raise the concern that if we were 
getting 15 billion from a non-financial institution and it was a client we 
could not trace any further information just by googling the general 
rudimentary type of research we needed to know that this money was 
kosher money and above board that it was not money that could be 
money laundering or coming through drug money or things like that. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So that is as I understand it what you regard 
7.8 as being directed towards. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Then at 7.9 there is even a condition related to 
10 
the Reserve Bank.  A certified copy of approvals from the financial 
surveillance department of the South African Reserve Bank on terms 
acceptable to the borrower.  Why would the Reserve Bank be relevant 
at all in this funding? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  From a financial institution 
perspective our Reserve Bank keeps a close I would say control and 
oversight on the banks and so therefore they are a stable company to 
get information from regarding your finders and so because this client 
we did not know we recommended that we get something from the 
Reserve Bank.  They should have been listed if they going to be 
20 
lending any amounts – huge amounts to borrowers. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Would the Reserve Bank also have been 
relevant if the funds were coming from outside South Africa? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That would be dollars then 
you apply because there is the FICA Act which complies internationally 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 65 of 171 
 
as well. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Hm. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  And the Reserve Bank does 
play a role.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then at 7.10 they wanted certified copies 
of the latest audited consolidated financial statements of the investors 
and the latest audited consolidated financial statements of the funders.  
What I read behind that is that is what they were not able to get out of 
10 
Seacrest at the time that they were required to do the review.  Is that a 
fair summary? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes Chair that is – yes we 
were – there was a list of issues that they were unable to comply with 
and hence we were uncomfortable with the final due diligence. 
ADV 
KATE 
HOFMEYR: 
 
So 
as 
I 
have 
your 
evidence 
the 
recommendation initially that we looked at was to go for Seacrest first 
the fall-back position was the consolidation of the three banks 
proposals. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Hm. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But that was coupled in the case of Seacrest 
with the need to do a due diligence, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  We then have the legal review report which 
similarly as we read it raised concerns about the level of information 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 66 of 171 
 
they were able to obtain but does record that the recommendation is 
that the due diligence process can be finalised post the award of the 
tender and during the contracting process by building in protections as 
conditions precedent, is that as you understood it? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And what then did you do in relation to the next 
round of approvals that you needed? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  So after the next round was 
through the EXCO committee which is our executive committee and we 
put our normal submissions through listing again the Seacrest and our 
10 
second choice being the banks combined and we also had a copy of the 
due diligence report by then which we had tabled at the EXCO and 
stated that we were not comfortable with the result of the due diligence 
at the time.  At the EXCO meeting it was decided to still put forward the 
recommendation through to board because we are covered in the due 
diligence that we will set the conditions precedent and that we would 
still minimise the risk for SAA should Seacrest not fulfil the final due 
diligence and then that would be completely out and we would then 
focus on the – the second recommendation with the combined banks. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Stimpel. 
20 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  As I read paragraph 43 of your statement which 
is at page 8 you record there that you queried at that EXCO whether 
you should not exclude Seacrest completely or still keep them in the 
recommendation and attach the due diligence report.  Give us a sense 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 67 of 171 
 
of your misgivings at the time and why in the end despite those 
misgivings you went with the broad EXCO decision to recommend 
Seacrest? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Okay.  Based on – thank you 
Chair.  Based on – firstly me being old school is that we have always 
worked we had a history of working with banks and we knew how the 
banks funded.  There was always right up front we knew – their legal 
team, our legal team and we worked closely with National Treasury’s 
legal team when it came to working the agreements.  They understood 
the funding process and with Seacrest coming up it was great that they 
10 
could fund SAA with the full 15 billion however my personal 
uncomfortableness arose from the fact that one was the due diligence 
was not really complete and I still was not sure who Grissag was and 
how could they be funding and where they were sourcing their funds 
from?  And then thirdly why I put it to EXCO the time was can we then 
just go with the banks and put a recommendation was that they had 
said we had been tasked by board to bring in third parties so let us go 
ahead with that.  We still protecting SAA at some degree because once 
we have got the conditions precedent in we have limited the risks that 
SAA would face.  So but my personal view was if I had to make the 
20 
decision alone yes I would have not gone with Seacrest.  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You then record at paragraph 44 that that same 
recommendation that you made initially to the financial risk committee 
is then placed before the board  Just to give you that reference if you 
turn to page 244 which is under Tab 13 you will have your as I have it 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 68 of 171 
 
submission to the board of directors.  Can you confirm if that is 
correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Okay.  I have it.  Yes it is. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And as you say at paragraph 44 in essence this 
is the same recommendation, go with Seacrest first if Seacrest fails 
then go to the consolidation of the banks.  Is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And you will find that just for the record at 251.  
And I see that reflected under paragraph 32, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So you now at Ms Stimpel the 27 November 
2015 that is the date that appears on the first page of that submission 
that you did for the board of directors.  Is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And you have been through something of a 
process by this stage.  You tried one RFP in February 2015 it had to be 
withdrawn.  You then are instructed to do a further RFP you go through 
that process.  You get response.  You analyse them and this culminates 
in this submission to the board on the 27 November 2015, right.  We 
now are going to move to what then happens and what decision the 
20 
board took after this really year long process by this stage.  And for 
that purpose we should turn to paragraph 45 on page 8 of your 
statement.  If you go back to the statement – oh the affidavit at least.  
Well let us start with your expectations for this board meeting.  What 
did you assume you would hear the following week after you sent this 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 69 of 171 
 
detailed submission to the board? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  After the board meeting my 
expectations would have been that the board would have either have 
approved the Seacrest or turn Seacrest down and approved the 
consolidated banks and if they did not want that either they would have 
then instructed us to go out on another RFP and see what else is out 
there.  Because that is what I would have expected. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Right that is now what occurred is it? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  No. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So you detail in paragraph 45 what did occur 
10 
and can you tell the Chair what then eventuated?  Ms Stimpel if I may 
just ask you to come closer to the microphone or bring it closer to you 
just so that we get you adequately on record.  Thank you. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Okay.  What happened is 
that the board meeting did take place on the 3 December Chair and 
subsequent to that I had followed up which is a normal thing we do.  
We follow up with companies’ secretaries’ office to get the board 
resolutions.  Once we get the board resolutions we then implement 
whatever the resolution is.  And on the Monday when I came into the 
office I followed up on whether we have a board resolution yet on the 
20 
funding and I was told no not yet.   
CHAIRPERSON:  And the Monday would have been what date if you 
remember?  The board meeting was on the 3 December? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  I think it was the 7 
December. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 70 of 171 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay more or less. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  I will check that Chair. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  We can check it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Please continue and I will give you that in a 
moment. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Thanks.  Thanks.  And we – 
when we did get the board resolution it was really unusual for me to 
see this in that the board resolution was stated that our first 
recommendation 
to 
Seacrest 
was 
declined. 
 
The 
second 
10 
recommendation for the consolidated banks was also declined and then 
the third part it makes a recommendation for us to go with funding for a 
company called FDC which was Free State Development Corporation 
and authority is given or the mandate is given to the acting CEO and 
the interim CFO to go ahead and sign the deals and make sure that this 
loan happens. And then it mentions because of a letter which was 
circulated at board and that immediately I questioned because I said, 
how can a letter that did not go through the formal process of the RFP 
process and now come to board and a decision is made on that letter. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Stimpel if we may? 
20 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  .Could we go to the letter just while you are at 
it. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  In your testimony.  Let us go to page 287 that 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 71 of 171 
 
is under Tab 15.    
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  I have it. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Stimpel it is often necessary with witnesses 
so I will be doing this a lot in the next few weeks to clarify what you 
had knowledge of at the time and what you have subsequently gained 
knowledge of.  At the time of this board decision on the 3 December 
had you seen this letter? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  No.  The first time I saw this 
letter was through the Zondo investigators when I was called in to give 
my testimony and then with them and myself working together to put 
10 
through evidence they showed me this letter.  So that was the first time 
I got to know about this letter. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Okay let us… 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Thank you Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Let us focus on it if we may for a moment?  
This is a letter dated the 2 December 2015 from the Free State 
Development Corporation to South African Airways authored by Mr 
Moyo and it records that the Free State Development Corporation is a 
schedule 3D company in terms of the PFMA.  The corporation offers 
financial and non-financial support in terms of the FDC Act and 
20 
subsequent – it goes on subsequent to our discussion this is addressed 
you will see your reference at the top right hand corner records P 
Nhantsi as the reference.  That is a reference to the interim CFO at the 
time Ms Nhantsi who will be giving evidence before the commission 
next week.  It says: 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 72 of 171 
 
“Subsequent to our discussion regarding funding that 
we provide we are in the process of exploring a joint 
venture between FDC and a foreign investor through 
its newly formed subsidiary in the Free State.” 
And it records that the investor has indicated that:  
“There is an appetite for government owned entities 
such as SAA who require funding.  This is a first of 
its kind within FDC but we would like to explore this 
opportunity and provide such funding to yourselves.  
This is subject to investor agreements reached and 
10 
also PFMA approvals sought.  I will keep you 
informed if this materialises and we will negotiate 
terms at that point in time.  The funder has indicated 
that it is low cost funding but this matter is under 
discussion.  I envisage this to be between 3% and 
6%.  Please note that as we discussed this letter is 
not a commitment but one of the solutions we may 
explore in future together.  I look forward to 
engaging you further as we progress on this matter.” 
Ms Stimpel your comments on that letter would this have been enough 
20 
if you were sitting on the board to motivate you to decline the 
recommendations that had come through a process and give a decision 
to sign an agreement with FDC? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  No I would not have because 
I think Boards should be clued up enough to know what the mandate of 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 73 of 171 
 
Free State is firstly and – and then if one looked at the rate.  It was 
three – to 6 percent.  They were only – this was an exploratory letter 
the way I see it and not a firm commitment and they even state this is 
not a commitment. 
So for Board to have made that decision and put it into a 
Board Resolution showed immediately that they had – they obviously 
wanted FDC in without going through the proper governance process.  
So no I would not have done it, thanks. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  We will look at that Board Resolution … 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  In a moment, but you made a point about the 
Board knowing the mandate of the FDC and I would like to pick that up 
because that mandate is clearly indicated Chair in the governing 
statute that creates the FDC.  We have included it in C – Bundle C – of 
Ms Stimpel’s evidence and you will find it there at page 904.  It is 
under the tab A2. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I got it. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And Ms Stimpel if you go over the page to 905 
you will see Section 3 of that Act talks about the main objects of the 
corporation.  I am going to come back to Section 3.  I would like to 
20 
start over the page at Section 4 because Section 4 defines the capacity 
and powers of the corporation and what is relevant is that it defines 
that capacity and powers with reference to the main object stated in 
Section 3.  You will see there that Section 4 reads: 
“The corporation shall have the capacity determined 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 74 of 171 
 
by the main objects.” 
So when we want to work out what legal capacity the FDC has to 
engage in activities whether funding or otherwise we must look to its 
main objects under Section 3 and if we go to Section 3 you will see that 
its objects and we will go through them do not appear to include … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is quite strange that Section 4 says: 
“…the capacity is determined by the main objects.” 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Hm. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because objects and capacity are different things. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed, indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You must have capacity in order to … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  To pursue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do something to achieve the objects. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed, indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So how do you look at the objects to determine 
capacity? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair as I read it what – what Section 4 is 
seeking to signal is that that capacity which the corporation has is 
20 
within the limits of the objects it is required to pursue within Section 3.  
So in other words no capacity beyond what those objects identify as 
that which the corporation must engage in.  It – it seems to me the only 
way sensibly to read the two but I agree it is unusual to define capacity 
with reference to object. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 75 of 171 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, if – I mean particularly if one is thinking of legal 
capacity … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  It does seem to signify legal capacity whereas 
objects are usually aims and … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, I mean … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Objectives of an – of an entity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Certainly the approach that was subsequently 
10 
taken by National Treasury and others … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Was that the objects of the corporation did not 
extend to the type of funding that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  FDC was to engage in. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And – and Chair the reason for that is if we 
look at 3A to F you will see a keen emphasis on activities within the 
Free State.  This is of course the Free State Development Corporation 
20 
and it also has an emphasis on development of small, medium and 
micro enterprises neither of which are SAA. 
A is - under Section 3A promotion and development of SMEs.  
B is to assist the Free State based small, medium and micro 
enterprises with funding.  C is to assist Free State based small, 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 76 of 171 
 
medium and micro enterprises in financial distress.  D is to initiate 
economic empowerment projects that would benefit the Free State. 
E refers to promoting investment and trade in the province 
and F talks about undertaking at the request of the responsible Minister 
activities which in summary will contributing to strengthening of the 
provincial economy.  So those objects … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Give a clear reference point to activities within 
the province small and micro enterprises there and in a sense acting 
with funding and financial assistance within the province. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Effectively it maybe that in order to give meaning to 
Section 4 one must read Section 3 as powers rather than objects. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Powers of the – of the corporation - what it may or 
may not do. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair it seems to me to be the only sensible 
way … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  To read them together.  In essence when it 
says the objects of the corporation it could as easily have said the 
20 
capacity or the powers or the corporation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or the functions or the powers, ja. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed, could be. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 77 of 171 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair that and that is – we will hear in 
Ms Stimpel’s testimony in due course what appears to have been the 
attitude taken by National Treasury on the question but Ms Stimpel for 
now you – you raise the concern well who is the FDC and what is their 
mandate and as I understand your testimony had you been sitting on 
the Board that would have been one of the questions that you ask.  Is 
that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Well let us look at the Board decision itself 
10 
because I would like to take you through some aspects of it.  It is 
relevant in – will be relevant in due course Chair also to the evidence 
of Ms Nhantsi because she deals with this also in some detail.  You will 
find that resolution – well at least an excerpt from the draft minutes 
which record the decision of the Board in the A file which we were 
working with previously under Tab 16 at page 289. 
Chair just for the purposes of the record we have confirmed 
that that Monday that Ms Stimpel referred to was 7 December. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So if we can look at that excerpt is this 
20 
something that you saw at the time?  Were you provided with this? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  The Board Resolution? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  I had to ask for it. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But you did see it back in December 2015? 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 78 of 171 
 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes, I did. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Unlike the letter which I understand your 
testimony to be you were showed in the course of your engagements 
whit the Commission’s investigators.  Is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That is correct Chair.  I only 
saw the Board Resolution.  I did not get to see the FDC letter. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Did you ask for the FDC letter at the time? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  I did.  I did ask because I 
wanted to see what was stated in it and I was told that it was part of 
Board and I did not need to see it. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Okay.  So let us look at the resolution because 
there are three parts to it.  It starts with the Board’s reason for 
declining the Seacrest offer which is the one that your – you and your 
team had recommended first and as I read it there they say under A: 
“The Board of Directors resolve to decline the 
secured term loan facility of 15 billion for a period 
of 10 years offered to SAA by Seacrest Investment 
for the consolidation of the current debt portfolio of 
the company …” 
And now comes the reason. 
20 
“…due to the lack of information in the Due 
Diligence Report and the reluctance by Seacrest to 
provide proof as to the source and availability of 
funds.” 
What is your take on that decision Ms Stimpel?  Would you support it?  
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 79 of 171 
 
Would you disagree with it? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  I would have supported it 
with the information of the Due Diligence Report, yes indeed and also 
reluctance of Seacrest to give us proof of where the funds were coming 
from.  So yes I would have supported that. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Would the conditions precedent in the 
agreement not have been enough to satisfy you that SAA was protected 
or would you still have been cautious? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  I would have still been 
cautious and with Board giving the final directive on this then tells me 
10 
okay but I would have been far more cautious especially since they a 
non-banker. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Okay and then let us go to B because B deals 
with your alternative, right and what - I think - you described earlier as 
the old school approach to this analysis of your responses.  What did 
they decide at B? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL: 
 
So 
in 
B 
we 
made 
a 
recommendation for the consolidated of the banks Chair but this was 
also declined based on that the funds offered would be not sufficient to 
consolidate the debt.  So the total debt would have been like 4.3 that 
20 
the consolidated banks would have been able to provide and it meant 
us going out again for another RFP.  I did not have an issue with that. 
I felt that this one could have been recommended because we 
knew the banks.  We knew how they work.  They had an efficient legal 
team and we knew that the funds once that agreement is signed today 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 80 of 171 
 
tomorrow the funds are in our account.  We do not have to wait lengthy 
day’s etcetera and so it was crucial for SAAs cash management that we 
needed to have those funds at the time as well. 
So the fact that they declined it that it was not sufficient for 
me was not – I was not – I was very uncomfortable because I felt that 
we could have gone in another RFB.  We take what we can get now and 
then we just put out for the balance that we do not have, thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Did you attend that meeting on 3 December? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  No.  Normally I do attend the 
Board Meetings.  I – especially when it comes to either the funding or 
10 
hedge proposals if we are doing any hedging and – and then 
Mr Wolf Meyer was there or with the previous CFO Kaushik Patel or 
whoever I attended and presented at Board Meetings. 
This particular Board Meeting was one of the first that 
Ms Nhantsi was attending and she gave me a directive not to attend 
this meeting.  She said be at your desk and be on standby.  If I need 
you I will call you and that is what I did.  I stayed at my desk waiting 
for a call.  I did not attend that meeting because I was not called to 
that meeting. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Were you called on at any point to attend? 
20 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  No Chair.  I was not called at 
all to attend the meeting that day or any subsequent days. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And this explanation that you have given now 
about in a sense banking the 4.3 billion because it would alleviate the 
immediate pressing difficulties of SAA and then going out on another 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 81 of 171 
 
RFP.  Do you have any knowledge as to whether that was put to the 
Board in the course of its discussions? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  I was not present and also I 
do not have access to the minutes of the Board Meeting at that time 
Chair.  So I would not know if that was discussed at all. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  I intend to go to the Board Minutes in due 
course because we have managed to source them Chair but for present 
purposes we can certainly state that the minutes do not reflect any of 
that sort of discussion.  Chair that does not mean it did not take place. 
 
The minutes are sometimes an abridged version of course but 
10 
had you been there – let us put it that way Ms Stimpel – had you been 
there when you learnt that the Board was intending to decline your 
second alternative would you have made these points to the Board? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Chair I would have.  I am – I 
am quite forthright in – in stating certain things and especially if it is at 
the best interest of the organisation.  So I would have stated that, yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then let us move to C because C captures 
the Board’s decision in relation to the FDC proposal.  It is fairly 
important in my view to – to look at this language particularly because 
there is some debate as to what the Board actually decided at this 
20 
meeting but let us look at it.  C records that: 
“The Board approved that the interim CFO and 
Acting CEO urgently take the necessary steps to 
negotiate, conclude, execute and sign and/or 
dispatch all documents and notices related to the 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 82 of 171 
 
14 billion loan offer received from a potential funder 
Free State Development Corporation SOC Limited 
(FDC) as per the letter circulated at the Board 
Meeting.” 
So let us stop there.  What do you understand that to be saying? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  How I understood it from day 
1 having read this Board Resolution that Board is giving approval to the 
Acting CFO and the – and CEO and CFO at the time to go ahead with a 
14 billion loan with a client where – that did not come through the 
normal RFP process and based on a letter that was circulated at Board. 
10 
For me that and hence the reason I asked to see the letter.  I 
thought it was term sheet that was put forward and therefore Board 
could do comparisons because in our document they would have 
already - attached in our annexures was the final outcome that analysis 
we went through earlier was attached in the annexures. 
So they could have done comparisons and maybe that is the 
reason they made the decision but I was not privy to see that letter and 
hence my conclusion was that this is not done according to our due 
process – our corporate governance process and I was extremely 
uncomfortable with it. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Stimpel let us look at the reason given 
which is the last sentence of that paragraph C for the Board selecting 
Free State Development Corporation because I would like to have your 
comment on the reason that was given from the Board.  Of course had 
you been at the meeting you might have been able to give it then but 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 83 of 171 
 
that was not to be.  Let us look at paragraph C the last sentence: 
“The Board recognised that as a State Owned Entity 
the FDC carried less risk for the airline and in the 
unlikely event of default by SAA another SOC would 
treat SAA differently than a private lender.” 
Ms Stimpel as I read that there - there are two statements being 
conveyed there.  I would like to focus on the first.  The first as I read it 
is that the Board recognised that the FDC carried less risk for the 
airline.  What would be your comment on that?  Would you have agreed 
with that determination by the Board? 
10 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Chair no, I would not have 
agreed with that because one is looking at also a similar basket of 
risks.  So you have got FDC who is part of Government.  You have got 
SAA which is a state owned company.  For – for them to be lending SAA 
we concentrating the risk within Government.  So I do not see it as a 
lesser risk at all. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then they went on as I read this to give 
their second reason which is their sense that in the unlikely event of 
default by SAA another SOC would treat SAA differently than a private 
lender.  What would be your comment on that rationale? 
20 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  I think when one goes into 
funding or any – ja – you build a relationship Chair and so with – I 
cannot see that FDC would have treated SAA any differently.  What I do 
see is that the impact – the knock on effect of the whole funding say 
SAA does default it will immediately maybe cripple FDC – who knows 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 84 of 171 
 
what would happen.  So what is the impact on the overall funding of 
Government or the overall impact of all the loans that SA – that South 
Africa has?  So I disagree with that completely that comment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And they say in paragraph C that: 
“They approve that the Acting CEO and Interim CFO 
urgently take the necessary steps to negotiate, 
conclude, execute and sign and/or dispatch all 
documents and (indistinct) related to the R14 billion 
loan 
offer 
received 
from 
the 
Free 
State 
Development Corporation.” 
10 
Was there another document other than the one we have looked at 
which had come from the Free State Corporation?  We – we looked at 
the one I think at 278 – 278 which said among other things this is not a 
commitment.  Was there another document that had come from that 
corporation other than that one? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Thank you Chair.  At the time 
there was none besides this letter.  There could have been other 
communication between Mr Moyo and Ms Nhantsi that I am not aware of 
but no other sort of commitment about the transaction of 14 billion that 
I know of.  What we did is that I took this document back to our 
20 
Financial Risk Subcommittee, circulated it to them and we – I listed my 
reservations on it and said – and made recommendations saying that 
we need to send the RFP out to FDC. 
They need to complete it like every other respondee has 
done.  Once they have completed it we will do a full comparison and 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 85 of 171 
 
once the comparison is done we are able to do that.  Based on that our 
FRAC Agreed and that is how we sent the RFP out.  I recall even 
having an argument with my deputy at the time who felt that we should 
just follow this Board Resolution to the letter and I said no this is not – 
this is inaccurate. 
I am not prepared to follow it the way it is and hence we will 
rather let the FRE – the RFP go out to FDC.  So we did.  On that 
agreement we sent it out to them sometime in December and they 
responded by 24 December and yes we do have a full term sheet from 
FDC, thanks Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  So when in paragraph C at page 289 the minutes say 
that: 
“Refer to a loan – a R14 billion loan offer received 
as per a letter that was circulated at the Board 
Meeting.” 
Is that a reference to the letter at page 287 which says? 
“This is not a commitment.” 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes sir, thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is – it is a reference to that letter? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  But is that not strange because I do not see any 
reference to R14 billion in that letter?  Do you see it? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  There is no amount stated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  There is no tenure stated. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 86 of 171 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  There is a range of three to 
6 percent only and just the openers that they were willing to fund. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you know where the amount or where the Board 
was taking the amount of R14 billion from to which they referred in 
their minutes? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  We had put through - the 
initial amount we had put through Chair was 15 billion.  For Board to 
write the 14 billion I felt it was probably a typing error because – ja.  
They just put 14 billion.  When we went out to and sent the RFP out to 
10 
FDC we sent it out on a 15 billion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But the – but the Free State Development Corporation 
had never in – as far as you know – in writing offered a R14 billion 
amount loan? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Not that I am aware of Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But also the minutes talk about there having been an 
offer.  So this letter being an offer - is it an offer?  Was it an offer from 
the Free State Corporation as you understand it? 
20 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Chair that is not as I 
understand it.  It is definitely not an offer.  It was not a firm 
commitment and they did not come and say we can offer you this 
amount for this rate fixed at this cost.  Even they have a line there 
saying it is not a firm commitment. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 87 of 171 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But how is it possible that a whole Board could make 
a resolution that talks about the R14 billion offer on the basis of a 
letter.  One that does not refer to such an amount.  Two that clearly 
says this is not a commitment?  Is that something you are able to 
explain or you are also not able to understand? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Sir I can only … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or maybe you have insight as to how they could have 
… 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes Chair I can … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Talked like that? 
10 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL: 
 
Perhaps 
look 
at 
the 
constitution of the Board at the time … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  And that would give you an 
indication of how decisions were made. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  So the constitution consisted 
of Chairperson being Ms Dudu Myeni.  Ms Kwinana – Yakhe Kwinana 
and Ms – Dr Tambi and then Ms Nhantsi and Mr Zwane. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Apologies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and – and I see they already say the Interim CFO 
and the Acting CEO must go ahead and do everything and sign and 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 88 of 171 
 
execute. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Without seeing any further information that they 
would have needed to see to have a commitment of – of this nature with 
any entity. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Exactly Chair and that is 
what concerned me … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Because there was no letter 
forthcoming.  I asked for a term sheet.  There was no term sheet 
10 
forthcoming.  There was – I was even asked to ratify this Board 
Resolution … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  And I said no I am not doing 
anything until I get the full – well not the Board Resolution.  To ratify 
the decision of FDC and once I received the Board Resolution and saw 
that it was – the decision was made via a letter which I was not able to 
see I was very uncomfortable and I stated that and hence with the 
FRAC we said we will follow due process rather.  We will rather send 
out another RFP because our recommendation was scrap everything 
20 
and start again. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Or send out an RFP to FDC 
then do your comparisons and they said to save time let us just send 
the RFP out which we did and only based on that once we received the 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 89 of 171 
 
RFP back from FDC will we able to then assess where they could fit in 
with the comparisons of the other respondees. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Thanks Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Ms Stimpel you – you recorded that 
and your reservations about it in an email on 9 December.  You made 
reference to it a moment ago.  It is at page 291.  That appears to be we 
now know the Wednesday of the week because 7 December was the 
Monday and as I read that email you are recording some of the very 
reservations that you recount to us now about how this could possibly 
10 
work in a way that would follow process.  Is - is that a fair summary of 
your concern? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And if we go back to your affidavit at page 9 
paragraph 49 that is where you recount what you have just indicated in 
your testimony about the instruction from Ms Nhantsi that you ratify 
that the FDC be appointed and you record there that you refused and 
you told her that you were not willing to take any instruction without the 
receiving the Board Resolution.  I assume that is because that 
conversation happened prior to your actually seeing the Board 
20 
Resolution.  Is that right? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then as I have it just in time you got the 
Board Resolution and then you write this email because now you have 
got the Board Resolution.  It is telling you to go and appoint on the 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 90 of 171 
 
basis of a letter and your email sets out your concerns about how you 
could possibly do this in a regular process.  Is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct.  I even state there 
that we need to reopen the RFP tender and then add FDC and send it 
out to them. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Well what did happen in terms of procedure?  
What – what did you do after receiving the Board Resolution? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  So once we received the 
Board Resolution Chair we then did send the RFP out.  In fact it took us 
a couple of days to get the contact details of Mr Moyo because none of 
10 
us were – of my team were in contact with Mr Moyo from FDC and we 
had written emails and called Ms Nhantsi who eventually gave us the 
email address and my colleague – Michael Klein – then sent the RFP to 
Mr Moyo and gave him two weeks to respond and he did respond by 
24 December and thereafter we did our analysis. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thanks.  Ms Stimpel if you go to page 10 of 
your affidavit you will see at paragraph 53 you say there: 
“There was a concern that we were already acting 
outside proper procurement governance processes 
because of the Board involvement and the fact that 
20 
the deadline …” 
I assume that is a reference to the deadline on the RFP. 
“…had long passed.” 
You say: 
“I asked Ms Nhantsi if I could see the FDC 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 91 of 171 
 
document.  She told me that I could not as it was 
circulated at Board Meeting and there was no need 
for me to see it.  I therefore had no idea what was 
contained in the process.  I had no name, no 
contact number, no email.  I had no evidence that 
FDC had even made representations.” 
 
I would just like to ask you to pause at that first sentence and 
Chair this is another aspect that comes up in the contrary versions in 
the cross-examination application.  So I would like to put it to 
Ms Stimpel for her – her response.  Ms Stimpel you are criticised for on 
10 
the one hand earlier on in your affidavit making the point that funding 
was an aspect governed by the Funding Policy of SAA at the time and 
not Supply Chain Management Policies but then later in your affidavit 
and I would suggest that this is an example saying that you were 
concerned about procurement process being followed.  What is your 
response to that criticism? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     So from a funding 
perspective, historically SAA’s always gone through the treasury 
department for funding and our own set of governance approvals and 
committees.  My concern here was one that Board has actually dictated 
20 
that they wanted to be involved in the RFP that it needed to be 
approved, then they dictated that they wanted to add some entities to it 
and then the third thing was for them now to actually add a new client 
when we’ve already completed RFP process and bring a client right at 
the end and say, go ahead with this client.  So those were my concerns 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 92 of 171 
 
that we weren’t following the proper governance process. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Thank you, at paragraph 54 you talk about the 
financial position of SAA as you approach the end of 2015 and that 
does become relevant later in terms of questions of urgency in 
procuring this funding, can you tell us what that financial position was 
in December 2015? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     So at that time we had 
government guarantees with National Treasury of roughly about 
14billion Chair and SAA had borrowed roughly about 11billion so we 
still had 3billion unutilised guarantees.  So it meant we could still use 
10 
it, SAA were going through a process where they were to meet all their 
obligations they were going into a tight cash crunch and therefore 
needed to ensure that we could borrow money.  The current and 
existing loans that they had at the time, towards the  end of 2015 were 
all coming up for maturity, as we read in the previous – there was one 
for November, then – and earlier and later – early in the new year so 
those were coming up for maturity but once you borrowed the funds and 
you’re only rolling-over debt it’s not new money coming in to your bank 
account and so the 3billion is what we still had which we could borrow 
and use and hence if one looked at the new proposals put by their 
20 
consolidated debt part would be rolled-over and the other part would 
have been new debt to add to it, so we would have had new money 
coming in to SAA’s bank account.  With the Board holding back and for 
us to go out again on the RFP and with the FTC meant we delayed the 
process of borrowing and we now had to go through the process again 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 93 of 171 
 
but with SAA being in the crisis situation of needing cash to meet it’s 
obligations we made the recommendation and this also had to go to 
Board so the same process we put to Board and we explained we need 
the money now so now we would like a bridging finance, while on the 
side the long-term finance is happening.  We will go short-term finance, 
a bridging finance for three months and we went the first – in December 
for 1billion and in, I think the end of January we borrowed another 
billion and end of March we borrowed another billion so that’s how we 
used the 3billion during that time. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And from whom were those funds borrowed? 
10 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  The banks –sorry they were 
from the banks so it was Standard Chartered, gave the fist 2billion and 
Citi Bank gave the last.    
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   I’ve just noticed it now Ms Stimpel but I 
assume at 54, Citi Bank there is spelt incorrectly it should be with an i 
is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:    Correct.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   It’s not a new banking entity of which we were 
not previously aware, we’ll make that change at page 10.  Ms Stimpel 
you then go on at the bottom of page 10 to talk about the process.  
20 
You’ve already indicated in your testimony that your colleague, Mr 
Michael Kline sent out an invitation, now once you’ve been able to 
secure the FDC details, as I have it, he sends out a proposal – well a 
request for a response to the proposal to FDC is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Correct. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 94 of 171 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And then at 56 you talk about a concern that 
was raised from the legal department of SAA can you tell us about that? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Yes because we have a 
cross-functional sourcing team, especially with the funding, we have 
our legal person, was Ephraim Lusenga and everything we’ve done 
regarding funding he’s copied on and very closely involved and he 
raised the question when the FDC issue came up whether a legal due 
diligence was done and can it be conducted on it.  He had written in the 
email which we had also collated and Mr Nhantsi had  said that it will 
be conducted, he confirmed that. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Ms Stimpel isn’t that the wrong way round 
thought, it seems to me odd, and I’d like your comment on this, that the 
Board decides to approve a funding offer but we don’t seem to have 
evidence of the offer in the letter, which is the only letter we’re aware 
of having been circulated to the Board, decides that they must empower 
people to conclude that transaction but then a week or so later the due 
diligence is going to be done, is that unusual? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     That is very unusual 
because everything that goes to Board, you should have done all the 
groundwork so you would have had your due diligence done because 
20 
you’re making a recommendation, a final recommendation and that 
should have been done already and then presented to Board, so that 
they can make an informed decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That – those minutes of that Board meeting, I didn’t 
understand them to even be to the effect that the interim CFO when the 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 95 of 171 
 
acting CFO should conclude an agreement if certain agreements are 
met, like if due diligence, you know, revealed that everything was okay, 
is that your understanding as well that, that authority given to the 
interim CFO and to the acting CEO was not subject to any requirement 
or conditions being met? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Yes Chair, I agree, there 
was nothing written in the Board resolution of that, it was just giving 
them complete authority to go ahead and transact the deal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that must have been quite risky and dangerous 
for the Board to authorise something like that in circumstances where it 
10 
was not saying the homework must be done first to satisfy SAA that 
everything would be in order if it had a commitment with the Free State 
Corporation. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Your summation is correct 
Chair, exactly. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Ms Stimpel you referenced the fact that when 
Mr Lusenga raised this concern, and just for record purposes you’ll find 
his email at page 303, that is under tab 20, you’ll see at the middle of 
that page there’s an email from Mr Lusenga to Mr Kline, Ms Nhantsi 
and you are amongst the copied recipients in which he says, 
20 
 
“Dear Michael, are we going to conduct a legal and financial 
 
due diligence on FDC”,  
 
And then the response from Ms Nhantsi is above that she says, 
 
“Good day, yes we will perform the legal due diligence and I’d 
 
like to suggest we give that mandate to Ursula at legal 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 96 of 171 
 
 
department, she says, we had an EXCO meeting and they 
 
suggested that we extend the scope of this and not only send 
 
the RFP to FDC but also send it to IDC and PIC as well so that 
 
we can see whether we can get better rates.  I saw that you 
 
have already sent the RFP to FDC and thank you for – thank 
 
you and could you please send it to PIC and IDC as well”, 
 
Again back to the Chair’s earlier point, this all seems fairly 
curious because you’ve got a Board decision on the 3 r d of December 
that is saying, do the necessary to conclude this, then you have people 
like yourself raising concerns about process, Mr Lusenga, it appears as 
10 
though some of that was taken on-board because there’s now going to 
be (indistinct) process but what was your response to the suggestion 
that the IDC and the PIC be included as well in this further net of 
potential funders? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     We had already sent – 
they were one of the ones we included in the early ones and they didn’t 
respond right from the start when I first started at SAA we also tried to 
see if DBSA would fund SAA, this was in the early years, probably 2008 
but we knew that their mandate was not to fund State owned companies 
and so therefore we never considered them in the later years because 
20 
we knew they couldn’t.  So when this suggestion was made to go to the 
PIC or to the IDC we didn’t even act on it because again it is in an 
email there’s no Board resolution for that and so we didn’t act on that. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And then over the page in your affidavit at 
page 11, you record the response that was received from FDC, that was 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 97 of 171 
 
received on the 24 t h of December 2015 and if you go to page 313 which 
is under tab 21 you’ll find the FDC proposal that was submitted in 
response to Mr Klein’s email earlier in the month and if I could take you 
to page 316 of that Annexure, what is that document? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     So the 316 referral is the 
term sheet we received from FDC after we had sent our RFP out and if 
one looked at the RFP this was – we sat as a team going through this 
and there you can see who’s the borrower which is SAA the lender 
being – and here they state a joint venture between Free State 
Development and Grissag and immediately I realised that we’ve already 
10 
come across Grissag as a joint venture partner with SeaCrest in the 
previous and the Board had already turned that down so why would 
Board now agree to something that they’ve previously turned down 
because we couldn’t meet – they couldn’t meet the due diligence with 
Grissag, do you need me to go further? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   I’d just like to look at, first of all the interest 
rate that is charge there on this funding you’ll find that at 318, what is 
that rate? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     The interest rate quoted 
by FDC to SAA at the time was 4% it was a fixed interest rate. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Ms Stimpel there’s an aspect in relation to 
these rates that I need to traverse with you because it’s again an 
aspect that will come up in the evidence of Ms Nhantsi and is an aspect 
of the application to cross-examine you.  As I understand Ms Nhantsi’s 
point on this, and she’ll certainly correct me in due course if I’m wrong, 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 98 of 171 
 
she criticises you for having supported the SeaCrest initial funding 
proposal because, you’ll recall that their rate was 5.8% right and she 
says, well they were also to be funded by – well they were the 
intermediary for funding that was going to come from Grissag and 
Grissag’s rate was 4%.  So she says when you approved the SeaCrest 
or recommended the SeaCrest proposal be accepted, you were satisfied 
that SeaCrest, as the middle-man so to speak would earn the difference 
between 5.8% an 4% which would be a 1.8% fee effectively to SeaCrest 
as the middle person.  Chair all of this is going to become very relevant 
later because precisely what percentage the middle-man, for want of a 
10 
better description gets, becomes pertinent when this funding develops 
in due course but the point being made by Ms Nhantsi as I understand 
it is, you took issue later with 1.5% being the fee for the middle-man in 
circumstances where you were recommending SeaCrest who was going 
to earn a 1.8% as the middle-man, what is your response to that? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Chair we work with the 
term sheets as we receive it, so SeaCrest had sent a similar term sheet 
like this and the interest rate they quoted was 5.8% and it was a fixed 
rate there was no additional margin, there was no lead arranger fee, 
there was no other type of – there may have been default fees all the 
20 
smaller type but nothing – so when we did our first analysis is what we 
received based on the term sheet which is 5.5%. Had Grissag and what 
I’m hearing is that Grissag had also offered 4% to SeaCrest we were 
totally unaware of it so I wouldn’t have been aware of it neither would 
any of my team or the rest of the cross-functioning sourcing team been 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 99 of 171 
 
aware of it because it’s not stated in the term sheet and that’s what we 
work on, thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And if I may just remind you, we don’t have to 
go back there but in that analysis table that you did originally of the 
rates from SeaCrest amongst other, if you look across at the rate, as I 
see that page, 5.8% is the best rate…(intervention). 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     It’s the better rate out of 
each of the other banks that responded or entities which responded. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Right but now you do see a term sheet 
provided by the FDC on the 24 t h of December identifying Grissag as its 
10 
JV partner in which the interest rate is – fixed interest rate at 4% is 
that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Is that the first time at which you knew of the 
Grissag rate being 4%? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Yes Chair that was the 
first time. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Thank you.  We then move at page 11 of your 
affidavit to what National Treasury was making of all of this at the time, 
can you tell us what the nature of your engagements were with them 
20 
and what attitude they had taken to this FDC being a potential funder to 
SAA? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Well throughout the 
15billion process National Treasury was part – they wanted to be kept 
part of the process and when the FDC resolution came up, I had 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 100 of 171 
 
notified National Treasury about it and we advised them that we would 
be sending out an RFP and we’ll do our final analysis on it. Once we 
received the FDC we had a meeting and we also called in two 
representatives from National Treasury who then sat with us because 
they said they’re only observers they’re not part of the decision making 
process, it was with us.  We  went through it obviously and, again, we 
looked at what benefit would it be from a interest rate cost saving 
perspective for SAA and if one looked at a 4% it was indeed far better 
than 5.8% which SeaCrest was offering. Our concern was that we’re 
using the same party, there was Grissag, we struggled getting a due 
10 
diligence and now we’ve got Grissag again, we had debated that in our 
meeting and we then gave over to National Treasury to speak, their 
focus was straight away, and said FDC is not mandated to fund State 
owned enterprises, they are mandated to fund projects and other 
organisations – development organisations specifically within the Free 
State only, thank you Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And as I have it over the page at 12 of your 
affidavit that occurred at a meeting on the 6 t h of January 2016, is that 
correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Correct Chair. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And what did you then do with that information 
from National Treasury in relation to feeding it back to the then CFO? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     We then set up a meeting 
with the interim CFO and gave her the feedback of our analysis, we had 
to show her that, yes FDC does come out tops because they’re now 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 101 of 171 
 
showing 4% but we have received – we had National Treasury at the 
meeting who advised that FDC does not have the mandate to fund us.  
We took that and presented it to the interim CFO, Ms Nhantsi and she 
told both Michael and I to leave the meeting – pardon leave the matter 
with her and she will be meeting with Mr Moyo that – and she will get 
back to us. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Did she get back to you, subsequently about 
FDC? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Not until the 20 t h of April, 
we kept asking what’s happening with the matter because we had not 
10 
closed the RFP, normally when you close the RFP is when you go back 
to all your respondees and tell them you’ve now chosen this as your 
service provider or your final bidder and you send out letters of decline 
to the others, we had  not done that, we had asked Ms Nhantsi must we 
do that and she said, hold on until we can find resolution with FDC who 
she was meeting on her own and then we will finalise it.  So we hadn’t 
close the matter with any of our respondees and secondly is that we 
kept asking because we needed to close this matter and only when I 
insisted on a meeting on the 20 t h of April did she say then that the FDC 
matter was off the table. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Thank you Ms Stimpel, we’ll come to that 
meeting in due course but between January and April there quite a 
number of developments around the appointment of a transaction 
advisor that I’d like to take you through.  If we can go there at page 12 
of your affidavit, at paragraph 64 on that page, you begin with what Ms 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 102 of 171 
 
Nhantsi said at the end of that meeting on the 6 t h of January as I have 
your testimony, you met with her after your meeting with treasury, you 
conveyed to her that National Treasury’s view was that the FDC did not 
have the mandate to fund SAA and then what did she tell you at the end 
of that meeting? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:   At the end of the meeting as 
Michael and I were about to leave the meeting, Mr Kline sorry, Michael 
Kline, she – Ms Nhantsi told us that the Board has given approval that 
we should get a transaction advisor and I questioned that and asked, 
why do we need a transaction advisor and what would they be doing 
10 
and she said we need them to look at our debt portfolio and to look at 
restructuring the balance sheet etcetera and I still stated to her, but 
that’s what we’ve done, we do that in treasury, the restructuring of the 
balance sheet is done through our finance department, that is all done, 
recommendations are made constantly. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Mr Stimpel you may not be aware of this but 
there 
has 
been 
quite 
extensive 
evidence 
already 
before 
this 
Commission about the role of transaction advisors, Chair it’s a point 
that in the evidence you’ve continued to raise, with respect, people 
within SOE’s who are drawing salaries who are doing this work and 
20 
then circumstances where people from outside are asked to come and 
do that very same work, was that your principle concern? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:    Yes that was because 
we’ve already presented it and in every report all our concerns all the 
debt portfolio, the maturity profile, the high interest rates are reflected 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 103 of 171 
 
in those reports already.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Stimpel if I may, and I’d like your comment 
on this, as I see it, it was more than that you’d reported on it those 
reports had actually been adopted by the Board in the previous year, is 
that correct?  
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:   That’s correct Chair.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Ms Stimpel, Ms Nhantsi takes issue with this 
point that there was no need for the transaction advisor and in her 
statement she deals with three reasons that were given by the Board, 
I’d like to take you through those.  The first of those is the – as she 
10 
has it, first reason given by the Board for this transaction advisor being 
required and that is that there was no skill or expertise at treasury 
because your predecessor had left in 2015 and you had only been in 
the position for eight months, what is your response to that? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     I think that is incorrect 
because I’ve had the experience I’d been there for ten years and 
secondly I’ve always deputised and I’ve been at – presenting at Board 
meetings regarding key focus areas regarding treasury, SAA’s finance, 
SAA’s hedging portfolio, the policies, that same financial risk policy 
was one of my key objectives that I had to achieve every year, review 
20 
it, do a benchmark across the country and  internationally and so all 
those facets of funding is in that policy so I think that’s an incorrect 
statement. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   The second reason that she recounts having 
been given by the Board for this decision that a transaction advisor 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 104 of 171 
 
should be appointed was that the amount, I take that to be a reference 
to the 15billion that was being secured as funding for SAA, was within 
the Board’s delegation of authority and they needed assurance from an 
external independent source, what would be your comment on that 
reason? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     At the time I was also 
again very uncomfortable I just felt we were in such dire straits to save 
every cent and here we were going to waste money continuously on 
getting different opinions from others and so for this particular one that 
they’re saying it’s within the Board’s approval DOA for me I felt that 
10 
every submission we made to Board, it means they’re either not 
interrogating it properly, reading it and seeing that we are raising the 
red flags around it, so yes, the statement was also – was inaccurate. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And then the third reason that was given was 
that Ms Nhantsi was new and so she didn’t have the requisite 
institutional knowledge, do you think that should have justified the 
procuring of a transaction advisor? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     No I think Ms Nhantsi 
could have relied on her team, so she had us in treasury which she 
could have relied on for knowledge, she had the procurement 
20 
department who she seemed to work solely with and excluded treasury 
department, she also had the finance department who were there long 
who knew the whole balance sheet of the organisation and she had the 
legal department so she could have – there would have been many 
people who’ve been there long enough to get the information she 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 105 of 171 
 
required. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Your reference to the legal department 
reminded me of a question I meant to ask you a little while ago, you 
had the feedback from National Treasury in early January that this was 
beyond the mandate of the FDC.  You also had, had Mr Lusenga raise 
the concern about a legal due diligence needing to be done on the FDC 
on the 11 t h of December of the previous year, are you aware whether 
the internal legal department at SAA was then tasked to come to a 
determination about the mandate of the FDC between January and 
April? 
10 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     No Chair I was totally 
unaware because we kept following up what’s happening with the 
matter.  Once we gave the final analysis to Ms Nhantsi, she said, leave 
the matter with me and that’s where it stayed, so we didn’t get 
feedback.  If she gave instructions to the legal department to do the 
due diligence we were not aware, I was not copied on anything and I 
was totally unaware, thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Char I see we are at 1 o’clock if our watches 
are aligned, if it’s an appropriate time. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes let’s take the lunch adjournment and we will 
20 
resume at two,  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may proceed. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 106 of 171 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Stimpel before the break we were at page 
12 of your affidavit and we were beginning to deal with the appointment 
of a transaction advisor.  You as I understand your testimony had 
indicated to Mr Nhantsi when she raised this issue with you on the 6 
January that you did not understand the need for the transaction 
advisor.  But despite that you go on at paragraph 65 to refer to a 
motivation that Ms Nhantsi put to the board of SAA for the appointment 
of a transaction advisor.  I would like us to go there if we may.  You will 
find that under Tab 24 at page 330.   
10 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So as I read that document – apologies Chair.  
So 329 is the covering email in which Ms Nhantsi refers to her 
submission to the board for the urgent board meeting and then if you go 
over the page to 330 you will see that submission which in entitled 
“Motivation for Appointment of a Transaction Advisor”.  And the purpose 
reflected under paragraph 1 is to request the board to approve the 
appointment of a transaction advisor regarding the 15 billion 
consolidation debt restructuring exercise.  And then what appears in 
paragraph 2 is the motivation which I understand to be why the board 
20 
should approve the appointment of a transaction advisor and I would 
like to go through each of those motivations with you because as I 
understand your evidence you did not regard the services of the 
transaction advisor is necessary because that work had already been 
done so I would like to go through these elements and you can tell us 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 107 of 171 
 
whether in fact that holds good for each of the grounds on which the 
appointment was motivated.  So if we start at paragraph 2.1 it is stated 
there that the transaction advisor will analyse all the loan agreements 
that are currently at SAA’s disposal.  What about that one, had that 
been done already? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes we have done it as a 
treasury team and we report on it regularly at every board meeting and 
interim meetings like EXCO or risk committees. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Then at 2.2 the statement is that the 
transaction advisor will determine which of the total funding of 14 
10 
billion is inefficient either because it is expensive encumbers SAA’s 
ability to raise further funding because of the attached government 
guarantee requirement or the tenure not being suitable for SAA’s 
financial turnaround strategy.  Was that work that your team had done? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes we have done that and 
we have also identified which out of that total funding which of the 
loans were not efficient. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And when was that, was that in your previous 
submission in 2015? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  They as – when we make 
20 
recommendations regarding the loans we have already said for instance 
like we had the Nedbank subordinated loan for 1.3 billion we had 
already mentioned that we need to relook at this loan and do something 
about it.  Whether we go on a one year, five year or – but put it down 
into a proper structure and not keep it as a subordinated loan.  So 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 108 of 171 
 
those were one of their loans we identified and they come out in each 
of the submissions as you see it. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And at 2.3 the idea was that the transaction 
advisor would advise SAA on how to restructure its balance sheet 
through the settlement of inefficient loans.  It seems to be something of 
a repetition of 2.2 but what is your comment on that?  Was that work 
that had been done? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That is work that has been 
done and it is not only done internally because at year end when we do 
our annual financial statements and we get our financial year end we 
10 
have firstly our internal auditors looking at everything and then Chair 
we also get the external auditors looking at it.  And on an annual basis 
SAA had to apply for a going concern letter and so they had to do this 
compare the balance sheet and see how we needed to restructure it.  
So that exercise was done and on an annual basis. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And 2.4 envisaged that the transaction advisor 
would advise SAA of the strategic loans that on the face of it appears 
to be inefficient however for strategic reasons it will be important for 
SAA to keep the loans in place.  For example if these represent equity 
funding that [indistinct] up SAA’s balance sheet.  I am not sure that I 
20 
understand what was going to be done there, do you – can you assist 
me? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Thank you Chair.  I will 
explain.  With SAA becoming its own state owned company it was – it 
first fell under Transnet and it was a subsidiary under Transnet.  In 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 109 of 171 
 
2006 it started that or at least the process started that they separate 
SAA from the Transnet and SA became its own schedule 2 company.  
When SA broke away from SAA’s bigger balance sheet – pardon 
Transnet’s bigger balance sheet SA’s balance sheet was high debt to 
equity.  In fact it had no equity at that time.  And so it had this debt 
profile.  No equity meaning it should have – it had cash at the time but 
it had no substantial equity that could strengthen the balance sheet.  
SA had no assets.  Its aircraft was all leased.  The buildings that SA 
owned at that time was minor – very small so it did not make an impact 
on revaluation of its assets and liabilities that it would show that there 
10 
was strong assets available for SA.  So from an equity basis is that if 
the government owned the organisation they would put equity into it 
and like with Transnet the government has put in cash equity into 
Transnet.  With SAA there was no cash equity and that is one of the 
reasons that with the earlier board that walked out they were trying to 
stabilize that balance sheet through saying, here you have a high debt 
to equity balance sheet how can you manage and run this company it is 
not going to work?  We need to stabilize it and we need to bring in 
proper equity.  And so what I am understanding here Chair is that they 
saying to keep the loans in place and to represent where there is equity 
20 
funding.  SA had no equity and it meant we either needed to get 
another company to buy out percentage or whichever amount to put in 
cash equity then to stabilize the balance sheet or they had to try 
continue then with the loans which was the option we were taking at 
this point in time because we could not go for equity without National 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 110 of 171 
 
Treasury permission.  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you for that background.  In terms of this 
work thought was this something that you were looking at?  It sounds 
from your answer as though you were engaged with it and in fact the – 
the going to the market decision was based on the need to get cash 
into the entity.  Would this have been something that would have been 
new for the transaction advisor to do? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  No.  Just to go back to the 
equity funding etcetera.  Yes we involved from a treasury basis but if 
one is looking at the whole full balance sheet and the equity structure 
10 
of it and its debt it is then done with external auditors and internal 
auditors and from a finance but yes I have been involved in that 
process especially when it comes to the going concern and personally 
no I do not think that SA would have needed a transaction advisor to 
tell them that, they knew already through the history of SA. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then finally over the page at 2.5 there is a 
requirement that the transaction advisor would analyse the current SAA 
leases the majority of which expose SAA to hard currency exchange 
prejudices given that approximately 60% of SAA’s revenue is US dollar 
denominated and with the 5A330 that will come in shortly that will 
20 
result in approximately 85% of SAA’s expenses to be US denominated 
and recommend to SAA of options to restructure these leases to lessen 
their burden on SAA.  What about that aspect?  Was that something 
that a transaction advisor could be introduced to work on? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Chair this was already 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 111 of 171 
 
worked on prior because a decision has already been made through 
board.  It went through a fleet committee who had sat and looked at 
what availability SA had with its aircraft?  Which ones were old and 
needed to be downgraded and which ones they needed to purchase new 
and upgrade new aircraft.  So this whole exercise was done by a fleet 
committee and this committee goes through board.  So this was already 
approved at board level so there was no need for transaction advisor to 
come and give additional advice. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  So that recommendation goes to 
the board and if we return to your affidavit at page 12 you reflect at 
10 
paragraph 66 there that the board did approve the appointment of a 
transaction advisor.  If we can go to that minute – those minutes of the 
board meeting you will find them at Tab 25 starting at page 333.  You 
will see that that is minutes of the special meeting held on the 16 
January 2016 and you will see if you flip through that to page 340 there 
is recorded the decision in the minutes in relation to the transaction 
advisor services. Can you read for us at page 340 under item 4.11 
please? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  It states here: 
“The appointment of the transactional advisors for 
20 
funding options.  It was resolved that the board 
hereby approves the request for appointment of a 
transactional advisor to advice regarding the 15 
billion debt consolidation restructuring exercise.” 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You make the point at paragraph 66 that this 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 112 of 171 
 
was before any process had been followed that identified a need for 
those services to be procured. What was your concern? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  My concern was that the 
treasury team were already in the process of seeking funding and we 
started the process from 2015 already.  At one point it was stopped.  
We re – put it out again and in December we were sitting with almost 
approved proposal that needed to go through then FDC was brought in 
which we then sent the RFP out to them so we were now into January 
and we had still not finalised the process of debt consolidation because 
we did not get any feedback from the interim CFO at the time Ms 
10 
Nhantsi.  Thank you Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Stimpel you then go on at paragraph 67 to 
record that a request for information went out I do not believe it is 
relevant to look at that in too much detail but if we go onto paragraph 
68 you talk about on the 3 March having received a BAC submission 
drafted by the commodity manager and that set out the proposed 
evaluation criteria for this transaction advisor services RFP.  You will 
find that commencing at page 345 under Tab 27.  The documents here 
have been arranged slightly out of order so I would like to take you into 
that file divider to page 348 because that is I understand is actually the 
20 
BAC submission that you were provided with.  There is a lot of 
annotation on this page can you enlighten us as to whose annotations 
those are? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Thank you Chair.  These are 
mine.  I received this document to approve so to get the BAC to support 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 113 of 171 
 
the evaluation criteria for a transaction advisor.  So since the date 
early January when Ms Nhantsi had said oh we will get a trans – we 
would like to get a transaction advisor we have heard nothing in 
treasury that there was – that we going to put the process in place. The 
process works that business drives it.  You take it up from business 
level up to board.  You do not just go directly to board for approvals.  
And there for the first time I received this for a – the evaluation 
criteria.  I read through it and then I discovered that there will be the 
source of funding.  Given that I have not yet seen the board minutes 
that was decided on earlier that we have just gone through so I am 
10 
totally unaware.  The transaction advisor – we have not got feedback 
yet from the FDC and so we still have all our RFP’s open for all the 
other respondees and then they bring in sourcing of funds.  So I 
immediately try to meet with Ms Nhatsi on this and she was unable to 
see me.  I tried to see Mr Matsaudza – Silas Matsaudza and he was 
also busy so I could not see him and then I just made these notes as I 
was writing it and then I subsequently sent an email to them to say 
please can we discuss. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Can I pause for a moment just to get clear 
through your evidence Ms Stimpel the difference between a transaction 
20 
advisor and a sourcer of funds?  Because as I understand your 
testimony a moment ago one of the things you were concerned about in 
this submission was that there was in addition to transaction advisor 
services to be a sourcing of funds element.  Can you please explain to 
us what that difference is? 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 114 of 171 
 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Thank you Chair I will do 
that.  So transaction advisor will look at what you have tasked him to 
do firstly.  So he has a mandate and in this case SAA had a clear 
mandate for the transaction advisor and he had to do certain things.  
One of them was to look at our debt portfolio, see if we could 
restructure our balance sheet, look at the aircraft leases etcetera.  
From a perspective of a person who is going to or a company who is 
going to be sourcing the funds for you this person is – will go out and 
seek funds from the various entities while willing to provide the funds.  
And again from that perspective as SAA treasury it was SAA – it was 
10 
treasury’s responsibility to go and source those fundings from the 
banks and in this case they added in – board added in non-financial 
institutions.  To now pay for someone to go and do the sourcing of 
funds is – is where I draw the distinction.  Why would you go and 
increase your costs to the organisation when you already have people 
doing the job and have been doing it in the past?  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And over the page at 13 of your affidavit you 
summarise what the nub of your issues were with the draft evaluation 
criteria that you had been presented with and that is conveyed in an 
email which you will find under Tab 28.  But your summary at page 13 
20 
paragraph 69 is useful.  Can you give us an indication of what your 
principle concerns were with those evaluation criteria and this process 
as it was unfolding? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Going through this actual 
request for support for the evaluation criteria I found that there was 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 115 of 171 
 
ambiguity in it in that they were asking for – to assist with reviewing 
and analyse the organisation’s loan book but at the same time seek 
source of funding.  So what was their main mandate?  Because it says 
to source funding and evaluate funding and you go to source is the one 
and evaluate the initial understanding was that we need to evaluate the 
existing funding.  And then they bring in this source and so I 
challenged that to say what are we trying to achieve here we need to 
be more specific in what we want to do and why would we want to 
source funding when we already doing it and we already got a RFP that 
is still open?  There was another issue that was – we needed to ask the 
10 
organisation to demonstrate how have they sourced funding before and 
we know that the banks do it all the time.  So why we now going to seek 
another entity to try and replicate what we know already and has been 
done.  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  As you refer to it under C in paragraph 69 that 
term that I was using earlier seems to come in about a middleman. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You say there: 
“In my capacity as head of treasury I did not believe 
that SAA needed a middleman to source funding.  I 
20 
had previously worked directly with South Africa’s 
major banks to source funding.” 
Is that something that you conveyed to Ms Nhantsi and others? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes.  We have said that 
many times in our various meetings whether it was the [indistinct] 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 116 of 171 
 
meetings with Ms Nhantsi herself especially the day she called us in 
with the transaction advisor.  Secondly I was really against it because I 
felt we did not need to get a middle person – another company to 
source those funds and we were on an extreme cost drive for SAA.  So 
why do we need to do that?  So yes I did explain it a couple of times 
and I think she understood that. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And what follows then if we go to 356 which is 
under Tab 28.  Ms Stimpel your email as I have it is in the second half 
of the page that is where you write to Ms Nhantsi and you set out these 
concerns which you have summarised for us and then her response is 
10 
above that the following day on the 4 March.  She writes there: 
“Hi Cynthia you can come through and I will give you 
background as the TA”  
I take that to be an abbreviation for transaction advisor, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Agreed. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   
“Needs to be approved by BAC today.” 
So what happened when you met with Ms Nhantsi about that? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Ms Nhantsi then told me that 
she already had board approval for the transaction advisor and that she 
20 
would email it to myself and to Silas Matsaudza. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then if you go back to your affidavit what 
you indicate there you received was that motivation that we have 
looked at previously the 15 January 2016 motivation, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct.  
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 117 of 171 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And what did that show you about what had or 
had not been approved by the board? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That showed me there were 
elements of what a – the transaction advisor should be doing but there 
was no sourcing of funds in that document at all. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And so what then happened with your efforts to 
maintain this delineation between transaction advisor services as 
compared with sourcing of funds? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  I – Mr Matsaudza then he 
also had a copy of this letter which Ms Nhantsi had sent us.  He then 
10 
updated the submission for the BAC which is the bid adjudication 
committee and on that basis I then signed the document after reviewing 
it. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Did it make the amendments that you required 
to keep it confined to transaction advisor services? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes Chair it did.  It covered 
just the basics of each of those points that were listed in the original 
letter. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And if we just go to it at 359 which is under Tab 
29 you will see precisely as you describe those five bullets that we 
20 
went through 2.1 to 2.5 of Ms Nhantsi’s motivation appear now to be 
the designed scope of the transaction advisor services at page 359, is 
that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You mention that there was a short period of 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 118 of 171 
 
time that in which bidders could respond to a request for proposal in 
line with this evaluation criteria.  What was your concern there? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  From the supply chain 
management policy the SCM policy they have a minimum of two weeks 
and for this particular one they put out I think it was one week – it was 
– I know it was less than the specified time period in the actual SCM 
policy. 
 ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes I think it was a week. At paragraph 73 you 
say that the request for proposal went out on the 11 March and then the 
submission period closed on the 18 March.  Is that correct? 
10 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes it is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then if we go over to page 14 of your 
affidavit you there deal with the responses that were now received in 
relation to this request for proposal.  Can you take us through the 
entities which submitted proposals and you will find that at paragraph 
74? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Ja so we had a list which 
provided their bids Chair and it was from Deloitte and Touche, 
Regiments Capital, Basis Point Capital, Singer Holdings, Nasela 
Capital, Nedbank Limited and BNP Capital. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Right I would then like to go to the BNP bid 
submission which is the next document in the bundle under flag 30.  
And the reason for that is I would like to highlight with you some of the 
requirements of that RFP because they are going to become significant 
later when we delve into the question whether the BNP bid in fact 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 119 of 171 
 
satisfied the requirements of the RFP.  So if we may you will find that 
commencing at page 370 and that was under flag 30 and you will see 
that that is a document headed Request for Proposal Appointment of a 
Transaction Advisor to be provide financial advice to SAA and then it 
references the bid number.  What appears to have happened is all of 
the bidders took this RFP and then populated it as I understand to be 
customary with their relevant information so this is the one that was 
populated by BNP?  Chair just to make a note this is not in fact the 
complete BNP bid submission.  We have subsequently sourced that 
from SAA and it will appear in one of the subsequent bundles.  But for 
10 
present purposes it is sufficient to work on this document because this 
will identify the key criteria that I would like to deal with with Ms 
Stimpel.  Ms Stimpel if you will first go to page 384 of that RFP 
document which now comprises the BNP bid information.  You will see 
at 384 under item 18.2.6 that the RFP is dealing with the BEE 
submissions that were required to be provided by bidders and it 
stipulates that bidders must submit their BBBEE certificate.  It goes on 
to record that consortiums are – or joint ventures must submit a 
consolidated BBEE certificate.  Each member organisation must submit 
the percentage income split as per the consortium or joint venture 
20 
agreement.  The work load split must also be clearly defined and 
indicated.  Is that fairly standard for BEE submissions in relation to 
supply chain management? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes it is.  It is in their policy 
it is a standard request. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 120 of 171 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So that is the first one I want us to take note 
of.  The second one is at page 386 that is the requirement that the 
bidder have a financial services board licence.  You will see that under 
critical criteria.  That is something that you flagged in your comments, 
is it not? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And explain to me your comments in relation to 
that licence? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  The reason for that is if you 
looking for advisory services there are companies like your KPMG’s, 
10 
Deloitte that offer advisory services especially as – for transactions 
and they do not have FSB licences and so to get a client specifically 
for FSB Licences this became part of the criteria now for the 
transaction advisor.  I obviously argued against that.  It was one of I 
would not say argument but it was one of the issue I raised saying we 
excluding others if we just reduce it to FSB then we have a smaller 
group and then we limit our pool.  And so that was one of my main 
reasons that I felt we could have broadened it. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But… 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Thank you Chair. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  As I understand it you did not win that battle so 
to speak because it remained a requirement of the bid that there be a 
FSP licence, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes thank you Chair that is 
what I – and I accepted that if that is what we are going to have then 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 121 of 171 
 
we need the FSP licence. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then if I could take you over to 392 which 
is another aspect of the RFP.  This one we looking at has been filled in 
by BNP Capital and submitted when it bid.  But the point that I am 
interested in on that page is towards the bottom of 392 where it lists 
documents to be submitted and amongst those documents you will see 
the fourth bullet point there.  Can you read for us what document was 
required to be submitted there? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  The signed joint venture 
consortium agreement where applicable. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And in the context of this bid requirement read 
that to mean there was Chair an opportunity for bidders to bid in joint 
venture or consortium.  When they did so they had to produce a 
consolidated BEE Certificate.  We have looked at that.  They also had 
to be clear about who was doing what work so that there could be a 
proper assessment about where the work was really lying … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And there seems to be a further requirement 
that there would need to be a signed JV or Consortium Agreement if 
indeed that applied to the bidder … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then we go over the page to 393 and you 
will see there this is BNPs bid submission and you will see that in the 
part beginning bold under the bullet points there is a section: 
“Where in case of a consortium or joint venture will 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 122 of 171 
 
details on the consortium or joint venture members 
must be filled in if applicable.” 
And there were have recorded In Line Trading 10 (Pty) Ltd.  Do you see 
that? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Stimpel we will come to it in due course 
because 
you 
were 
subsequently 
engaged 
in 
the 
process 
of 
recommendation for the appointment of the transaction advisor.  What I 
am interested in knowing is whether you knew at the time that BNP had 
bid in joint venture with this entity called In Line Trading 10 (Pty) Ltd? 
10 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Chair I had no idea.  I had 
no idea that In Line was their joint venture.  The most I saw was the 
final list of names which came up in a document which I was also asked 
to sign.  At that point I also wanted to see the files and they said there 
was no need because there are two bid community, - Bid Committees. 
There is the Bid Evaluation Committee and then there is the 
Bid Adjudication Committee and they said they – they have reviewed 
everything.  So once the Bid Evaluation Committee is done it they have 
done their – because there is a full checklist. Then they would have 
made sure everything is correct.  So I was – I did not know. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  We will come back to the potential significance 
of that in due course.  You – if we return to your affidavit at page 14 
now.  We have looked at the bid that was submitted.  You have made it 
clear at the time you did not see this document … 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 123 of 171 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then you explain at 76 that you were away 
for a period of time.  Can you tell us about that? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  My mom-in-law took ill and 
subsequently passed away and so I left to go to Germany and I stayed 
there until we buried her and that happened around the Easter 
weekend. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And just to get the chronology right you 
indicate at paragraph 76 that you were away from 19 March to 
29 March.  So just – we recall the bids had to be in on 18 March.  That 
was the deadline and so for those first 10 day period of evaluation you 
10 
were away and you make the point there that neither you nor Mr Kleyn 
were invited to take part in – in that analysis.  Would you ordinarily 
have done so or not? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  The fact that it was a 
transaction advisor that would have been part of our work.  So it would 
have been either someone from a Treasury or a Finance or probably 
from the Fleet Management.  Yes, because the idea of a Cross 
Functional Sourcing Team is to get people from various – so when you 
are looking at a bid you have knowledge from the various sections that 
can add value to it and so I would have because we - many times we 
20 
have been called to sit in on bids. 
I have been on IT bids.  If it pertains to anything that is going 
to affect my area.  I have been on the banking tender because it is – it 
is my area.  I have even been on the fuel tender earlier years.  So it 
depends where and they rotated.  So there will be people who will be 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 124 of 171 
 
called in to sit and review those bids. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But you did not take part in that process? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  No Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  I would then like to move to paragraph 77 
which relates to a document at page 424 under Tab 31.  Now as you 
reflect in paragraph 77 this is a letter that notified BNP that it had been 
awarded the tender to provide transactional advisory services.  
Ms Stimpel what is curious at least on its face about this letter is its 
date.  You will see that it is dated 20 March 2016. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You make the point that – well first of all let us 
be clear.  Were you aware of this letter at the time? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  No Chair I was not at all 
aware. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And it is dated 20 March which is two days 
after the bids closed.  You will see from the later documents we look at 
the bid adjudication process had not even been finalised by that stage.  
Chair just to make a note it is not clear to us whether it was in fact sent 
to BNP on the date of 20 March. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  It is an aspect that we will traverse … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Explore. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  In the evidence next week … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  That is fine. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But we just note now that it is – it is 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 125 of 171 
 
unthinkable … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Dated the 20 t h  … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  That the date could be the 20 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The 20 t h, ja. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed because none of the processes of 
evaluation have run by that stage. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You will note over the page that the acceptance 
of this letter by BNP and the Director there Mr Mahlangu is only dated 
25 April 2016. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Which tends to suggest it probably went out 
later than this … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And that may have been an error.  We do not 
know.  We will explore it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Thank you Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But back to the next annexure which is 
Annexure 32 because Ms Stimpel this is - as I understand it – the 
20 
recommendation that was then put together by the Global Supply 
Management Team after they had completed the evaluation process and 
you will see at page 427 it is dated 15 April 2016. 
I would like to spend a bit of time on some of the aspects of 
this recommendation but I – I first want to get one aspect out of the 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 126 of 171 
 
way. You will see at page 436 that there is the page in which the 
various supporters and recommenders sign the document and this 
recommendation page bears a signature of Ms Nhantsi but no signature 
from you.  Is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That is initially yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But there is a version of this which you did sign 
later as I have it … 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Later, yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And we were able to source that Chair.  You 
will find that at – in Bundle C page 915.1.  It comes after the Tab A2 – 
10 
sorry not A2 – after the Tab A3. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the actual page is? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Is 915.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you.  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So Ms Stimpel can you confirm that that is your 
signature? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes it is my signature Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And I am going to come back to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The first one from the top? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Spelt correctly.  Ms Stimpel I am going to come 
back to probe with you a bit why you saw fit to recommend this 
appointment because we have heard evidence from you about your 
great misgivings about a transaction advisor being appointed to do the 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 127 of 171 
 
very work that had been done but before I get there I would just like to 
look at one or two aspects of this recommendation. 
You – you mentioned earlier that you were not aware of this 
joint venture in which BNP Capital had bid and you said that because 
this recommendation did not reference that anywhere and I would just 
like to take you to the parts of the document that certainly confirm that.  
If you go back in Bundle A to page 434 you will see a table if the 
consolidated scores for the price and BBBEE and you will see there as 
the entities are listed it is Nedbank, Regiments and Nisela Capital, BPS 
and BNP.  There is no reference to a JV or a consortium. 
10 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You will find again support for that at page – if 
you go back a moment to page 249 because the names of the bidders 
who have responded again are reflected only BNP Capital.  There is no 
reference to a JV submission despite what we thought previously in the 
actual bid documentation and then if we just return to page 434 you will 
also see there that item 11 and that table contains the consolidated 
scores for price and BEE and as I read this table this is really the 
outcome of the evaluation process because this was a 90/10 
procurement scenario. 
20 
10 points were going to be applied for BBBEE.  90 points for 
price and you have the consolidated analysis there of the various bids 
who had passed the initial disqualification phase.  You will see there 
that Nedbank scores nine on triple BBBEE and BNP is a little bit under 
that at eight. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 128 of 171 
 
Those are the first and the last columns and then you will see 
it is really price which in sense clenches it for BNP because they come 
in at a value of 90 on price and ends then with a total score of 98 out 
of 100.  Is that a fair reflection of what we are looking at? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes understanding it as it is.  
This is what we are given at least I was given based on everything.  
They would go through all the files and this is what I would work on.  
So yes that is a fair summation that you have made, yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  If you go to item 13 on that page there were 
some risks that were identified in relation to BNP Capital.  What is 
10 
recorded there is that: 
“The risks associated with contracting with BNP is 
allayed by the fact that the agreement is not a 
supply contract that requires a capital outlay.  The 
capability to deliver is embedded in the proposed 
team and the bidder’s experience.  Hence the 100 
percent score on functionality.” 
What I understand that to be a reference to is actually the 
document that you find at page 437 because that is a summary of the 
financial assessment of the bidders and what I would like to do again is 
20 
just contrast the financial assessment of Nedbank on the one hand as 
bidder 1 as compared with bidder 5 which was BNP Capital.  You will 
see that Nedbank has recorded in the last sentence there as: 
“Based on the above the risk for this bidder has 
been assessed as low.” 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 129 of 171 
 
And then if you go to BNP Capital you will see the concluding statement 
is that: 
“Based on the above the risk for this bidder has 
been assessed as high.” 
That seems to have been what informed that risk comment 
which is that although there is a determined high risk in relation to BNP 
that was in the views of the team putting this together sufficiently 
allayed by those factors that they referenced.  That there is not a 
supply contract and that the capability to deliver was embedded in the 
proposed team and the bidders experience.  Did that cause you concern 
10 
when you were reviewing this at all? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  It did raise concerns with 
me.  In fact the whole process continued raising concerns with me.  
Reviewing the entire one – the entire document and then looking at the 
final outlay for SAA from a financial risk perspective with the cost of 
2.6 and based on what they were going to do was just give advisory 
advice to SAA. 
On that basis I decided let me sign it and let us see what 
they have to offer.  Maybe there is something that I am not seeing that 
they can raise and on that basis I signed it. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  I am going to go through some of the 
deficiencies in the BNP bid with you and I would like to have your 
comment on whether had those been known to you - you would have 
signed on to this recommendation but before we do that if we can just 
go to page 435. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 130 of 171 
 
There is a note at 435 from the financial controller at the 
bottom of the page.  You will see under signatures there is a signature 
from the financial controller shared services right at the bottom of the 
page and then there is an annotation not budgeted for.  What do you 
understand that to mean? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  We all – every division has 
its own budget and we … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Is that at 435? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes.  Right at the bottom Chair you will see 
handwritten – not budgeted for – under … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Item 2. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And Ms Stimpel you were just explaining to us 
what – what that would mean in the context. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Thank you Chair.  Every 
division – business division in SAA had its own budget and we were – 
had to manage that strictly.  So any new service you are going to take 
on needed to be in that budget or if it is an existing service already you 
must have had that budget because we have a process that every year 
20 
we set up out budget. 
This – for this particular one there was no budget for it and 
that is why Mr Pier would have signed it because he is role is to check 
every amount against the budget when he goes through it before he 
signs it to say yes there is a budget or no there is not and that is what 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 131 of 171 
 
he is indicating here. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then if you go over the page to 436 there 
seems to be a response to that note from Ms Nhantsi.  Could you read 
for us what is written there next to her signature? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Ms Nhantsi states: 
“The budget will be catered for under the CFOs cost 
centre.” 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Whose cost centre would that have been? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  So that would be the Chief 
Financial Officer’s cost centre.  They had a separate budget.  I had no 
10 
idea what the total balance is or what that budget is on an annual basis 
and ja … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But … 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL: 
 
I 
just 
hope 
she 
had 
availability. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  That is her budget? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That is her budget. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So to speak. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  I would now like to just deal with 
20 
you well put to you some of the perceived deficiencies with the BNP 
bid.  So that we can have your comment on whether if these had been 
brought 
to 
your 
attention 
you 
would 
have 
recommended 
the 
appointment. 
Ms Stimpel in your – in your testimony a moment ago you 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 132 of 171 
 
made it clear that the financial exposure on this appointment was not 
particularly high.  It was in the order of 2.6 million.  Is that right? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Well some of the issues in relation to the bid 
and Chair this is an aspect that that will be traversed in evidence to 
come but it is appropriate to have Ms Stimpel’s comment on it at the 
moment.  I will not require us to go into the documents.  When we are 
dealing with the relevant witness we will do so but just for your 
comment at this point Ms Stimpel if it - if it were to be shown that BNPs 
bid or be it identifying that it as bidding in a JV with In Line Trading 10 
10 
(Pty) Ltd contained no information about that partner/bidder would that 
have been a concern to you? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That would have been a 
concern to me and it should have been raised in the document by the 
Bid Evaluation Committee because that is their role.  They are 
supposed to identify all these issues. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  If they had supplied no consolidated BBBEE 
Certificate would that have been a concern? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes definitely it would have 
been a concern. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And if you learnt that the price that they 
submitted with their bid was quoted and I am quoting from the bid 
submission along the following lines: 
“Because 
of 
the 
envisaged 
methodology 
and 
complexity of the project we propose a fee of R1 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 133 of 171 
 
excluding VAT plus a fee to SAA on the successful 
adoption for implementation of advice.” 
What would you have made of that? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Definitely not – definitely I 
would have said there is something wrong here.  How can you go in and 
put in a bid for R1 and … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Excluding VAT. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  And excluding VAT. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  There is something very 
10 
wrong with that. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Well that will be an aspect … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well forget about VAT. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  It just makes it sound even less than R1.  In 
the end R1.15 now.  Those were the aspects.  Ms Stimpel I take it if 
that had been none to you at the time you may not have recommended 
that (intervenes)? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  I would have not.  Ja, it was 
just unfortunate the process we are running with the Bid Evaluation 
Committee they get to see the documents.  They go through it.  It then 
20 
comes as you can see the first lot signs and we get the final ones and 
even then I wanted to see the document and I was told but the – the 
Bid Evaluation Committee had done their work and they had done it 
thorough. 
So – and on that basis I thought I have put enough resistance 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 134 of 171 
 
and I am sure a second opinion would not do any harm and on that 
basis is why I recommended it but knowing everything else that you 
have just mentioned yes I would definitely not have recommended it, 
thank you Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Just tell us that request to see the underlying 
document who was that made to? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  It was made to Coetzee – 
Amanda Coetzee to Silas Matsaudza. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And you remember that specifically? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  That request that you made. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Let us then if we may return to 
page 14 of your affidavit because you now move to a section which is 
headed “Sourcing of Funds” and one of the engagements we had earlier 
where you provided some background to us of the difference between 
transaction advisor services and sourcing of funds now becomes quite 
pertinent because as I have it in the story Ms Stimpel at this point what 
BNP Capital has been appointed to do is to provide transaction advisor 
services.  Is that correct? 
20 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And what then develops as the evidence and 
your affidavit progresses is that their scope was changed from 
transaction advisor services to sourcing of funds and you pick that up 
at paragraph 80 at the bottom of page 14.  This is the day that you 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 135 of 171 
 
referred to earlier. 
You will recall you - you were in some limbo in the early part 
of 2016 to get clarity as to the position in relation to FDC and the 
previous RFP.  Can you tell us about what happened on 20 April 2016? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  So leading up to that time 
we had no feedback what was happening with FDC.  We had also not 
closed the RFP and we could not go back to any of the respondents and 
so we called the CFST meeting which is the Cross Functional Sourcing 
Team on 20 April with Ms Nhantsi for her to please give us feedback 
and advise what is happening with the funding because we had key 
10 
maturities happening on the loans and we needed to get back to the 
banks and to the respondees of the RFP. 
In that meeting Ms Nhantsi actually wanted to know who 
called the meeting and why is it being called and I had said I needed 
clarity and that is why we called it because we are all part of this - the 
– the team and we need to know so we can take further action and then 
at that meeting she mentioned that the FDC is off the table. 
Those were here words and in that same meeting she said 
now that we have FDC – pardon – we have BNP as a transaction 
advisor we can use them to source the funds for SAA and that is when 
20 
we all challenged it.  The one member – Lindsay Olitzki brought up the 
fact that if you change the scope of the procurement transaction there 
is the amount involved and it should not be more than 15 percent. 
This was way more than the 15 percent up front already.  
Secondly we all raised between ourselves, myself, Mr Lesenga (?), 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 136 of 171 
 
Mr Makura (?) all raised that we need to rather go out and put a full 
RFP out there to – and rather get a complete new RFP and not get the 
current transaction advisor to source funding for SAA. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Stimpel as I have understood your previous 
evidence you raise concern about utilising any third party to do 
sourcing of funds in circumstances were that had been done in 
internally traditionally.  Is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  No.  Yes that is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But now you are at a point where you told that 
the - FDC is off the table and there is going to now be an expansion of 
10 
the scope of the transaction advisor to source the funds.  Now as I 
have it if you pick it up at 81 over the page – page 15 of your affidavit 
you record there precisely what you have indicated that you said to 
Ms Nhantsi that she would need to follow a competitive bidding process 
for the sourcing of funds if that was to be the next step. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct and that was putting 
out the RFP process, getting this full competitive bidding out there and 
then doing a proper analysis, correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Now that was on 20 April.  Further down in that 
paragraph you talk about what happened the very next day on 21 April 
20 
and that as I have it was the Board’s decision to extend the scope of 
the transaction advisor.  Is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Let us go to that and you can now Ms Stimpel 
move to the B file because the annexures we will be working on for the 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 137 of 171 
 
remainder will be in the B file and there we will go the first tab which is 
33 and that is a decision of the Board of 21 April in which they: 
“Approve the extension of scope of a transaction 
advisor to include sourcing of funding of 15 billion 
for South African Airways.” 
Do you see that? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes I do see this and again 
the way it should work is that business drives it and business should 
have done it from the beginning driving it through to be approved at 
Board.  What has been done is that Ms Nhantsi had taken a letter 
10 
directly to Board to get approval and they have approved the 
transaction advisor. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Stimpel there is another aspect of this 
resolution that I find curious and I would like your comment on.  The 
Board resolved as it is recorded here: 
“To approve the extension of the scope of a 
transaction advisor to include sourcing of funding of 
15 billion for South African Airways.” 
Was there any other transaction advisor at the time besides BNP 
Capital? 
20 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Not that I am aware of Chair.  
As far as I knew it was the BNP who was chosen at the time. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But despite that there is then a whole process 
that seems to be followed and you will take us through it.  Where there 
is a request for a confinement so that you do not have to go through a 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 138 of 171 
 
competitive bid and then a proposal that BNP be appointed as the 
source of funds.  That just seems to disconnect from this resolution 
that was taken on 21 April.  Do you accept that that is an oddity? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  I do definitely. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But your evidence seems to suggest this was 
becoming a pattern. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes because what I have 
been seen is – it is the same that first in – in January was the initial 
10 
approval for – for transaction advisor and then only it comes through 
the Bid Adjudication Committee.  Then change the scope of the 
transaction advisor.  Then it comes through the Bid Adjudication 
Committee. 
That is not how SAA should be functioning from a corporate 
governance perspective.  Business drives it if there is any discussion 
from – between the CFO etcetera on what we are going to do.  We 
make the recommendation first and the get the approval.  Here it has 
been working back to front.  We get the approval and now you drive it 
through the governance process.  That is incorrect, thank you. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Ms Stimpel.  I – I have been asked 
to request again that you speak a little bit closer to the mic.  Maybe 
draw it towards you if that would be helpful.  You – you make that point 
in summary at paragraph 83 of your affidavit page 15 and then you 
move on to the date of 6 May 2016. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 139 of 171 
 
Can you tell us what happened on that day?  So we have 
moved forward a few weeks.  The Board Resolution is 21 April and now 
we move to 6 May and there is an interaction between you and 
Ms Nhantsi on that day. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Come 6 May I get called in 
into Ms Nhantsi’s office and she put a document down in front of me 
and she says you are challenging me and asking me questions so I 
would like to discuss this with you first before you get to sign it.  So I 
said good and then she showed me the document. 
She said the Board gave approval for the transaction advisor 
10 
to change the scope and source funding for – for SAA.  She has already 
spoken to the – the client – BNP Capital and they have already 
reviewed and they have come up with – they are prepared to do it.  
They can source 15 billion and their price. 
So the first document that I saw was for 15 billion sourcing of 
funds.  They were charging a fee of 3 percent.  3 percent on 15 billion 
is 300 million.  Immediately I just said to her Phumeza I am not signing 
this.  I pushed it back and I said I am tasked in my balance scorecard 
to save 300 million for this organisation by year end and the only way I 
was going to do it is to reduce the interest rates on our borrowing. 
20 
Otherwise there is no other way and I said now you are going 
to wipe it out with one transaction that we are going to sign.  Her words 
to me was oh I did not think of it that way but I will go back and 
renegotiate.  Even then in the discussion I said to her I will go to the 
banks and – and see what they – what they would offer but I know – I 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 140 of 171 
 
said I know the banks will give a better rate. 
They never charged us such a high fee.  They may add a 
margin in the interest rate but for arranging sourcing of funds they do 
not charge us that amount and then she said well the President is 
coming to SAAs offices on that day and she said well I have got to go 
meet the President.  Can we meet on Monday and I said I am not here. 
I did put in my leave.  I will be going away on a pilgrimage 
from the – the Monday for the week and then she asked who will 
deputise for you and I said Michael Kleyn will be deputising.  I 
immediately went back and I asked for a copy of the – the memorandum 
10 
and she said no you cannot have it.  She will update it and send a new 
one and discuss it when I return. 
I left to go and chat to my deputy.  I told him what happened 
and I said to him please do not sign anything in my absence.  Secondly 
I said can you please get pricing for what the banks would offer on 15 
billion and when you get the letter review it or the memorandum and 
then hold it till I return.  He agreed on that, thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us take a five minutes adjournment. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Okay Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We will adjourn for five minutes. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  We may proceed. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Thank you Chair. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 141 of 171 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Ms Stimpel we were at paragraph 86 on page 
15 of your affidavit where you record there that you were going to go on 
leave and you gave feedback to Mr Kline about your meeting and as I 
read it you record there that you instructed him not to sign the BAC 
submission in your absence.  Was it as clear as that Ms Stimpel?   
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:   (Inaudible – microphone off) 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Ms Stimpel please just turn on your 
microphone. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:    My apologies. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Yes, so just clarify for us I asked you was it as 
clear as that that you instructed him not to sign it? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Yes, I instructed him not to 
sign it and he also clarified by saying no I will not sign anything without 
your knowledge ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  While you are not there? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:    ... while you’re not here, 
correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   I want you to skip over paragraph 87 and come 
back to it, because it’s useful for us first to see what happened in a 
20 
sense in SAA on the 11 t h of May which we pick up at page 88, over the 
page 16 on your affidavit and then we can talk about how that 
interfaced with you outside of SAA on your leave.  So if we start at 
paragraph 88 you will see there that you record that on the 11 t h of May 
the South African Airways Global Supply Management Unit made a 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 142 of 171 
 
request to the BAC to support the confinement and award of a contract 
for sourcing of funds for SCA Group to be in P –Capital, and let’s look 
at that document, it’s under tab 35, at page 445.  So this as I read it is 
the GSM, that’s the Global Supply Management’s request to the BAC to 
support the confinement of the contract to source funds to be in P-
Capital, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:   That’s correct Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And that background on the page that we see 
under the bold heading is the same background we are familiar with, 
that’s what the transaction advisor was originally procured to provide, 
10 
as a service.  
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And then you go over the page to 446, which 
now contains the motivation for this extension in the scope of the 
transaction advisory services.  Could you read for us what’s recorded 
there as the motivation. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:      
“Loans to the value of 7.3billion are maturing on 30 t h of June 
2016 and SAA is obliged to settle the loans on or before the 
maturity date.  Due to time constraint the only feasible 
20 
approach is to engage the appointed transaction advisor to 
urgently source the funds required to settle the loans.  
Sourcing the funds was not included in the transaction 
advisor’s scope of work as SA believed that the funds could be 
successfully 
sourced 
without 
the 
transaction 
advisor’s 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 143 of 171 
 
assistance.  The outcome of SA’s efforts to secure funding 
without the assistance of the transaction advisor in the market 
has proved otherwise.  It is against this background that GCM 
on behalf of the business unit is requesting for BAC to 
support, to confine, and award the contract for sourcing of 
funds to settle the loans maturing on 30 t h June 2016 to be in 
P-Capital Pty Limited.  A duly signed confinement declaration 
form is attached in Annexure A.” 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Thank you.  I would like to just pause on some 
of those propositions.  Let’s go back to the point about due to time 
10 
constraint the only feasible option is to engage the appointed 
transaction advisor urgently to source the funds.  What is your 
comment on that, would you have supported that as a motivation? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:   No I would not, because 
we’ve always been in a time constraint and we’ve managed it, we’ve 
had loans maturing, we had to roll them over, we had to seek Board 
approval and then go back and there is a constant going back and forth 
to Board, getting the approvals to International Treasury because once 
the loan matures you have to do a new agreement, so we – it was 
something we were doing as almost a daily basis, we knew that so I 
20 
wouldn’t have called that a constraint that we needed to go now and 
source the R7.3, whatever was maturing we were going to roll over 
anyway. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And if against your view that you’ve just 
described there was urgency where would you say that urgency arose 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 144 of 171 
 
from? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     For me the urgency arose 
through Board’s delays I felt, and the whole delay starting from 2015, 
and then on our interim CFO who at the time had she told us the FTC 
was off the table in January and not in April we could have already 
made plans of how we’re going to roll those funds again or gone out for 
a new RFP, by then we could have at least managed the process but we 
were always waiting, being told to wait and sort of on the back burner 
and that I feel was where the urgency came about Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   I would like to pick up that point, you do 
10 
address it later in the affidavit but this question about whether you can 
justify a confinement of a procurement process on the grounds of 
urgency because that is what seems to be lurking in this  motivation 
that because of this urgency we must confine to this particular existing 
service provider rather than going out competitively, and you make the 
point later at paragraph 92 that SAA’s own procurement policy clearly 
states that poor planning on SAA’s part  can never be regarded as a 
ground of urgency.   
 
I would like to take you to that policy just so that we can find 
that provision.  You will find it as one of the supplemented documents 
20 
in File C and you will find it there at page 890.  Well let me just 
orientate you, the document begins at 868 under Tab A1, is that the 
supply management policy you’re familiar with? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And then if we go to within that policy page 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 145 of 171 
 
890, you will see Ms Stimpel the section dealing under 11.13 with 
limited or confined bidding, do you see that? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:    Correct.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And it gives circumstances in which under (1) 
SAA shall use limited bidding only in the following exceptional 
circumstances, and it lists the circumstances, but at 11.13.1.6 I think is 
the point that you were making in your affidavit.  Would you read us the 
provisions of that clause? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:    Yes it states that: 
“Bad planning shall not be acceptable as justification for the 
10 
use of limited bidding.” 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   What was your view at the time, had there 
been bad planning? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:   I felt that there was 
because we had ample time to put out and why were we rushing this 
now with – and taking an existing transaction advisor who was only 
tasked and mandated to do certain transactions and now opening the 
scope so broad to go out and source funding and then pushing the 
approval to say it is because we need to source funding with immediate 
effect or else SAA will be in jeopardy.  Sorry, yes I agree. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Ms Stimpel there is an odd circularity I would 
suggest, and I would like your comment on to what is happening here 
because you will recall you have already testified about the initial 
inclusion of the sourcing of funds in the RFP that was going to go out 
for these transaction advisor services.  You took issue with that as I 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 146 of 171 
 
have your evidence because you said but the Board has not approved a 
sourcer of funds in January 2016 so our request for proposal must be 
faithful to what the Board has approved, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   The consequence of that is that there’s a 
process BNP gets appointed as transaction advisor and then shortly 
thereafter there’s in a sense a resurrection of the source of funds issue 
and now a process to confine to BNP getting that deal in a sense from 
SAA, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That’s correct Chair. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Well let’s look at what financial implication 
that was going to have for SAA, and that appears at page 446 where we 
were dealing with first the motivation for this confinement, tell us what 
the financial implication says in that first paragraph. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:   The industry norm is that 
the transaction advisors charge a success fee from two to three percent 
of the funds sourced and SAA negotiated a percentage with the 
transaction advisor, the two parties settled for a success fee of 1.5% 
should BNP be tasked to urgently source the funds.  Indicated below is 
the projected success fee to be paid to BNP Capital if the transaction 
20 
advisor succeeds in sourcing the R15billion required to settle all the 
loans.  The success fee lies not in a once off payment, the terms will 
be negotiated with the transaction advisor to ensure that the payments 
of the success fee are staggered. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And then what is the total liability on that 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 147 of 171 
 
success fee as recorded in the table that then appears? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  So based on the success fee 
they’ve chosen a 1.5% of 15billion making it 225million.  If you include 
it at that time it was 14% VAT it would have made it R256million. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Well let’s go back to the financial implications, 
because you had an interaction with Ms Nhantsi just before you left to 
go overseas at which you recall a 3% figure was being debated and as I 
recall your evidence you said you made it clear to her that you were 
concerned about how high that fee was, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:   That’s correct. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   What then is your comment on the statement 
here that the industry norm is that transaction advisors charge a 
success fee ranging from two to three percent of the funds sourced. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:   Still I don’t think, I disagree 
with this, I know there were other schools of thought, but I disagree 
with such a high fee.  Banks charge basis points so it’s a percentage of 
a one percent for instance, so they will go 35, 25, 50, 85, basis points 
for them arranging for the funding.  Where they would they would 
charge it on the margin, so for instance if they’re saying I am going to 
lend SAA (indistinct) 6.5% I am going to add on the 3% margin and they 
20 
will charge us the interest rate of 9.5%, but they are not going to add it 
in for sourcing the funds, so I disagree with that statement that this is 
the industry norm and that’s my view.  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   But it does seem as though at least the 
position had moved from when you met with Ms Nhantsi because if 3% 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 148 of 171 
 
was on the table then the second part of that sentence records that 
there’s been some negotiation down to the 1.5%, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:     That’s correct yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But you are away at this point in time is that 
correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You did not receive this, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That’s correct I did not 
receive it. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And if we go over the page to 447 that’s quite 
10 
clearly reflected because your name is scratched out and that of our 
deputy, Michael Kline, is included, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That’s correct Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And what does he signify there next to his 
signature? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  He writes there, he signs it 
and states recommended under the premise that the company is under 
pressure to arrange funding. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Stimpel if we go back in your affidavit to 
paragraph 87, which was on page 15 the one that I said I wanted to 
20 
return to, you indicate there that you received a Whatsapp from Mr 
Kline on that day? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Tell us about that message. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  So the reason I was away if 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 149 of 171 
 
it was normal leave I would have stayed but it was a birthday present 
from my husband,  it was a pilgrimage walking from Paris to Chatreaux 
and it was a five day pilgrimage which I was doing, and which I got in 
December and could only take it in May because that was the date the 
pilgrimage was running so I was away walking in between small towns 
and on this particular day which was I think it was the 11 t h when he 
signed it and he sent me this message saying I was put under pressure 
to sign, I did sign the document and with that I was immediately upset 
in that how could he sign without me being there, he had promised me 
that he wasn’t going to sign it, we were going to discuss it, and I then 
10 
immediately went to the head of our group and said to him when we get 
to the next town can I take a few minutes and he said fine, so there I 
did, I went to sit quietly and I actually wrote a message to National 
Treasury, the two people that I deal with, Ms Avril Healthstead and Mr 
Rajesh Rajilal and I wrote to them, I said this is a Whatsapp whistle 
blowing message, I don’t know how else to do it, but I have just 
received notification that a BAC document has been signed for – to pay 
a small client and I said I really don’t know anything about the client 
except that they were going to be our transaction advisor and we were 
going to pay them R2.6 odd million and now they are going to be 
20 
sourcing the funds for SAA and I said at a fee of initially I said 
R300million, Michael in his message had corrected that by saying 1.5%, 
so I said the figure I wrote is wrong it’s actually R225million, so I wrote 
this message to National Treasury because I was concerned, I just felt 
why are we pushing this agenda, all this time we’ve been delaying 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 150 of 171 
 
funding, why suddenly do we have to take this client and why do we 
have to pay them this phenomenal fee.  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You provided us with a copy of that Whatsapp 
communication that took place while you were on your pilgrimage in 
France.  You will find it at page 443, which is under tab 34, and Ms 
Stimpel you will correct me if my sense of this communication is wrong 
but it really does read as though it’s sort of moments in time that are 
developing because it starts – you will see the date in the text, 
2016.05.11, so that’s the 11 t h of May and it’s at 8.15 and then you talk 
about everything you’ve described, you say it’s a whistle blowing 
10 
report, it’s a whistle blowing message, and you apologise having to 
send it by sms and you say you will do a formal email or letter and then 
you to into the details as they have been relayed to you by Mr Kline 
and you there reference the 2% of the quantum, but if you go right 
down the page there appears to have been a second message later, 
what seems to be just before midnight you will see it’s sort of five lines 
up from the bottom that reflects as 11.24.09 pm and you say: 
“Cynthia Stimpel speaking. The success fee has now been 
changed to 1.5% ...” 
And you go on to raise your concerns in relation to that and you 
20 
reference there in the last line: 
“Michael said he signed a BAC doc as I was not there and the 
interim CFO has put him under pressure. 
Best regards” 
This is quite something to do on a pilgrimage; did you feel strongly 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 151 of 171 
 
about it? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  I was yes, I was – ja I just 
felt that this was wrong, this isn’t our approach we should be following 
funding and the fact that we were doing this showed that we wanted to 
enlist someone who wasn’t – and pay them a huge fee on what basis, 
when we’ve been rolling funding, we’ve been doing funding over the 
years with the minimum cost to SAA.  So yes I felt strongly about it, I 
had to take time out, I literally sat at a coffee shop because they had 
wifi so I could do this, and that’s how I did it.  Thanks. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Well despite that Whatsapp message as I have 
10 
it two days later on the 13 t h of May the BAC did approve the decision to 
confine the sourcing of funds to BNP.  You reference that at page 17 of 
your affidavit from paragraph 95 and you will find that BAC document at 
page 453, which is under tab 37.  I’m interested just to pause at this 
document for a moment to look at the various options that are given to 
the committee when it makes its resolutions, there seem to be various 
options, they can approve, they can recommend to the Board, they can 
refer back for rework, they can decline or they can note, is that 
correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That’s correct. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And so what we see signified there is what 
decision on the part of the BAC? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  It’s recommended and one 
sees there that it should go to CEO, Exco, Audit, PTPC and for 
recommendation to Board, correct. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 152 of 171 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then there are some conditions contained 
at the bottom, I have struggled greatly to decipher what these 
conditions record, are you at all better placed than I am to decipher 
those conditions.  Is that handwriting that’s familiar to you?  I mean my 
bad attempt, but we will ask Ms Nhantsi about this because she 
references it in her statement.  It seems to me the main being 
...(intervention)  
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  It looks like ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Main basis, main basis of the support is to get 
funding and then something ...(intervention)  
10 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Due – it’s due to the urgency 
and ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, due to the urgency ...(intervention)  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Practicality maybe? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Practicality of the 
requirement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of the required ...(intervention)  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  We’re all trying. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
...fund 
is 
offered 
to 
the 
best 
something 
...(intervention)  
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Rate in the market. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Rate in the market. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Well we will explore that further but the bottom 
line as I have it is that the BAC then on the 13 t h of May recommends to 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 153 of 171 
 
the Board that BNP be appointed to source the funds, is that your 
understanding? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But you’re still away at this point, is that right? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  I’m still away at this point 
yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Okay, you then go in your statement to deal 
with the BAC submission checklist that was – that accompanied the 
submission that went to the BAC from the GSM, I would like to take a 
look at that and there are actually two copies of it in the papers and the 
10 
better copy is at page 448, so if we can go to 448 you will find that 
under tab 35, you raised some concerns about the content of this BAC 
submission checklist because as I understand your evidence there are 
...(intervention) 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry ,what was the page number? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Apologies Chair, 448. 
CHAIRPERSON:  448. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So we go back a bit in the file, under tab 35. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You make the point at paragraph 96 that this 
20 
checklist contains really the areas of compliance that need to be 
satisfied, or of which the BAC needs to be satisfied when it makes its 
decisions and you highlight how many of these items of compliance 
have in annex to them not applicable.  What concerns you about that? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  So the purpose clear 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 154 of 171 
 
description of the submission, they put down yes, then confirmation of 
signed business case, that meant the motivation around it, they’ve got 
not applicable.  Details of the lender, number of bidders, so because 
they put it in a confinement they put it as non – ja, so they didn’t need 
to look at that.  Details of the tender bidders not applicable, bid 
evaluation not applicable, financial due diligence not applicable, bid 
award recommendation not applicable.  Financial impact assessment 
not applicable, assessment ...(intervention)  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Why – sorry can I pause there just for a 
moment because I can understand why you would say not applicable if 
10 
you’re not in a bid scenario right, but financial impact assessment 
would that not still be relevant even if you were confining? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  I would agree, it should still 
be, you need to still review it. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And what about assessment of fair value? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes and risk assessment. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But all of that is indicated as not applicable? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct.  Had it gone 
through a true process of checking, comparing, take the transaction 
advisor as is and opening it out and then doing a full comparison they 
20 
would have then reviewed at that end and picked up the FSB license or 
picked up any other shortcomings regarding the client.  At the time – 
pardon? 
CHAIRPERSON:  So where it says assessment of fair value not 
applicable is it correct that what it in effect means is don’t worry about 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 155 of 171 
 
whether there is fair value or not. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes and this is done by the 
...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  That’s not our concern? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct, that’s how I would 
assume it.  The GSM because they were now confining it felt that there 
was no need to go through checklist again and ensure that you have all 
your criteria in place.  Thanks Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Right, and then we move to page 18 of your 
affidavit, if we may, because we’re now at the stage where you have 
10 
returned, you say at paragraph 98 you returned from your leave on the 
17 t h of May and you get a full account from Mr Kline and he gives you a 
copy of the submission that he signed, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That’s correct Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then from the 18 t h of May you for want of a 
better description snap into action, because you are now going to the 
banks to get hypothetical quotes.  Ms Stimpel why did you do that the 
day after you returned? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  When I returned I first sat 
with my deputy, Michael Kline, and got the information from him, and I 
20 
wanted to know what exactly happened, how was he put under 
pressure, was there a gun  held to his head, etcetera, and he said that 
he was called to Mr Lester Peter’s office, who literally, is words were, 
jumped up and down and told him you don’t take responsibility here so 
you just sign, and based on that Michael said he signed it.   
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 156 of 171 
 
 
I was still concerned and then when I came back to my desk I 
tried to arrange a meeting with Ms Nhantsi to discuss this further 
because when we left she said she was going to wait for prices and we 
would discuss it, she knew that I was going to go away.   
 
I couldn’t get hold of her and I decided well I am going ahead 
anyway to get prices in the market and see and at least have 
comparable prices that I can put forward to her so she can see there is 
a strong possibility of saving costs for SAA, and so that’s what I did.   
 
When I sat my desk I thought do I go to our major banks, I 
know that the banks talk to one another and the minute you talk to one 
10 
bank and the other they all know what’s happening out in the market so 
I wanted to limit it, so I then worded my email under a hypothetical 
quote and I then only sent it to three banks, I sent it to Standard Bank, 
I sent it to ABSA and I sent it to Rand Merchant Bank. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Let’s go to that email in which you make the 
request for a quote.  You will find it at page – I would like to start at 
page 460 because these email trails from the bottom up so speak in 
terms of time, so if you go to 460 which is under tab 39, you will see 
there your email sent to ABSA Capital and the subject is hypothetical 
quote, as you’ve described, can you read for us the text of your 
20 
enquiry. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Thank you Chair, I will do 
so.  I wrote: 
“Dear Thule [who is our relationship person at ABSA Bank and 
asked her] would it be possible to give me a hypothetical quote 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 157 of 171 
 
on the following.  I’m trying to benchmark some numbers 
please.  This is purely hypothetical.  Should SAA go into the 
market for a transaction advisor or funds arranger for an 
amount of R15billion what would be the fees for this service 
from yourselves please.” 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then her response is above that, what does 
she come back with? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  She writes back the same 
day: 
“Dear Cynthia, 
10 
Arranging fees are generally lower than ten basis points and 
you would also need to factor in participating fees for the 
lenders and the arranger which usually range between 25 to 40 
basis points.  A deal can always be made.” 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  I understood your earlier evidence to be basis 
points are percentages of a percent. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That’s correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So we’re talking in terms less than one percent 
now and remember for the purposes of this part of your evidence it’s 
useful to keep in mind that what’s been proposed and BAC approved is 
20 
a 1.5% for BNP, and as I have it you’ve returned and you’re concerned 
about the extent of that fee and so you are now engaging with banks to 
get a comparator, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Is that something in your view that should have 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 158 of 171 
 
been done prior to the setting of the 1.5 with PNB? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes definitely Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  If you ...(intervention)  
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  It should have been done. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  If you turn then back a page to 259 we can 
follow the email train, you then respond to Ms Zulu and you say would 
this be calculated on the full quantum amount of borrowing let’s say it’s 
a total of 50 basis points on 15billion.  Thanks and regards and then 
she responds ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry what page is that? 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Apologies Chair, we’re back a page. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We were at 460. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes so we go back to 459. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Just to follow the email sequence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So Mr Stimpel you go back to ask about 
whether that percentage that she’s quoted as I have it would be 
influenced by the total quantity, so you say would this be calculated on 
the full quantum of borrowing and you say for example let’s say a total 
20 
of 50 basis points on 15billion and then her response is reflected above 
that, what does she come back and say to you? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  She writes: 
“Not quote, the arranger will earn the 10 basis points and then 
in addition their portion of the debt will be 25 basis points of 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 159 of 171 
 
participation fee.” 
So in essence one party will have 35 to the maximum of 50 basis points 
and others there could be 25 to 40 basis points because they are only 
participating – and negotiate – and then she writes I will negotiate hard 
to get close to 25 basis points given the quantum involved. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Right and then you thank her as I have it and 
then on the 20 t h of May you start communicating with Ms Nhantsi about 
this quote and you will find that email under tab 40 at page 462.   
 
So what – if you could give us just the essence of this email 
what are you communicating to Ms Nhantsi on this day? 
10 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  My intention was to raise the 
concern of us having gone ahead to approve the BNP – to source 
funding at BAC, the next level of approval was going to go through the 
obviously EXCO, TIPCO, Audit & Risk and Board Committees and I was 
hoping to stop that because I felt that with us getting a better rate you 
can still stop it and do a comparison and then make a decision on how 
we’re going to go forward and so I sourced these prices, I got – the 
reasons why there’s a delay from when I came back to the 20 t h, I was 
waiting for RMB to come back to me as well, and so I submitted to her 
what RMB was saying and what ABSA had said.  I even went to the 
20 
extent where I drew up a little Excel table just calculating on the 
amount and saying this is what BNP is charging us, this is what the 
banks are charging us and if I went with the maximum amount the 
banks would charge us this would be the fee and the fee came to 
R85million.  By then I realised we could definitely be saving if this is 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 160 of 171 
 
the route we’re going to go and so I wrote to her and that was the 
essence, raising my concern and that we should do a full comparison.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  I will go into the detail of this email in a little 
bit of time but there is something that I just want to pick up on on 
something you said.  You indicated that you wrote to her on the 20 May 
because you had been waiting for further responses.  I think you 
mentioned RNB.  But I want to draw your attention to page 466 because 
466 appears at least to me to be the response you got from RNB. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And that is after the 20 May.  It is the 25 May. 
10 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Am I reading that correctly? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That is correct ja because I 
was waiting for them… 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So you had not received RNB… 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL: I had not yet I was still 
waiting for them and – but I went ahead with what I had so that she 
already had some figures on the table. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And that – so then can I just clarify because I 
had understood you say you had RNB at the time of the 20 May you 
20 
have now clarified that that is not the case? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  No sorry I have not had them 
but my reason for the delay I came back the 17 t h I did not respond the 
18 t h or the 19 t h.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 161 of 171 
 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  By the 20 t h after getting my 
first one waited another day or two and then I thought let me respond 
at least with what I have on the table. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And so the table is reflective of what you had 
received by that stage from ABSA is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Right.  So let us just look at that email at 462 if 
we may because you raising some concerns for Ms Nhantsi’s 
consideration.  You say in the second paragraph after the first break 
you say: 
10 
“Therefore I am still very uncomfortable with the 
document that has been approved by the BAC for a 
fee of 1.5% to be paid on the success rate fee with 
BNP Capital and thought to ask you whether we can 
still reconsider the decision taken to confine to one 
service provider rather than open this wider to all.” 
That appears to have been your consistent concern, is that right? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Yes.  And rather open it to 
wide all yes that is what I requested.  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes.  And then at the end of the next paragraph 
20 
you raise a reputational risk issue for SAA.  Can you explain to us what 
your concern was there? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That we have been going out 
to the banks since 2015 Chair already and so the banks knew that we 
were seeking funds.  Part of the other activities we did with banks we 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 162 of 171 
 
met on a regular basis between National Treasury, SAA and the funders 
because they wanted to know what was happening with SAA especially 
if there is major changes like a CFO change or any major events that 
happened in SAA.  So for me is that if we now go out and we are saying 
we have got this client which personally I knew nothing about.  I tried 
to google them and find nothing about their web site, was not much to 
find out the work they would have done and achieved in sourcing huge 
capital amounts is that what reputation would SAA face being 
associated with a small client like this sourcing 15 billion.  So that was 
my concern. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then you conclude by saying you are 
available on your phone if she wishes to discuss it further even over 
the weekend or else you say you could meet on Monday and you say, 
as this is imperative that we review and reconsider this proposal in 
order to save money for the company and keep this company’s best 
interest at heart.  That again seems to be your persistent concern, is 
that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  We then go to paragraph 101 of your affidavit 
which is at page 18.  Where you record there that Ms Nhantsi decided 
20 
not to draw your attention – your concerns to the attention of the board 
and instead sought to secure their approval.  And you indicate there 
that the approval was granted by round robin resolution on the 24 May.  
You say though that you were not aware of that at the time, is that 
right/ 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 163 of 171 
 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So your communication with Ms Nhantsi is on 
the 20 t h you volunteering to meet over the weekend to discuss it further 
or on Monday.  On the 24 May approval is given but you are unaware of 
that? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  I am unaware of that.  I did 
not know it was approved at the time. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So what did you do on the 25 May and you can 
pick that up at page 102 – paragraph 102. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Ja I subsequently got the 
10 
response from Rand Merchant Bank and then forward that also to Ms 
Nhantsi saying this is the second one and again it is still a ball park 
figure that I have calculated.  I have built this table and there can still 
be substantial cost savings for SAA and I submitted that to her.  At the 
time I got – when I sent that to her I was then told that it has already 
been approved by a round robin. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Well before we get there could we – because 
Ms Stimpel with respect you do not seem to leave it at the email you 
engage in other modes of communication on the 25 t h.  So the email 
goes out.  I have now got RNB. This is what RNB is saying.  Let us just 
20 
summarise RNB, was it coming in around the ball park that you had 
received from ABSA? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct they were in that 
range so – and RNB gave additional information they even gave around 
if you were looking at the capital markets which I did not even ask for 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 164 of 171 
 
they gave additional information which is great for us to then also look 
at.  So yes I still had the concern and because I knew there was a 
board meeting coming up on the 27 t h I did not realise on the 24 t h that 
they had done a round robin I was still looking at the meeting coming 
up ahead.  And having sent the email and not having any response I 
thought let me engage Mr Nhantsi further.  I then sent a sms saying 
please can we meet, can we discuss there is still this, can we look at 
it?  And ja and then she responded to that. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Ms Stimpel.  I do want to just pause 
for a moment at the RNB quote.  You will find it at page 466.  Chair the 
10 
reason for spending a little bit time on this is because one of the points 
that are taken up in Mr Zwane’s application to cross-examine is Ms 
Stimpel is that the quotes that she sought to get from the banks were 
too hypothetical.  There was not enough information in them in the nub 
of the criticism as I read it.  And you referenced however that what RNB 
had come back with was actually some level of detail and alternative 
ways in which you could structure the funding as I read that email at 
page 466. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  They seem to be dealing with three scenarios 
20 
there.  Can you just take us through what RNB were saying? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Thank you Chair I will do so.  
So the first one is that we expect that SA would prefer to raise rand 
only that is ZAR and understand that the funding is largely going to be 
raised in order to restructure existing debt.  As such we believe that a 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 165 of 171 
 
bank loan package will be most appropriate.  In order to assist SAA in 
arranging the bank package which we are assuming would be 
government guaranteed we would charge a fee of approximately 50 
basis points of the total funding raised.  RNB would be mandated as the 
lead arranger.  Then point 2.  If SA wish to raise funding from a capital 
market perspective we expect that 5 billion would probably be the 
maximum that could be raised in the SA market with a government 
guarantee.  We would charge a fee of 20 basis points of the amounts 
issued.  RNB would be the acting – and acting as lead arranger for the 
issuance.  On the third point.  If SAA wish to access the full amount of 
10 
funding from the capital markets a US dollar bond which is also 
government guaranteed would be more appropriate we would charge a 
fee of 30 basis points of the nominal amount issued.  RNB would be 
acting as joint lead manager and we would recommend that at least two 
other joint lead managers are appointed who would share the proposed 
fee.  Please note that due to the limited amount of information that we 
have the above is still purely high level indications. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank yo. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  And so – ja – if I may also 
just clarify here.  Asking the hypothetical quote is for the banks – had I 
20 
gone for a pure quote the banks come back with a quote and you need 
to give specific information.  At that time I felt I could not divulge what 
was happening around the BNP issue and I needed to at least get some 
figures so I could compare and do comparable analysis with the fees 
that we were getting.   And so hence that is how I worded my emails.  
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 166 of 171 
 
And from both ABSA bank and RNB they understood what I wanted 
because they came back with a pricing.  Where there was additional 
prices to be paid either as lead arranger or for any other additional fee 
for instance – they added those basis points in.  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you and then we were just at the point 
where you engaged on sms with Ms Nhantsi because there had not 
been a response to your email and you will find that sms 
communication at page 471 that is under Tab 43.  Ms Stimpel I am not 
going to ask to read all of that communication but what is the gist of it 
as you recall it? 
10 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  In my message it was 
basically to again say that – to raise the point with Ms Nhantsi that I 
was away and came back to find that this was – the BNP was approved 
and then I wrote there it is unethical for us to pay this large amount 
when we know we can get better rates in the market.  Then Ms Nhantsi 
responds by saying that we need to have a meeting to make me 
understand.  Her words are  
“Cynthia I think we need to have a meeting and make 
you understand that at the end the board and 
executives take the decision not you.  We have a 
20 
crisis on our table and I need money.” 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And if you go over the page that is actually 
better – that part of the correspondence is better reflected because you 
have the top part until I need money but then Ms Nhantsi’s message 
goes on as I have it she says  
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 167 of 171 
 
“I need money urgently and you keep on questioning 
the process.  Unfortunately I am here to stabilize the 
airline and do what is right.   It is not my problem 
that you decided to go away without even my leave 
approval.  As I have said if you have questions talk 
to – talk – if you have questions about this talk to me 
next week.  I do not have time please.”   
And then if you go over the page at 473 your response – sorry please 
and then she goes on:   
“In fact you need to explain what is unethical about 
10 
this because that is a big statement that undermines 
our integrity.”   
And what is your response? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  I then say:  
“Please I have asked for a meeting and would like to 
meet and I have sent an email regarding my leave on 
the 5 May already.  I was struggling to book the 
leave on the system.”   
Because she alludes to me going without her approval.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then the last bit of the communication is at 
20 
the bottom.  What is her response? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  She writes:   
“As I have said this week it is madness for me you 
can set up a meeting for next week.” 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Now that is happening on the 25 May as I have 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 168 of 171 
 
it.  As it so happens the board had already decided to approve it the 
day before, is that correct? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And just so that we can see that board 
resolution let us go to it.  It is at page 480.  And it is under Tab 45.  It 
reflects again a round robin situation.  Just tell us about that round 
robin situation because you mentioned earlier in your evidence that 
there was a scheduled board meeting that you were aware of, is that 
right? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Correct. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So when was that scheduled board meeting to 
take place? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  On the 27 May. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So when you are corresponding on the 25 t h you 
are still in a position where you assumed that is when it is going to be 
discussed, is that right? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  Tabled at the board.  
Correct.  That was my understanding because especially a matter of 
this nature should be at – at a proper board meeting.  I did not expect 
that it would be done by a round robin.  But to explain how the round 
20 
robin works Chair is that the documents are sent via email to each of 
the board members and they then have an opportunity to respond.  
They can either obviously got to read it and then they can approve or 
not and raise any concerns that they have via email.  And this is all 
coordinated through the company secretary’s office.  Thanks. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 169 of 171 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So that round robin approval was given as of 
the 24 May and so the decision has been taken to procure funds – well 
to allow BNP to source funds for SAA and the letter of award that then 
goes to BNP goes the following day the 25 May when you were having 
that correspondence with Ms Nhantsi and you will find that at page 490 
under Tab 46.  And this is really the last aspect Chair because I see we 
are close to four o’clock that I propose to deal with today because we 
will move on to the last topic which is the cancellation fee after that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But let us just look at 490.  Ms Stimpel this is a 
10 
letter of award as I read it congratulating BNP Capital on being 
awarded the contract for sourcing of funds for South African Airways 
and they record there: 
“Kindly note that this letter of award is subject to the following 
conditions.” 
And those conditions include that the letter sets forth SAA’s 
understanding of the terms and conditions of our engagement and the 
nature of scope of the services to be provided in order to ensure that 
both parties are aware of their responsibilities.  It goes on under 2 to 
say the letter of award and any other correspondence dealing with the 
20 
subject matter constitutes the essential elements of the terms of our 
engagement and in the event of any inconsistency the agreement shall 
prevail.  And at 3, any services rendered by BNP prior to signing the 
agreement will be governed by the – by SAA’s general conditions of 
contract.  And it says that they hereby extend congratulations.  And 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 170 of 171 
 
they ask for acceptance of the award by return and you see over the 
page that does come back later on the 3 June.  Ms Stimpel are these 
terms standard in letters of award that specify that the terms and 
conditions of the engagement are contained in the letter of award or 
not? 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  The letter of award would 
then have the full terms.  This does not cover any of the – it just says 
letter of award sets forth the terms and conditions of our engagement.  
So there had to be an attachment to this. I do not see any.  I have no 
idea how the SEM department worked on this.  If this was done in the 
10 
treasury department we would have only sent a letter to say that they 
have been awarded this and we will follow on with the terms of 
agreement because that needs to negotiation between both parties 
legal department etcetera and so it would have been between SAA and 
the – the client’s legal team and that would have been the 
correspondence.  If this was the only letter it said sets forth but there 
is nothing in here that covers it that I can see. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair what we will move onto tomorrow is the 
cancellation fee that arises from this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  What is noteworthy and we will commence with 
it is that on the very same day that this letter is sent a letter is 
received from BNP Capital in which they are motivating for a 
cancellation fee. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
13 JUNE 2019 – DAY 112 
 
Page 171 of 171 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Of 50% of those fees that they would have 
earned on the sourcing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But we will go into that in more detail. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  And we start normal time tomorrow? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  I think normal time Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Normal should do. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Because we gone quite swiftly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS CYNTHIA AGNES SORAYA STIMPEL:  There is a bit more to deal 
10 
with with Ms Stimpel and then there is a second witness but I am 
confident we will conclude that in the day? 
CHAIRPERSON:    Okay.  Okay.  We will adjourn for the day and 
tomorrow we will start at ten o’clock.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 14 JUNE 2019 
 
