 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
BRAAMFONTEIN CHAMBERS 
 
 
 
10 
 
13 MARCH 2020 
 
 
 
DAY 223 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 2 of 146 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 13 MARCH 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Pretorius, good morning everybody. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR AGRIZZI:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Agrizzi.  We are starting with a 
matter relating to Mr Agrizzi and Ms Jabulele Elizabeth Sishuba and 
then we will thereafter proceed with the evidence that we were hearing 
yesterday.  Yes Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Chair the purpose brief hearing this 
10 
morning is to allow Mr Agrizzi to put an apology on record in respect of 
evidence given in January last year.  But because it is a public apology 
it is necessary to place the words that Mr Agrizzi would use in their 
context and if I may take five minutes to do so? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  On the 24 January 2019 Mr Agrizzi 
testified and amongst other things gave testimony implicating Ms 
Sishuba by saying that she had received money from BOSASA or one of 
its subsidiaries.  A Rule 3.3 Notice was issued to Ms Sishuba and she 
consequent upon that made an application requiring the allegation to be 
20 
retracted and if there was no retraction she would apply to cross-
examine Mr Agrizzi.  In response to that and on affidavit Mr Agrizzi on 
the 8 April 2019 retracted the allegation and apologised.  A further 
affidavit was filed by Ms Sishuba which noted the apology but raised 
the issue that the apology appeared to be somewhat qualified and 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 3 of 146 
 
proffered the wording of a different apology.  There was a further 
response filed by Mr Agrizzi on the 2 August which confirmed the 
contents of his previous affidavit and he stated quote “I take full 
responsibility for the error that occurred”.  The application by Ms 
Sishuba came before you on the 3 – well came before you in – later in 
2019 during August and on the 3 September 2019 you Chair made a 
ruling saying that Ms Sishuba’s application was justified but that no 
order was necessary to be made and you noted that Mr Agrizzi would 
apologise on record in an open hearing.  If I may just quote from your 
ruling Chair.  You stated on the 3 September at page 44 of SEQ4  
10 
“I think it is enough that Mr Agrizzi has said: 
1. He made an error by suggesting that Ms Sishuba had 
received bribes from BOSASA. 
2. He said he takes full responsibility for that. 
3. He said he apologises to Ms Sishuba for that. 
4. He said he will repeat all of this when he comes 
before the commission next time.” 
In those circumstances you said Chair it was unnecessary for you to 
make any positive order.  Arising out of that background Chair Mr 
Agrizzi is now here to place on record his apology.  Mr Agrizzi. 
20 
MR AGRIZZI:  Chair good morning again. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  I am sorry perhaps you should be sworn 
so that the apology is on oath. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes he should be sworn first.  Please administer the 
oath or affirmation. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 4 of 146 
 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
MR AGRIZZI:  Angelo Agrizzi. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the prescribed oath? 
MR AGRIZZI:  No I do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on your 
conscience? 
MR AGRIZZI:  Yes I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give will be the 
truth; the whole truth and nothing else but the truth if so please raise 
your right hand and say, so help me God. 
10 
MR AGRIZZI:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Yes – Yes Mr Agrizzi. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Agrizzi I understand you have 
prepared an apology. 
MR AGRIZZI:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And are ready to place it on record. 
MR AGRIZZI:  Yes.   
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Would you do so please? 
MR AGRIZZI:  Chair and Ms Sishuba and your Counsel. I am truly, truly 
sorry it was – as soon as it was brought to my attention right in the 
20 
beginning that there was a confusion and I have confused the names I 
already apologised so there was no – there was not malice intended.  I 
think it was rough, it was confusing and everything happening so I am 
really sorry and I do not want to – I do not want to belabour the point 
but I think that I understand that it has done harm and damage and my 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 5 of 146 
 
– and as I apologised to Ms Sishuba this morning and I said to her, 
sorry and she accepted it.  So I thank you for accepting my apology and 
I really do.  I made an error, a pure error and I am sorry and I 
understand in that – just it is damaging to people and I am sorry.  I 
really am. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Thank you.  I think that we are therefore 
done Mr Agrizzi has once again apologised to Ms Sishuba has said that 
that was an error and I think that is where it should end.  Thank you.  
Are you ready that we release Mr Agrizzi? 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you Mr Agrizzi you are released.  Thank 
you very much. 
MR AGRIZZI:  Thank you Chief Justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  I will adjourn for five minutes to allow for 
rearrangements so that we can proceed with the evidence for the day.  
We adjourn. 
MEETING ADJOURNS 
HEARING RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Soni, good morning everybody. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Morning Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready? 
MR MOLEFE:  We are. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us proceed.  Ja thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chair before Mr Molefe’s evidence perhaps he 
should be sworn in.  But before he gives his – oh perhaps – and I 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 6 of 146 
 
should do it while he is on oath. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no the oath that he took two days ago will continue 
to apply. 
REGISTRAR:  As – as it pleases. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson yesterday or I think it was on 
Wednesday I indicated that two people had not been served because 
they were in Zimbabwe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I hear what you.. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  In regard to the PRASA matter. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  You will have to raise your voice again. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh – oh sorry Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I – on Wednesday I indicated that two people had 
not been served because they were in Zimbabwe.  It is the ideal 
opportunity to point out that they are referred to in paragraphs 47.2 and 
47.3.  47.2 of Mr Molefe’s affidavit Chair is – which is SS6 refers to a 
Mr Mahlangu who was the General Secretary of Satawu and a company 
known as Bashume.  They were the two persons who were not served 
because they are in Zimbabwe and we could not find addresses for 
20 
them.  But I thought I would just complete the picture. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That – because they are specifically mentioned. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  In the last part of the evidence Mr Molefe gave. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 7 of 146 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no that is fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now Mr Molefe yesterday you were pointing – 
when you ended you were sketching the background against which Mr 
Montana left PRASA and you were saying there were various incidents 
of support for him and strikes and so on, do you recall that? 
MR MOLEFE:  I recall Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And one of the questions that you reflect on in 
your affidavit Mr Molefe is how is that given all of these disruption at 
PRASA, given all the scandal that wracked PRASA Mr Montana 
survived?  That is a matter you address in your affidavit.  Will you 
10 
outline to the Chairperson what your view is as to how that came 
about? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson I would like to place on record a minor 
correction. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE: Regarding the point that was raised by Counsel in 
respect of individuals or persons. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:    Who could not be served. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:    With notices. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  I need to clarify the second part of it.  Bashume is 
actually not a person unless we are talking about juristic person.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 8 of 146 
 
MR MOLEFE:    It was a company. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  That was established by Mr Mahlangu and his colleagues 
at Satawu. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  An investment company. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  Yes.  I took it that Mr Soni was using 
persons to include a juristic person but that is maybe because when I 
read I – the affidavit I understood it to be a reference to a company.  
But of course it may be that the point you make is that – is that 
10 
company is registered in South Africa. 
MR MOLEFE:  In South Africa. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Mr Chairperson as I understand it and the 
reason it could not be served is the – the – Mr Mahlangu is the sort of 
creator or the company and the company could only be served through 
him.  And you will recall Mr Chairman on Wednesday I said it was a 
person and a company.  And that is the association between Bashume 
and Mr Mahlangu. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  But if it is registered in South Africa it ought to 
20 
have a registered address in South Africa. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is what could not be found Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that could not be found.  And was a check made 
or was there somebody who checked in the relevant company offices – I 
mean registers and find – found out?  Because as long it is registered 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 9 of 146 
 
in South Africa it should have a registered office. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that registered office would need to have a 
physical address. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Chairperson that was done by the section 
but can I get clarity on that and when we do get clarity we will place it 
on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I – so that needs to be checked because there 
might be nobody there at the registered office but as long as it remains 
the registered office of the company then you can even serve – there 
10 
are various ways of service. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Even if there is nobody you can – you can serve. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And if the owners of the company have decided not to 
make any arrangements as to how they receive correspondence and 
other – and court processes that are sought to be served then that may 
be their own problem. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But we would need to be seen to have served at the 
20 
registered office.  And that would serve – if Mr Mahlangu is presumed 
the Managing Director he could be served in – on the same address I 
would think. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.   
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 10 of 146 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I will attend to that Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well – well thank you Mr Molefe for bringing that 
clarification up.  That of course raises the question of what do you do if 
indeed the one person – juristic person is registered in South Africa 
and has an address in South Africa but no attempt has been made to 
serve on that address.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I can say to you from what I have received from 
the administrative section of the commission Chairperson that an 
attempt was in fact made and what is recorded here is there are no 
contact details either for Mr Mahlangu or Bashume. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but the question is, was there an attempt made to 
serve on the registered address? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson may – may I suggest the following 
process Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That we make those enquiries as soon as we can 
and if there is a con – there are contact details then we effect serve 
this now and just extend the period for the 3.3 the rights contained in 
3.3 to apply from the time the service has been effected. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I do not particularly remember how serious the 
allegations are that led to Mr Mahlangu and Bashume but it is important 
that if at all possible all reasonable measures be taken to ensure that 
service is affected. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 11 of 146 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And – and it does not necessarily mean that the Rule 
3.3 Notice has to be given to a person if there is nobody and attempts 
have – reasonable attempts have been made to get somebody that at 
least those attempts should be made and then somebody should – if it 
is not a return of service from a sheriff then somebody who made those 
attempts needs to depose to an affidavit setting out what attempts were 
made. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The one option of course is that because those 
attempts are yet to be made to serve on the registered address of the 
10 
company which could be used for Mr Mahlangu as well one option is 
that Mr Molefe’s evidence would skip the part relating to Mr Mahlangu 
and Bashume until that has been done. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It would just – we would have to apologise to Mr 
Molefe that he would have to come back for what might not take long 
but because it is necessary that attempts that were not made should be 
made.  So that is – I think that probably is the safer route. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Molefe how do you feel about having to come back 
20 
to deal with that later after these attempts have been made? 
MR MOLEFE:  I am happy with the guidance that I will have from the 
Chair and the Counsel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank – thank you very much. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please Chair.  Mr Molefe I just want to 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 12 of 146 
 
return to the issue you reflect on in your affidavit namely how was it 
that Mr Montana with all the scandal surrounding him and PRASA would 
survive from 2008 to 2015? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson I indicate in my affidavit that I found it quite 
intriguing that despite the findings by the High Courts in this land and 
the Public Protector in her reports about corrupt activities of Mr 
Montana.  He continued to – to – to go around with nobody really taking 
up those matters.  The – the first point we – I make in an attempt to 
look at what might be the cause of that and the relationships between 
Mr Montana and certain political officers is that during 1990’s – late 
10 
1990’s and early 2000 Mr Montana and a gentleman whose name 
features prominently throughout and in particular in the Swifambo 
contract, Siyaya relating to the Braamfontein Depot and several other 
services provided to PRASA worked for the Department of Public 
Enterprise under Minister Jeff Radebe.  Mr Montana was the director in 
the office of the Minister – Minister Radebe and Mr Makhensa was a 
director in the same department, different division but reporting to the 
Department of Public Enterprises.  The second point I make is that 
when Minister Radebe in 2004 was appointed Minister of Transport Mr 
Montana followed him and when he got back I think he ended up at the 
20 
high position of Deputy Director General which is a big jump from what 
he was at – at Public Enterprises.  Around that period when Minister 
Radebe was the Minister of Transport the government initiated an 
ambitious programme of taxi re-capitalisation with a view to improving 
taxi services in South Africa giving them vehicles which ostensibly were 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 13 of 146 
 
to assist in minimising breakdowns and accidents that affected the 
passengers.  When this programme…. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I must – I must just confess that I never quite 
understood that – that programme but it is okay.  I am saying I must 
just confess that I never quite understood that programme of re-
capitalisation of taxis or whatever but it is fine.  Maybe I just did not – 
never got somebody who could explain it properly.   
MR MOLEFE:  Thank you very much Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  But I must just ask Mr Molefe from here do you 
hear me well because I did pick up yesterday. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  I do, I do Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do okay.  Yesterday at some state I was not sure 
whether you could hear me well. 
MR MOLEFE:  There was a time when one question I could not hear. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  Except after it had been repeated.  Well it might also 
being my mind being elsewhere at the time but maybe (indistinct). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright.  You were continuing and I interrupted 
you.  You were saying there was this big programme that – of taxi re-
capitalisation that the Department of Transport came up with. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  When the taxi re-capitalisation programme began two 
things happened.  Mr Montana was given the responsibility to own that 
process.  It means to be the one who directs the taxi re-capitalisation 
programme.  The second thing that happened was that Mr Mabunda 
Makhensa decided to – to go into the private sector.  He became a – a 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 14 of 146 
 
private you know… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Business person. 
MR MOLEFE:  Business person. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  And what happens is that he then becomes one of those 
perhaps even the key one who gets a tender ostensibly to provide 
transactional advisory services with regard to that taxi re-capitalisation 
programme.  The third point we – we make which I make – I keep 
saying we – like one of the witnesses previously.  The third point I 
make is that a few months later and as a result of the – the South 
10 
African Railways Commuter Corporation which was an offspring of what 
used to be a big organisation that included Transnet and others – 
including South African Airways at the time now it had been created as 
a new organisation.  Minister Radabe then appointed – well that 
organisation changed its name to what is currently known as PRASA.  
That is SARCC here became PRASA.  Then Minister Radabe appointed 
Mr Montana – firstly he was – he put him on the Board whilst he was 
still in his office later he appointed him Group CEO of that 
organisation.  Now we looking at two individuals Mabunda and 
Montana.  When Mr Montana moved to SARCC and what is now known 
20 
as PRASA Mr Mabunda emerges again as a very important service 
provider to PRASA.  He provided a whole range of what they called 
transactional advisory services.  He was advising on the major 
signalling rollout programme which I referred to earlier on in my 
evidence as one that had to do with the establishment of this nerve 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 15 of 146 
 
centre in Kalkfontein by Siemans and the rollout in KwaZulu Natal 
under the auspices of Bombardia Transport Signalling division.  The 
third one was Talis Africa with their black partners in the – in the 
Western Cape.  So Mr Mabunda then was brought into be the 
transactional advisor to all these important projects. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry Mr Molefe and I know you want – I just want 
to work out … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Raise your voice Mr Soni please. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh sorry ja Chairperson.  What were Mr 
Mabunda’s qualifications to be given these massive contracts? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson I would not want to speculate about that.  I 
do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not know yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  But when we did other investigations say for example 
with regard to Swifambo and so on he did not appear to know much or 
anything about the leasing of locomotives or manufacturing or so.  But I 
may say that by the way in the evidence that emerged as a result of the 
investigations conducted on Swifambo it appeared that he had bought a 
company, a – a micro lending company which micro lending company 
was then transformed into Swifambo.  I have no evidence of any other 
20 
qualifications that he would have had to justify him been given all these 
contracts save that he had worked in this very important office that had 
this big programmes to roll out.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Just on that score you say that he also headed 
Siyaya Engineering Consultancy. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 16 of 146 
 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes he did so Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Do you know if he had any engineering 
qualifications? 
MR MOLEFE:  I – I have not personally established whether he had 
engineering qualifications.  That notwithstanding of course maybe he 
did have but he got all this important programmes with critical 
engineering requirements.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And you know that the evidence will be that Siyaya 
– the Siyaya companies earned more than R1 billion from PRASA or 
were paid more than R1 billion from PRASA.  I am just placing that on 
10 
record.   
MR MOLEFE:  Well at this stage I would not say I know that evidence 
would be led in that regard because I have seen anybody’s statements 
saying that.  My statement does say he – he was paid approximately – 
Siyaya was paid approximately R900 million. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It – sorry carry on. 
MR MOLEFE:  No it is fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now you also mentioned Mr Daniel Mthumkhulu in 
20 
paragraph 51 of your affidavit.  What role did he play in – in the 
formulation of these policies or the – the award of these contracts? 
MR MOLEFE:  Mr Daniel Mthumkhulu is somebody designated Chief 
Engineer at the time at PRASA although evidence later demonstrated 
that he had nothing that would have brought him anywhere near being 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 17 of 146 
 
called Chief Engineer was responsible for most of these programmes.  
He worked very closely with Mr Makhensa.  He is the kind of a person 
who would have made submissions to the Group CEO on approvals of a 
range of these projects.  I will be guided by Counsel.  I can go on and 
deal with others where he has got a role because now… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  I do not know how far to go. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  But maybe I should leave that for when we come to some 
of those points. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  We – we will and we will – we will deal with what 
the Supreme Court of Appeal especially said about Mr Mthumkhulu.  So 
we – we – I want to return to that because this is something that is 
important for the commission for one but also something that has to be 
set out in public. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe what might not a bad idea Mr Molefe is that 
you make a note of some of the issues that you believe are important 
and at the end of Mr Soni’s questions if I can give you a chance if there 
are other matters that you believe are important that you should tell me 
then you can deal with those if – if you believe that they are important.  
20 
Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  I am happy to do so Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, Yes.  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now thereafter just coming to Mr Mthumkhulu you 
– you in fact referred to the judgments of the High Court in these – of 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 18 of 146 
 
the High Court and the Supreme Court of Appeal in the Swifambo 
matter and the comments they made about Mthumkhulu.  You say at 
paragraph 55 of your affidavit. 
MR MOLEFE:  I do Sir – I do Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now can we then deal with the Swifambo matter 
and Mr Molefe your affidavit refers to the – the judgment mainly of the 
Supreme Court of Appeal and we will refer specifically to certain 
paragraphs of the judgment.  Before we do that can you tell the 
Chairperson what the Swifambo contract entailed? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairman the Swifambo contract entailed the – initially it 
10 
was intended to be – and that is what was articulated in the RFP the 
leasing of locomotives which would be used for here what was called 
the Mine Line Passenger Services but also used in routes in the – in 
the Metro areas where of course there were a lot of failures of old 
locomotives which we said were not re-capitalised for 40 years.  So 
that was supposed to be.  But of course in the course of that process of 
procurement I suppose something that typifies how procurement 
processes were manipulated suddenly Swifambo was allowed to – to 
offer a proposal on the manufacturing of locomotives which was not 
part of the RFP right at the beginning.  So the process went on, there 
20 
were specifications of what would be needed by PRASA because 
PRASA was going to operate on the rail tracks and signalling systems 
that had been designed by – at the time when Transnet was still that 
big organisation with everyone inside and they – what was to be leased 
or procured needed to comply with the Rail Safety Regulators 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 19 of 146 
 
requirements or they would have had to be approved by the Rail Safety 
Regulator but they also needed to comply with rail network of Transnet. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now you have intimate knowledge of the 
Swifambo matter because you made the affidavits in support of 
PRASA’s application to review and set aside those awards, am I 
correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now just again, as a general proposition, without 
going into details, what were the points that you took, when I say you, 
I’m talking about PRASA took in asking the Court to review and set 
10 
aside the award of the contract to Swifambo? 
MR MOLEFE:   The investigation, Chairperson that we conducted 
demonstrated, conclusively that, that procurement process was flawed, 
was corrupt – well let me say corrupted that Swifambo itself 
notwithstanding the fact that it did not meet the requirement set out in 
the RFP, this being amongst others, the need for them to have a track 
record in rail business, either being leasing or manufacture they 
needed a track record.  Secondly they needed to demonstrate that they 
had the skills necessary to carry out a programme of that size and as 
complex as it was.  The third point was that they needed to have, and I 
20 
think it will be an element that includes that capacity, sufficient 
qualified people to carry out the programme.  Fourthly it was a 
requirement that a bond deposit of 10% of the value of the contract be 
paid upfront.  They also needed to demonstrate that they would be able 
to implement the local content requirement which is often included in 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 20 of 146 
 
the PPPFA.  Now in respect of all of those matters, Swifambo did not 
qualify.  I needed to have say – said also earlier on when I said that 
there was a need to comply with the rail safety network, the rail 
systems network in South Africa, that in fact, initially, what should have 
been procured by PRASA would have been in the context of Europe and 
Spain would have been Euro 3000 and Euro 3000 is a model of a 
locomotive that would have complied in all respects with the 
requirement of South Africa including Israel, Narrow-gauge, the height 
of the electric pylons, the pantograph on top of the locomotive and so 
on but in the end what was procured was what was known as Euro 
10 
4000.   
 
It was so because the company Vossloh which, at this stage 
was not bidding to supply these locomotives was also advising PRASA 
on what it needed and that company, in Europe, in Spain and Barcelona 
had already discontinued the production line for Euro 3000 and they 
started the production line for Euro 4000.  It would appear that they did 
so because there was no longer traction for that product where they 
were selling their locomotives.  So they then influenced PRASA to buy 
what, more or less, was from the shelf, no longer – according to the 
specifications set in the RPF and interestingly enough, I don’t want to 
20 
go into the details of what happened in Court, but the evidence that 
emerged also was that, in fact, the company that became the sub-
contractor of Swifambo, but only after the contract was concluded with 
Swifambo which had nothing – no capacity to provide locomotives.  In 
their own report, indicated that, in fact, they were in trouble. So 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 21 of 146 
 
PRASA’s contract was the biggest ever and a life saver for Vossloh.  I 
do need to say that – I was asked about Mr Daniel Mthimkhulu earlier 
on, Daniel Mthimkhulu was pretty central to the design of the 
specifications, he had interacted very closely with Vossloh, he was the 
one invited by Vossloh to persuade the company, PRASA to go along 
with Euro 4000 which later was baptised in South Africa to Afro 4000. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That’s the background and that’s what you had 
set out in your affidavit in support of the review application, would I be 
correct. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is so sir, it’s easy to say [indistinct] Chairperson 
10 
that I had no occasion to refresh my memory but - by reading the 
affidavits but if there are minor differences really they – I don’t think 
they’ll be material, I think what I’ve presented is the essence of the 
message. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I think what you have presented seems to be 
very much in line with the judgements that were given. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So can I then say the first issue that I want to deal 
with is the – well what was the outcome when the matter went to the 
Gauteng Local Division in Johannesburg, the outcome of the review 
application?  
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson when the matter went to the Gauteng High 
Court, our application – firstly let me say was to have the contract 
declared irregular and to have it set outside as being unlawful, that is 
what the Court granted, it declared, in a very scathing judgment that, 
that contract was corrupted from the beginning, it was irregular, it was 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 22 of 146 
 
unlawful and failed to be set aside. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay we deal with the basis on which was done, 
the matter then went to the SCA. 
MR MOLEFE:   There is just one point I need to make, I hope counsel 
does not get irritated with me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No. 
MR MOLEFE:   Because I don’t know if we’re going to get the 
opportunity to get to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   We come down showing the relationship between Mr 
10 
Montana and Mabunda.  We then deal more with his relationship with 
Mthimkhulu but it was there because he appointed, then, this Chief 
Engineer and he was reporting to him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   In that case before the High Court of Gauteng, Mr 
Montana applied to become the friend of the Court but basically saying 
that there is evidence that PRASA should be placing before the Court, 
it is not.  One would have expected that he would say to PRASA, I 
worked in this company there are these other matters that you seem to 
have left out, he did not but what emerged in that – his application, was 
20 
that fundamentally he wanted to defend the Swifambo contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So can I then, just on that point, Mr Molefe, ask 
you to look at the judgments bundle please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just tell him what’s written on the spine.  Also for the 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 23 of 146 
 
record just say what is written on the spine of the bundle? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson it will be SS3 – sorry SS2, judgments 
it will be bundle A, SS2 judgements, used. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it’s Bundle A. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Bundle A and SS2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he Judgment is …[intervenes]. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It’s the first judgment in that…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja okay, so that’s what page of the bundle is it? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Page 3, Mr Chairperson – sorry page 3 of the 
record – of that bundle. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are your bundles not sequential here or they are not 
– okay it’s page 1 of the judgment that is the judgment of Judge 
Francis. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And then it will be the second page of that 
judgement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There’s supposed to be – I think that’s just confusing 
but are you able to find it under SS2 Mr Molefe, you have found it? 
MR MOLEFE:   I have found it chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And for the record Mr Chairperson, this will 
20 
appear at SS2, page 3. Could you read paragraph 3 of what Judge 
Francis said into the record, Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   Are we on page 3? 
CHAIRPERSON   What paragraph number Mr Soni? 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 24 of 146 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Page 2 of the judgement but page 3 of the Bundle 
of SS2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No I think tell him the paragraph number of the 
judgement that you want him to read. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Paragraph 3 Mr Molefe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja I think you may have said page 3. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is what confused me initially we said page 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja I think he said page – okay paragraph 3, you want 
him to read that part, that paragraph? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   The paragraph reads as follows, Chairperson, 
 
“At the commencement of the proceedings I had an  application 
brought by Lakhe Montana (Montana) who used to  be the Group Chief 
Executive Officer (GCEO) of PRASA to be  admitted as a friend of the 
Court.  That application was  
dismissed with costs and reasons 
were provided in a  
separate judgment”. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So that is the point you wanted to make? 
MR MOLEFE:   I made earlier on. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Chairperson that judgement is available – the 
20 
application papers are available but we would make them available and 
have them as part of the record if you wish, but having considered them 
as a whole, we don’t think it adds to what we are concerned with Mr 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 25 of 146 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then Mr Molefe, can I ask you to look at the 
second judgement there which is – appears at page 63 of SS2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Assuming that the dividers have the same colours it’s 
under 2 of the green dividers.  I think the – Mr Soni the – in this bundle 
the pagination is still not how it should be for everything that’s in the 
same bundle there should be a complete pagination from page 1 up to 
the end so that when you say Bundle A you just say page so and so 
without having to look at the page number of the particular document.  
So maybe at some stage that can be sorted out and for all others to 
follow. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Are you there Mr Molefe, have you located the 
judgement? 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s the judgement of the …[intervenes]. 
MR MOLEFE:   It would seem in the document it is recorded as page 64 
I have. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes you will see it says Supreme Court of Appeal 
Judgement. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now I want to refer you to some of the 
paragraphs of the judgement and can I start with paragraph 4 of that 
judgement? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course Mr Soni, Mr Molefe can just make the 
important points without reading unless there is something significant 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 26 of 146 
 
in a particular paragraph, then it should be read. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now you were making the point that it was Mr 
Mthimkhulu who drafted the specs for this.  What does the SCA say in 
that paragraph regarding the role of Mr Mthimkhulu? 
MR MOLEFE:   The SCA, Chairperson, and I’m paraphrasing, following 
what the Chairperson has said, held that - noted that Mr Mthimkhulu, as 
I said was the one who drafted the memorandum and made submission. 
He recommended that PRASA procures at that time 100 locomotives at 
the cost of R5billion and correctly stating that – because the fleet that 
PRASA had was outdated. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then if you turn to paragraph 7…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I can say, Mr Soni,  also that because this is a 
judgement as opposed to any other document, it’s quite fine to just 
highlight even if you highlight. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To say in this paragraph this is what – this is the 
conclusion reached by the Supreme Court of Appeal and that 
paragraph, just highlight the conclusions and then if Mr Molefe wishes 
to add any perspective in regard to any conclusion of the Court, then 
he can do so. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Chairperson, in the sense, Mr Molefe’s 
affidavit itself does exactly that and maybe it would be better just to 
deal with the – because he actually sets out which paragraph he’s 
speaking to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 27 of 146 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And perhaps I should just lead him on his 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja if he has captured, and I think he has in his 
affidavit we don’t need to go to the judgement unless there is a 
paragraph where there’s something special about how it’s phrased or 
anything like that.  If we just capture what were the important findings 
or conclusions reached by the Supreme Court of Appeal that should be 
enough. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes and I have checked them over again Mr 
Chairperson, they coincide. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no that’s fine as I say, unless Mr Molefe has some 
important perspective that he wants to highlight in regard to any 
particular finding.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So Mr Molefe, to place matters on record can I 
ask you to start looking at your affidavit from paragraph 61 and just 
indicate what – where the important points made by the Supreme Court, 
as you captured in your affidavit and you don’t have to read everything 
there, you can just say at paragraph 6 this is what they dealt with, this 
is what they dealt with but it’s then part of the record of the evidence 
before the Commission Mr Molefe, are you with me at paragraph 61? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   I am Chairperson, the paragraph 61 Chairperson, 
confirms the statement I made earlier on that Mr Mthimkhulu, in July 
2011 submitted to Mr Montana, a recommendation in respect of – in 
which he was asking approval for procurement of 100 locomotives over 
a period of six years but a RFP was then published in November of the 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 28 of 146 
 
same year, the RFP recommended – well was calling for procurement of 
88 locomotives.  My recollection is that, at the end of that process, in 
the 
final 
analysis, 
only 
70 
locomotives 
were 
ordered. 
 
So 
the…[intervenes]. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But for the – and what was the price, was there 
going to be a change in price? 
MR MOLEFE:   The prices would change and the price changed then 
from R5billion to R3.4billion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When I read the Supreme Court of Appeal judgement 
I didn’t pick up anything that may have been placed before Court that 
10 
explained how the number of locomotives jumped from 88 to 100, I may 
have missed it.  Do you recall if there was any information as to how 
the number jumped from 88 to 100? 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson my - in dealing – attempting to deal with 
that question I must say that my experience as we – as a Board were 
interrogating these matters.  We found that no hedging or no correct 
foreign currency hedging was effected, built into the procurement price 
to the extent that it was done.  It was, for example, one that put 
exchange rates of rand to Euro at R10.40 per Euro.  By the time this 
procurement happened the exchange rate had changed so the hedging 
20 
was not protecting PRASA against the escalation.  So as the Euro 
became stronger and the rand weaker the prices went up and when the 
price went up the budget being what it was for 88 locomotives, PRASA 
could no longer – or let me start off, being for 100 locomotives, could 
not afford to pay for 100 locomotives because it would have then meant 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 29 of 146 
 
that it would need to put more money to meet this escalation of the 
Euro.  So that is what then caused management to constantly reduce 
the numbers to try and deal with something that they believed would be 
manageable. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I may have misunderstood something, I thought you 
said the RFP had contemplated 88 locomotives but ultimately what was 
ordered was 100 and I was asking about that jump but what you have 
just told me seems to suggest that 100 may have been contemplated 
but because of there having been no hedging then a lesser number of 
locomotives had to be obtained? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   I think I was mistaken, let me try and take it in a 
chronological order. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   To clarify matters Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   A memorandum for procurement of 100 locomotives is 
submitted to Mr Montana by Mr Mthimkhulu in July 2011, he says let’s 
buy 100 locomotives. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   However when the RFP is issued, PRASA says no we’ll 
20 
procure 88 locomotives.  I have no recollection of any motivation why 
Mr Mthimkhulu’s request for 100 locomotives was not accepted as was. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   Now – so the order is then – the RFP envisages 88 
locomotives but because of the passage of time, and at that time the 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 30 of 146 
 
price tag was R10.40 but as time lapsed the Euro was escalating, 
getting stronger, the rand weaker.  Even the 88 locomotives could no 
longer be affordable on the budget that was set aside at that time.  So 
management then reduced the numbers again I think to a lesser than 88 
locomotives. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, no now I understand, I think I may have 
got the 88 and 100 wrong from what you say, the 100 came from the 
memorandum from Mr Mthimkhulu to Mr Montana but at the time of the 
RFP 88 was the number that was put to the RFP. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson just again, if I can put on my 
lawyer’s hat, one of the points that this made is, there wasn’t a need 
analysis for how many exactly were required.  So that also, in a sense 
tainted the procurement process because when one procures for that 
amount of money one needs to say, well we need 20 or we need 50 or 
we need 100 and if you read, both the judgement of Justice Francis and 
Justice Lewis you will see, Mr Chairperson, that is part of the theme 
that emerges, aside from the issue that Mr Molefe…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, okay thank you. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes and then Mr Molefe you had finished now with 
Mr – what the specifications were.  At paragraph 62 you detail what the 
SCA said about Mr Mthimkhulu, could you place that on record? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes Chairperson, the Court held – the SCA held that Mr 
Mthimkhulu had no expertise for – on the subject that he was given 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 31 of 146 
 
responsibility for but it also noted that he had been, if you like, just 
elevated and promoted to that position of Chief Engineer and 
…[intervenes]. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   By Whom? 
MR MOLEFE:   By Mr Montana and the Court noted that his rise was 
maturing, I don’t know good English, but I think it means that very 
rapid, very fast, concomitantly what – together with this rise was also 
the rise in his salary increase. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And as regards his qualifications what did the 
SCA say? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   The SCA had established – held that he didn’t have the 
qualification and it arrived at that conclusion, Chairperson, because in 
various ways Mr Mthimkhulu had lied about his qualifications.  He 
claimed that he had a Bachelor of – Bachelor degree in technical – in 
engineering, something like that and he also later argued that he had a 
PHD, Doctorate from a German University and in one meeting where I 
sat with him he produced a letter, because we said, show us the award 
that you qualify, you have this qualification and he produced a letter, I 
said, no, no the award of a Doctorate is not done in this way.  Why is it 
that this appears to be just a letter that you would just show to people, 
20 
where we want to see the real award by the University.  He did not have 
that, in the end of course, it was established that he didn’t even have 
the technical diploma that he said he had. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now one of the matters that the SCA deals with in 
paragraph 7 is…[intervenes]. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 32 of 146 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Well maybe Chairperson, I should say that in order for 
Mr Mthimkhulu to get where he got to, he lied at different times.  At one 
point he lied to the Board and to Mr Montana that a company called DP 
Shancke in Germany had offered him a job and he was going to leave 
the country to go and work in Germany and Mr Montana believing that 
Mr Mthimkhulu is an asset to PRASA said, no don’t go we will pay you 
what that company was going to pay you.  So that’s how he found his 
way, I just wanted to put that on record as well. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Was there such an offer? 
MR MOLEFE:   There was – it was a fake letter the investigations 
10 
proved that there had never been such an offer.  The company that he 
said made him an offer didn’t even know him. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And as regards his qualification just read the last 
sentence of paragraph 62 of your affidavit, what did the SCA say about 
his qualifications. 
MR MOLEFE:   The SCA categorically says, 
 
“In fact he had no qualification at all”. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Tell me, did you ever, at any stage at PRASA, get to 
know whether, in his personnel file that PRASA is supposed to have 
kept, whether there were documents that purported to be degree 
20 
certificates, diploma certificates that he may have used to mislead 
whoever appointed him or promoted him to various positions or did he 
just say I’ve got this qualification and that was accepted, was that 
something you ever got to know? 
MR MOLEFE:   My recollection is that he produced letters from various 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 33 of 146 
 
institutions and I think in the case of the Vaal Technical College which 
is here in the South of Gauteng Province, he produced what purported 
to be a diploma.  The institution rejected that and said that it was a 
fake diploma. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now in regard to…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni, you must help to keep your eye on time, we 
need to take the tea adjournment, we normally take it at quarter past 
eleven.  Let’s take the tea adjournment, it’s now twenty-two minutes 
past, we will resume at twenty to twelve, we adjourn. 
10 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us proceed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you pleases Mr Chairperson.  Mr Molefe you 
were saying that Mr Mthimkhulu well according to the SCA funds 
Mr Mthimkhulu had no qualifications, what did they say about and, we 
have dealt with this in your evidence, what was the finding in regard to 
the specifications drawn up by Mr Mthimkhulu. 
MR MOLEFE:   The – the first point that the Court makes is that 
20 
Mr Mthimkhulu contravened the Procurement Policy of PRASA which 
means Supply Chain Management Process that he actually used the 
specification provided to him by Vossloh he makes that what PRASA 
procured to suit what Vossloho required and Vossloh as I earlier indicated 
in my evidence had in May of 2011 given advice to PRASA on what its 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 34 of 146 
 
requirement should be. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And what did it – sorry, sorry you were 
...[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   It is okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What did it say about MrMthimkuhulu’s,  about how 
Mr Mthimkhulu determined those specifications, you refer to it in your 
affidavit when you say the SCA agreed at paragraph 63. 
MR MOLEFE:   Well – well basically they our findings and it was in our 
investigations as well that Mr Mthimkhulu tailored the specifications to be 
in line with what the company at Vossloh required and in the and it had no 
10 
relevance to the needs of PRASA there was no strategic procurement 
planning .   
 
There was no need analysis as we said earlier on but they 
proceeded then to procure this locomotive to benefit both Swifambo and 
Vossloh and clearly therefore that it was what the Court states is that the 
– the tender process was corrupt. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, in regard to Mr Mthimkhulu’s actions what did 
Francis J say regarding his state of mind? 
MR MOLEFE:   The Honourable Judge concluded that Mr Mthimkhulu 
conducted himself in a dishonest manner and that even Swifambo which 
20 
is the company that he awarded the tender to, did not deny that 
conclusion. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And in regard to Mr Montana’s role in this practice 
of Doctor – of Mr Mthimkhulu what did the SCA say? 
MR MOLEFE:   The SCA concluded that Mr Montana’s conduct was he was 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 35 of 146 
 
party to the conduct of Mthimkhulu. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And as regards the entire process of Swifambo 
bidding but relying on Vossloh what did Francis J and the SCA find? 
MR MOLEFE:   The SCA found that Simfambo was actually fronting for 
Vossloho, because all that it had said to PRASA it could not do.  But it iss 
also so Chairperson because at the time when the award was granted 
they did not even have the subcontractor with their technical partner.  
 
They did not have that envisaged technical partner was to be 
Vossloho.  And I do need to say that in one meeting of myself and 
directors of PRASA where Swifambo had come to ask for the Board to 
10 
support and approve, I think, an addendum. 
There had been, you know, submitting various addenda 
because things were changing for them wanting more money and so on.  I 
think this one was the third addendum.  I had occasion in that meeting to 
ask them if at the time of procurement they already had Vossloho as their 
partner and they said:  
“No no, we wanted first the tender to be awarded and 
after that we are going to tailor the subcontract we 
sign with Vossloho in line with what the award says, 
the contract that we sign with PRASA.” 
20 
Now that is putting the cart before the horse, because the award should 
not have been approved without demonstration of this capacity and the 
fact that they would have been a subcontractor already with a subcontract 
concluded.  There was no subcontract concluded.   
 
That is my addition, Chairperson, on this part.  I am not quoting 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 36 of 146 
 
the judgment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said a few minutes ago that the Supreme Court of 
Appeal, I think that is what you said, you might have been talking about 
the High Court judgment that they said that Mr Montana was party to 
Mr Mthimkhulu’s conduct did I understand that correctly? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now you have said, and I remember that it is in the 
judgment that the Supreme Court of Appeal Mr Mthimkhulu conducted 
himself in a dishonest manner.   
 
Did you have any understanding whether the Supreme Court of 
10 
Appeal saying Mr Montana was party to Mr Mthimkhulu’s conduct whether 
it went to, it sought to say he was party to dishonest conduct as well or it 
may have simply meant that he was party to certain activities but not 
necessarily the dishonest part.  So, I am just looking for your own 
understanding.  Obviously one can misconstrue the judgment. 
MR MOLEFE:   Only I would be careful not to misconstrue the judgment 
but I understand that to the judgment the statement in the judgment to 
mean that Mr Montana’s Aquest in the misconduct, the corrupt conduct of 
Mr, corrupt conduct of Mr Mthimkhulu.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes – yes, ja. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   We have tabled a number of things that have happened 
there are also some strange things that I am just throwing this in that has 
nothing to do with the judgment that Mr Montana did.   
 
Before my Board was appointed at PRASA it had happened that 
Mr Montana’s contract had expired and had been renewed well which is 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 37 of 146 
 
one of things he said to me when we had one on one that look I wanted to 
leave and they persuaded me not to leave and I agreed to the extension 
of this contract.  That is when he was trying to convince me that I should 
accept that when his contract ends he would not stay. 
But relating to this question what I want to raise Chairperson, 
in the course of our investigations and it is a document that I will submit 
to the Court, we established that similar to the conduct of Mthimkhulu, 
Mr Montana when he wanted a rise and extension, a rise in salary and an 
extension of his contract submitted a fake offer of employment.   
A letter that was given by a company called Gypsum Fertilizers.  
10 
Our investigations established that that company had ...[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   Never made an offer to him. 
MR MOLEFE:   Had – had not well the offer they were making is a kind of 
offer of a business that does not exist as a solid business.  It is a – a 
what we, would call a newly registered company.  It did not even have 
offices.  The registered address was a house in Bedfordview and I think 
the evidence before The High Court would demonstrate that.  So, what I 
am saying that the dishonesty that is being spoken of is not only about 
Mthimkhulu, you also had these instances where the Chief of 
Administrative Functions of the business was doing similar things. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Finally, Mr Molefe at paragraph 66 you set out what 
the SCA said about Mr Montana, you read that into the record please. 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson the paragraph of the SCA judgment reads in 
this manner as follows: 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 38 of 146 
 
“The SCA he controlled PRASA and his staff, was 
obstructive and attempted to cover up his role in 
various corrupt transactions including the award of 
the tender of Swifambo.” 
Of course the Public Protector had experienced a similar obstruction in 
her investigation we referred to it earlier on in my evidence and it is 
detailed also in the Public Protectors Report.” 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It would perhaps be an ideal opportunity now to look 
at the Public – what you say the Public Protectors Report is and you deal 
with that [intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well before you do that Mr. Soni, well maybe allied to 
the question I put to Mr Molefe about his understanding of the Supreme 
Court of Appeal’s judgment in relation to Mr Montana’s conduct in relation 
with special reference to Mr Mthimkhulu’s conduct.  I see that the 
quotation from the judgment in paragraph 66 of Mr Molefe’s affidavit does 
seem to suggest and I want to put the question to you because you would 
have applied your mind maybe better than I have in preparation for this.  
Whether that is your understanding, it seems whether the Supreme Court 
of Appeal is quoted to have said: 
“Mr Montana’s controlled PRASA and its staff.  Was 
20 
obstructive and are attempted to cover up his role in 
various corrupt transactions including the award of 
the tender to Swifambo.” 
Now that seems to suggest that he had a role in various corrupt 
transactions, but he sought to cover that.  Is that your understanding of 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 39 of 146 
 
what he has done? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It is absolutely.  So Mr Chairperson, if I could go 
back to the question and maybe I should have seen that they are related, 
that although it did not expressly say so when it referred to Mr Montana 
had a role in Mr Mthimkhulu’s contract, the passage that has been read at 
paragraph 34 makes that quite clear. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That is how I understand it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Thank you.  You are ready to proceed to the 
Public Protectors Report? 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   We proceed with the Public, because it leads 
directly to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no that is fine.  That is fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, Mr Molefe yesterday we were talking about 
...[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, is my understanding correct that nobody 
has ever challenged that report in Court? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I was going to come to that Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Montana in 2015 filed an application to review 
20 
the Public Protectors Report but it is matter I want to address through 
Mr Molefe ...[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Because that is of utmost significance and what I 
will through Mr Molefe point out is in a sense ...[intervenes].  
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 40 of 146 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   The challenge was not pursued. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Well it – it is there but five years later we have the 
Public Protectors Report and we know what the Constitutional Court has 
said about the status of her Reports and you file a Review application 
which PRAJA says you must file within 180 days and five years later you 
do not bring it to fruition .  But this the point I want to make through 
evidence through Mr Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No that is fine but also what should be done is 
somebody should inspect the Court file and see what steps have been 
taken by whom since the launching of the applications.  Or whether it was 
10 
simply launched and no further steps were taken or whether some further 
steps were taken but there has been a problem of getting a date which on 
my knowledge of the Gauteng Division would be unlikely that somebody 
who may have been ready to have their date have done everything they 
are supposed to do that they would not have been given a date for five 
years or so.  But somebody needs to go and check. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And maybe it will be useful to know what the state of 
affairs is, whether they are any further steps that Mr Montana has taken 
to try and have that Review application adjudicated. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Chairperson, may I just point out, at the end of 
this when we make submissions to you at whatever stage, one of the 
points I will be taking is that the High Court has said that a Review is 
parented if it is not pursued, well firstly, if it is not instituted within 
reasonable time and there are at least two cases which we will refer to 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 41 of 146 
 
which says if you have not prosecuted your Review.   
 
So, you may have instituted it but you left it lying in Court the 
Review is like an appeal. 
 
Your right to Review has been parented.  But that does not 
detract from what you have said. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, because it would just be important to know if there 
are any steps if there are any legitimate challenges in pursuing it.  
Because if there are no legitimate challenges in pursing it and having it 
set down then one has got to look at what one makes of that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, yes, and – and as regards the status of that Mr 
10 
Chairperson, may I refer to two passages from the Public Protectors 
Report, which are not in Mr Molefe’s affidavit but which are relevant to 
the issues you have raised Mr Chairperson.  Mr Molefe, Mr Chairperson 
perhaps for orientation the Public Protectors Report is in bundle C I think 
in your set of files.  I have indicated to – to ...[intervenes].  
MR MOLEFE:   What is the page? 
CHAIRPERSON:   We will wait for you to tell.  To give the page so before 
you give it to me. 
ADV 
VAS 
SONI 
SC:   The 
page 
number 
of 
the 
report 
itself, 
Mr Chairperson, is page 20. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have – I have got page 20. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, sorry Mr Chairperson, it is page 22. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Have you got it Mr Montana I mean Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   I have got it, yes. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 42 of 146 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:    May I ask you took at paragraph xxii  So, that is 
just before the first big number on page 22. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  The one - Is it the one after saying careful?  I 
have got a careful on the page. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, sorry it is paragraph 21.  Sorry, not 
paragraph 22.  So it is XX(1).  Would you please read that into record 
Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   The paragraph reads as follow – as follows Chairperson: 
“What is encouraging is that both Mr Montana and 
the Board have welcomed to the provisional report 
10 
which did not differ vastly from this final report and 
committed themselves to implementing the remedial 
actions once the report is made final.  For this I am 
grateful and as such conduct is in line with the 
Constitutional 
ideal 
regarding 
the 
relationship 
between the Public Protector and Organs of State.  
As envisaged in section 181 of the Constitution.  
Section 181 of the constitution.  Section 181 enjoins 
Organs of State to assist and to protect the Public 
Protector 
and 
other 
institutions 
supporting 
20 
constitutional democracy to ensure the effectiveness 
among other things.” 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   My I then also ask you to turn to page 64 and 
paragraph 3.6? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that page 64 at the bottom? 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 43 of 146 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   At the bottom.  Sorry, yes Mr Chairperson.  If you 
could read that – if you read that paragraph into the record Mr Molefe? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which paragraph is it? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Paragraph 3.6 
CHAIRPERSON:   On mine that should be at page 65 and not 64.  I 
thought you said 64. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It is 64 on my notes.  Sorry Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Molefe is it is 64 or 65 with you paragraph 3.6? 
MR MOLEFE:   Is it paragraph 3.5? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   3.6. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   Then 3.6 is on page 65 on my – in my file. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  As you refer him to pages you will need to 
remember that you are one – you are one page behind. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I will need to confirm that.  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   You are one page behind. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So, would you read paragraph 3.6 on page 65 of the 
Public Protectors Report into the record Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   Reads into the record. 
“Mr Motana’s response to the provisional findings 
was however deeply encouraging.  He said in pardon 
20 
we quote: We confirm that PRASA welcomes the 
Provisional 
Report 
and 
the 
remedial 
actions 
recommended by the Public protector.  PRASA views 
the remedial actions concerned as an essential tool 
to assist in improving its internal administrative and 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 44 of 146 
 
financial controls.  PRASA believes that the remedial 
actions will in future strengthen its governance 
framework 
operations 
and 
internal 
controls 
in 
ensuring that PRASA is safeguarded against irregular 
or unlawful conduct within its organisation.” 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Mofele I just placed that on record and then 
asked you to comment on the following.  Mr Motana has filed an 
Application to Review the Public Protectors Report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, a lot of people say analytical files a Review 
Application to Review is the Court that reviews to have the report 
10 
Reviewed and set aside by the Court.  No, but that is just a technical 
thing. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no but an important one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I am just placing on record that to the extent that 
that Review has any substance the Public Protectors Report will have to 
be considered in the light of the fact that there is that review, you 
understand? 
MR MOLEFE:   I do understand Chairperson, but in the light of what we 
have read in the Public Protectors Report are scribed to the response of 
20 
Mr Motana and the Board of Control.  The old Board of Control because it 
was not my Board that responded.  I think Mr Motana has got a very 
difficult task because he first have to get what he responded to the Public 
Protector on out of the way to justify and reviewing it because he has 
accepted it.  Now it is difficult, I think he has got a difficulty but maybe 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 45 of 146 
 
well lawyers know how to go around these things but as a lay person I 
think he has a very serious difficulty.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So let us start with the findings that you highlight in 
your affidavit and let us start with what you say at paragraph 68 
[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are back in the bundle that has Mr Molefe’s 
affidavit now? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, sorry Mr Chairperson it is SS(6). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja I have got it in front of me.  Okay we have gone 
10 
beyond.  Yes, okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you might need to repeat your question. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  In paragraph 68 you referred to or you 
highlight one of the findings made in relation to the tender for two train 
stations valued at 1.95 billion rand. 
MR MOLEFE:   I – I do so Chairperson perhaps to provide a little context.  
The context is that at a certain point and before 2010 South-Africa was 
awarded the status of hosting the [intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Soccer World Cup. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Firstly, there was the one for Africa Wealth and then later 
the Soccer World Cup that was coming in 2010, and PRASA being an 
organisation responsible for transporting many ordinary people became 
part of that process by it had to improve the stations and do maintenance 
and allow for access to those stations by those who would be wanting to 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 46 of 146 
 
attend the World Cup.   
 
So, therefore this contract was then issued as I understand it 
and the – the – the contract entails doing work.  You know we refer to two 
train stations and was later extended to seven stations.  But this is also 
because it would seem like management and perhaps Mr Montana had the 
head- Mr Montana himself that they did not think that when you have 
issued a contract, you cannot in the cause of execution of that contract, 
willy nilly change the scope to put more work- scope of work and more 
cost to the contract.  And this what the Public Protector found. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Who was- do you know who the contractor was in 
10 
this matter? 
MR MOLEFE:  The contractor in this matter was Siyangena which we- the 
company we referred to earlier on in my evidence. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson may I for your benefit especially that 
appears at 359 of the Public Protectors report at page 359. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  With all those details set out in paragraph 68. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then Mr Molefe may I ask you to set out what you 
say in paragraph 69 of your affidavit which is SS6 in relation to the way 
20 
Mr Montana ran PRASA or provide her with information. 
MR MOLEFE:  The Public Protector found that Mr Montana had 
approached her or the institution to say that he is finding it difficult to get 
information from PRASA.  With this being and may- I think we, they 
approach here is not correct.  Let me go to the actual thing ... 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 47 of 146 
 
(intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  You can read ... (intervenes) 
MR MOLEFE:  Because I think the prefacing is confusing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You can read the ... (intervenes) 
MR MOLEFE:  The prefacing is confusing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  The Public Protector says it was difficult to get information 
from PRASA.  With this being the main causer factor for the delay in the 
finalisation of the investigations and the report where the investigations 
that had started in 2012.  The Public Protector says promises for 
10 
documents were made but they were not kept.  Request for assistance 
from the board also yielded nothing and I must state here that it was the 
old board, not the board that I was chairman of.  So source documents 
could not be made available.   
 
Now just an add lipping of some kind, the contract of Siyangena 
was continuing at that time.  It could not be true that PRASA did not know 
where to find the source document of a contract that is continuing and for 
which they were continuing to pay.  So, but that is what they said.  But 
the Public Protector also finds that Mr Montana boasted that you see they 
went and complained about me, now they cannot produce documents by 
20 
way of evidence.  And request the Public protector to find in his favour 
because he believes that those accusing him do not have- the 
accusations were baseless.   
 
Now the company withholds document which would disprove what 
the complainant says even did they were wrong.  But the company does 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 48 of 146 
 
not release them and Mr Montana according to the Public Protector boast, 
he says, look I am innocent.  Find in my favour.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry Chair, can I just deal with that issue with a few 
questions?  As far as PRASA status in our constitution dispensation go, 
what would PRASA be?  Would it be a private body, an organ of state? 
MR MOLEFE:  Earlier on in my affidavit Chairperson I state that PRASA is 
an organ of state to that extend PRASA is obliged to comply with legal- 
the legal and constitutional framework of South Africa.  In the earlier 
discussion in the course of this evidence where the Public Protector when 
she expresses her appreciation for Mr Montana and the board of that time 
10 
saying that they welcome the report and the remedial actions required 
and that in their view it would assist to improve the governance in the 
organisation clearly means that they understood that they needed to 
support the work of the Public Protector.  They were actually obliged to 
do so. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Molefe before we go on to the next matter raised 
in your affidavit, may I ask you to please again turn to page 20 of the 
Public Protectors report now.  If it may well be 21 in your copy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just mention again for the record the bundle number. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It is bundle C Mr Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is bundle C. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I do not know whether that your own one is also 
marked bundle C.  It should be but you seem to not to be sure earlier on. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It is not- mine is not- ours has been marked 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 49 of 146 
 
differently Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, but they need to be marked in the same way so that 
we are all on the same page. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So, when you need to tell me and the witness what 
bundle you are sure that it would be the correct bundle that we have. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it is Bundle C on mine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  And you said page 20? 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It is either page 20 or 21. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are one page behind is it? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am one page behind.  So, it is 20 on mine and 
probably 21 with you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So, it will be 21 with me.  Ja.  Okay it should be 21 with 
your bundle Mr Molefe 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  And it is paragraph XVIII. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, that is not on page 21.  That is on page 20. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On mine.  Mr Molefe, is it on page 21 ... (intervenes) 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Mine is also on page 20, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So this is where I was coincide. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, but I think it is important that all your bundles 
all your documents should be marked paginated exactly the same ... 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 50 of 146 
 
(intervenes) 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Exactly the same. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As ours and they should be marked exactly the same so 
that we do not have this problem. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Page 20 XVIII.  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Can you please- so remember you were talking 
about Mr Montana boasting that they could not produce- the complainants 
could not produce documents.  I would just like you to read paragraph 18 
where the Public Protector comments on this approach. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  The Public Protector states; 
 
I must record that the investigation team and I had immense 
 
difficulty piecing together the truth as information had to be 
 
clawed out of PRASA management.  When information was 
 
eventually provided it came in drips and drabs and was 
 
incomplete.  Despite the fact that the means used to obtain 
 
information and documents from PRASA included a subpoena 
 
issued in terms of Section 7 (4) of the Public Protector Act, 
 
many of the documents and information requested are still 
 
outstanding.  Until about 3 weeks before issuing the report 
20 
 
PRASA was still being asked for outstanding documents and 
 
information on the contracts and some staff appointments.   
 
I must say at this point Chairperson that at the time when the 
Public Protector report was being finalised I had also- my board of control 
had also been approached to assist in providing information to the Public 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 51 of 146 
 
Protector and we actually had a meeting, two meetings or so in the 
offices of the Public Protector.  I think the first one was on the 26 t h of 
June ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  2015. 
MR MOLEFE:  2015.  26 June 2015.  And of course, Mr Montana was very 
unhappy that ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  You met with them. 
MR MOLEFE:  I went to meet with the Public Protector with other 
directors.  We did request and the minutes of our meetings would record 
that we asked Mr Montana to comply with the request of the Public 
10 
Protector.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mm. 
MR MOLEFE:  At that time, we had also found that the subpoenas issued 
came through the office of the Group Chief Executive Officer Mr Montana.  
But to the extend that they effected members of his management team, 
they were not given to them.  So, he wanted to be the sole person who is 
not only the custodian but the controller of what goes out and what does 
not go out. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then may I ask you to please read paragraph 
XIX on the same page.  It is the very next paragraph. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  The same page.  The same page where you were 
reading, the next paragraph, page 21. 
MR MOLEFE:  But what are we reading there? I do not have anything 
different from what I read earlier.  Maybe paragraph. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think Mr Soni ... (intervenes) 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 52 of 146 
 
MR MOLEFE:  But what I have here is paragraph 18 on page 20 maybe I 
must go ... (intervenes) 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, you have read paragraph 18.  Can you now read 
paragraph 19 please. 
MR MOLEFE:  On which page? 
CHAIRPERSON:  The next page.  Well on me- yours and mine seem to be 
the same.  Paragraph 19 would be on page 21 ... (intervenes) 
MR MOLEFE:  Mine is on ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  19 is XIX in terms of Roman figures. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  It starts with, I must also indicate, is that right Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I must also indicate. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, that is the one he would like you to read. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Read that into the record. 
MR MOLEFE:  I must also indicate that the authenticity of many of the 
documents submitted by PRASA management as evidence  
principally 
relating to procurement is doubtful.  Many of the  
memoranda 
for 
approval of tenders and related documents  submitted 
by 
PRASA 
20 
management were undated, unsigned and  
at 
least 
in 
one 
case 
incomplete.  Examples in this regard  
include documents relating 
to the contracting of PSIRA  
Security, ARUP and a Enlightened 
Security  Services.  In some of these cases had this been an audit only  a 
disclaimer would be a legitimate audit outcome.  
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 53 of 146 
 
 
Now Chairperson I did say that the Public Protector had 
expressed concern about the authentication of documents that they could 
not authenticate the documents and they were not being assisted by 
PRASA in a way of authenticating those documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you did say a few minutes ago that Mr Montana 
sought to control the incoming correspondence and what went out of 
PRASA to the Public Protector.  And you made the point that to the extend 
that she needed to have communicated with his management team on 
some of the matters raised by the Public Protector or in correspondence- 
I think you referred to the subpoena.  It looks like he did not do so, they 
10 
were unaware.   
 
So, I want to ask the question, where the Public Protector now 
says the PRASA management was submitting to her office documents 
whose authenticity was doubtful.  And where she says many of the 
memoranda for approval of tenders and related documents submitted by 
PRASA management were undated, unsigned and at least in one case 
incomplete.  Would that mean that although it says PRASA management 
in terms of your experience or understanding are you able to say that 
actually refers to Mr Montana because he was controlling correspondence 
that comes in and that goes out.  Or are you not able to say whether he- 
20 
that was the position or whether there were other members of the 
management team who may have been party to this? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson I ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not know. 
MR MOLEFE:  Restate, reiterate my statement that he was controlling 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 54 of 146 
 
information. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  That he had not availed the subpoenas to the individuals 
mentioned. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Because the information from the Public Protector was 
channelled through the Group CEOs office.  It was pretty clear to me 
when I met with the Public Protector in June 2015 that- well we became 
aware for the first time that there were these subpoenas.  But when we 
went back the individuals mentioned had never heard anything about the 
10 
subpoenas. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then may I just ask you Mr Molefe you have now 
read specifically what the Public Protector has said about the authenticity 
of documents, the incompleteness of documents and so on.  Were you- 
are you surprised that that is how the PRASA management through Mr 
Montana dealt with the Public Protectors request? 
MR MOLEFE:  I am not surprised Chairperson.  The earlier on in our 
engagement as the board of directors I indicated that in 2014 the 
November meeting we were advised that there was a probity report which 
20 
was to give assurance to the board that procurement was done properly.  
It had not been there.  And I subsequently indicated that the board had 
requested the contracts which had been concluded before it was 
appointed again this request was not honoured.  So, I would not be 
surprised, it was a pattern of behaviour of the organisation- of the group 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 55 of 146 
 
CEO.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course, as I understand the position, here the Public 
Protector is complaining that PRASA management and maybe we should 
read the Group CEO was not cooperating in furnishing information and 
documents to the Public Protector.  But you also gave evidence either 
yesterday or the day before yesterday that your board soon after it had 
been appointed sort or asked Mr Montana to provide it with various 
contracts that had been concluded in regard to the modernisation program 
and that these were never provided.  He never provided this to you.  So, 
is my understanding correct? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And earlier you said that it seemed to reflect a 
pattern.  Is that- would that be correct? 
MR MOLEFE:  That- I said so Chairperson.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then if we could carry on with paragraph 69 of your 
affidavit Mr Molefe you talk about what the Public Protector found in 
relation to labour relations at PRASA.  What did ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry, did you move away Mr Soni from the page 
that- from our page 21?  I do not know where ... (intervenes) 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh sorry, I am going now to the affidavit again.  
Sorry Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh well before you go- you do so.  Mr Molefe you see 
the paragraph that comes immediately after the paragraph you have read 
that is now in the Public Protectors report, page 21.  There is the 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 56 of 146 
 
paragraph 19 that you have read starting with, I must also indicate.  Can 
you see that paragraph?  Can you see that paragraph? 
MR MOLEFE:  I do see it Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  The one that comes after that which is paragraph 
20, the Public Protector says something on which I think you should 
comment.  She says; After unsuccessfully asking the new 
  
PRASA board and its chairman to assist.  I decided it would be 
 
in the public interest to proceed with the report and differ 
 
unanswered questions to second report. 
 
Now that may or may not- that unsuccessfully that she uses, may 
10 
or may not give the reader the impression that your board did also not 
cooperate in this regard.  But maybe that is not what she means.  Are you 
able to comment on that statement? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson well reading it if you had not had other facts 
proving otherwise ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes, it is a conclusion that one could draw but ... 
(intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you may be able to comment and give context. 
MR MOLEFE:  But the context is that the board was asked on the 26 t h of 
20 
July to assist.  The board can only assist through its Group Chief 
Executive because the board does not keep records.  And it was clear 
that the previous board and the Chief Executive did not cooperate even 
during our time they did not cooperate.  For example, if you- maybe I 
should not go into the details but that is what it means.  We offered to 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 57 of 146 
 
cooperate but we could cooperate only to the extend that we can get 
information. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So therefore, it seem from what you say that it would be 
fair to say she is correct in saying after unsuccessfully asking the new 
PRASA board to assist that her attempts to get the board and its 
chairman to assist, that there are those that that request was 
unsuccessful.  Those attempts were unsuccessful even in effect when she 
had asked the board to assist her.  But what you are saying is, there was 
a reason for the board and its chairperson not being able to assist.  And 
the reasons was that the board did not keep records.  It is the Group- it is 
10 
the management that keeps records and the Group CEO was not assisting 
the board.  Is that right? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  The- I understand that paragraph to mean that even as I 
had asked the new board to assist, that effort yielded no results.  That is 
how I understand it and the result are directly linked to the need for 
cooperation by the Group CEO and his management team. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, I think your- the meaning you attach to it is fair.  It 
is correct.  It is just that in the absence of the report saying anything else 
20 
to the reason why even the board was not able to assist.  And against the 
background of the lack of cooperation dealt with in previous paragraphs 
in relation to the Group CEO, the reader could get the impression that 
even Mr Molefe’s board did not assist here.  But you are giving the 
reason.  You say as the board were committed to cooperating but you had 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 58 of 146 
 
to ask management to do certain things and the Group CEO did not give- 
play his role, the role that you expected him to play. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Maybe one should ask what kind of time period 
are we talking about when this was happening?  Was it at a time when the 
group CEO had already- oh he had already given his so-called letter of 
resignation.  Or actually it was during the period which came after the 
board asked him to stay on for 6 months. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So, he was somebody who was on his way out.  I think 
10 
that is one of the points you made. 
MR MOLEFE:  He was on his way out but he was still in office in charge. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but that might- could this be one of the reasons 
why the board decided that his continued presence in the company was 
not serving the purpose that the board wanted?  Or not really? 
MR MOLEFE:  Whilst we would not have specifically said that about the 
Public Protector. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  But we did say that increasing the board was finding it 
difficult to get information from the Group CEO.  In fact, he was even 
20 
beginning to give excuses for not being available for board committee 
meetings.  So essentially behaving in a manner that made committees to 
some extend dysfunctional because the memoranda that committees 
consider have to be approved by the Group CEO.   
 
So that was the problem that we were beginning to experience.  
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 59 of 146 
 
That coupled with other unbecoming behaviour which played itself out on 
the public domain, I did refer to the kind of statements regular attacks on 
the board of directors.  It was then clear that we needed to ask him to go.  
So, it is a combination of all of those Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would I be right in saying while the purpose for which 
the board wanted him to continue for 6 months was to- or the primary 
purpose maybe I should say was to assist the board to get his 
replacement.  That would have been on the assumption that he continues 
to perform the duties of Group CEO in the manner expected of him by the 
board. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson except for those conditions 
which are articulated in my evidence yesterday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Relating to further appointments of employees. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And awards of contracts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And- ja.  And of course, him serving on the boards of 
subsidiaries. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But basically, it must have been among the other things 
20 
on the basis that he would continue to cooperate with the board.  
Because in order for the entity to operate properly there should be 
cooperation from the Group CEO with the board. 
MR MOLEFE:  That was at the heart of the decision of the board to allow 
him to serve the company for another 6 months Chairperson. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 60 of 146 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson I perhaps should have dealt with that 
issue.  The problem is I had consulted on that issue and based on what 
Mr Molefe said in evidence, it did not seem to me to be relevant.  But you 
are absolutely right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Looking at it objectively, that is a matter that should 
have been pursued. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And I apologise. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, that is fine.  It just seems to me that you can only 
ask a Group CEO to continue for any proper purpose on the basis that he 
would cooperate with you as the bord.  If he does not cooperate with you 
then it does not look like there would be much purpose in wanting- the 
board wanting him to continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that is way I wanted to get the clarifications. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then Mr Molefe if you go back to your affidavit that 
SS6 paragraph 69 regarding the labour practices or some of the unfair 
labour practice.  What does the Public Protector says or say? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  The Public Protector Chairperson notes that or concludes 
that Mr Montana suspended employees without following procedure and 
that that conduct of habitually suspending employees contravened 
PRASA’s disciplinary code.  And constituted maladministration and 
improper conduct on the part of the Group CEO. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 61 of 146 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I see that the Public Protector said there was a 
conduct on the part of- of the Group CEO of habitually suspending 
employees and that might talk to the issue that I raised with you 
yesterday when I asked whether you recalled what numbers were involved 
in the suspension and dismissals of employees.  You did say many, you 
could not remember the figure.  You said many.  But if the Public 
Protector says- talk about habitually suspending, it seems to suggest that 
there was a habit of suspending employees.  So, it might be consistent 
with your recollection that it was many. 
MR MOLEFE:  It is correct sir, Chairperson.  But it is consistent with the 
10 
Deputy Judge President Chief Justice with what I said in my evidence.  I 
can come this way a little bit and say, in fact some of the suspensions 
happened when I was on the board.  There was suspension of the then 
Chief Information Officer, Mr Chris Mbata.  And one of the managers in 
the legal function of PRASA Mr Fani Dingiswayo and the Head of that 
legal function Ms Martha Ngoye.  There would have been others that I 
would immediately not know but those were the prominent ones who were 
suspended and this is a matter we dealt with at the board meeting held in 
May of 2015 where we demanded that Mr Montana reverses his decision 
in the manner in which he had done it.  But also recognised that as a 
20 
Group CEO he has the prerogative to discipline his subordinate.   
 
But we insisted that he needed to follow process.  Because what 
he did with some of these individuals he simply locked- told the security 
to lock them out, not to allow them to get into the premises of the 
company.  And then having locked them out he then served them with 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 62 of 146 
 
letters of suspension without following any due process.  It is then true 
that of course the individuals came back and I think he did try to suspend 
them again but he was a man going out at that time. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Molefe, the evidence that Ms Ngoye and Mr 
Dingiswayo will lead is not different form what you say is that in fact Mr 
Montana at the time you are talking about had dismissed them.  They had 
approached you, you had approached Mr Montana.  He reversed his 
decision to dismiss them but he summarily suspended them again and 
that suspension lasted until he left.  Is that more or less your 
recollection? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  The facts are correct but I do not know what those 
witnesses are saying in their affidavits.  I cannot say- I have not seen.  
But I accept that you having seen it, it corroborates what I have said.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then in paragraph 70 of your affidavit you say there 
was a culture- well the DPP found something about the poor information 
management.  What does she say about that?  At paragraph 70 Mr 
Molefe. 
MR MOLEFE:  The Public Protector also noted that there was a culture of 
information- well it should be information mismanagement actually. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I think she says a culture of poor information, 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Oh, poor information management or hiding of information 
that could provide evidence of maladministration.  And I concur with the 
findings of the Public Protector. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now just in brief, the Public Protector prescribed a 
number of remedial actions which you briefly referred to in paragraph 71.  
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 63 of 146 
 
What were the more important remedial actions that she prescribed? 
MR MOLEFE:  Fundamentally the Public Protector Chairperson wanted 
action to be taken in respect of various remedial actions.  One of them to 
restore proper administration within the company to investigate various 
contracts which reflected evidence of corruption to inform National 
Treasury of the report of the Public Protector and the findings.  And that 
National Treasury was required to then go further to investigate contracts 
above 10 million from 2012.  And then to take appropriate measures 
having done so in addressing the findings of the Public Protector.  The 
Public Protector wanted also the board to deal with the misconduct of 
10 
functionaries such as Mr Montana and others. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So, in regard to that- so let us just deal with each of 
them.  In regard to the improper conduct of people like Mr Montana, did 
the board act on that? 
MR MOLEFE:  The board I should say Chairperson by the way if I 
remember very well the report of the Public Protector when it came out, 
Mr Montana had already left. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  The only way in which the- well one of the ways in which 
the board could then address the concerns of the Public Protector to the 
20 
extend that they are related to Mr Montana would have been then to deal 
with the unlawful contracts and investigate that in detail and that is then 
addressed in the applications that we made before the court.  Because he 
was no longer under out authority, we could not discipline him.  And with 
regard to Mr Mthimkhulu we had initiated disciplinary proceedings, of 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 64 of 146 
 
course he then resigned at that point.  In respect of the rest of the 
employees we secured the assistance the services of a firm of attorneys 
Huntley Mkhabela to deal with all labour related matters arising out of the 
Public Protectors report.  At the time when I left PRASA that process was 
still continuing. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Just ... (intervenes) 
MR MOLEFE:  And I must say Chairperson that we regularly gave the 
Public Protector an update report on what we were doing about the 
remedial actions. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Just for the record Mr Molefe, at paragraph 65 you 
10 
make the point that in 2015 your board took action against Mr Mthimkhulu 
but he resigned just as you had just said.  I am just saying that it is 
contained here in your affidavit. 
MR MOLEFE:  It is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Alright.  And then with regard to the National 
Treasury.  The reporting matters to the National or supporting the 
National Treasury, did the board- participate in that process? 
MR MOLEFE:  The board did cooperate Chairperson but at the time of 
this report as I say the board had already taken steps to deal with issues 
of corruption.  The company Werksmans- a firm of attorney Werksmans 
20 
had already been appointed and they were busy investigating.  In order to 
obviate to avoid duplication in the investigations I held a meeting with the 
Minister of Transport the Director General in that or Acting Director 
General in that department, the Chief Procurement Officer of National 
Treasury Mr Kenneth Brown. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 65 of 146 
 
  
 At that meeting we agreed that all the investigations will be 
coordinated under the board of PRASA and that National Treasury would 
be informed about what PRASA was doing.  Down the line of course 
because there were many many very many small contracts approximately 
200 of these contracts.  We then agreed to disaggregate them to separate 
them from those that PRASA had already started investigating and let 
National Treasury would deal- to deal with them.  But the coordination 
continued in that regard. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Molefe let us get to the next major issue that you 
raise in your affidavit namely the attempt of former President Jacob Zuma 
10 
to intervene in regard to the board’s acceptance of Mr Montana’s so-
called resignation.  Will you explain how that came about please? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson … (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  I wonder- I am sorry Mr Molefe.  I wonder whether we 
should start use the 5 minutes left before lunch or whether we should 
start it after lunch. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  It- and I take your point Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am quite happy that we use the 5 minutes but it seems 
to be the kind of topic that you should rather start and take up to finish 
without interruption if possible.  Is that fine with everybody? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  It is fine with me Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay, let us take the lunch break.  It is 12:55 and 
then we will resume at 2 o’clock. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 66 of 146 
 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us proceed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am pleased to say my bundles have now going to 
be in accord with yours Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that is good.  That is good.  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  We are still at Bundle D, Annexure SS6 Mr 
Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and we – has this always been Bundle D? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay alright.  And you have got to start on the 
topic appearing at page 30 of Mr Molefe’s – 20 of Mr Molefe’s affidavit? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  20 yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Molefe you deal in your affidavit with an 
attempt by former President Jacob Zuma to persuade the Board or 
persuade you to persuade the Board to reinstate Mr Montana.  Would 
you tell us how this whole incident started – or the whole episode 
20 
started? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson yesterday I referred to a long meeting I held 
with Mr Montana in a small town in the Southern Cape called Knysna.  I 
need to indicate something that is not in my affidavit but it is relevant 
to the topic that we are discussing now.  Shortly after that meeting a 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 67 of 146 
 
few days after that meeting with Mr Montana in Knysna and whilst I was 
still in Knysna I received a call from my secretary in PRASA advising 
me that they had received an email from the office of Mr Jeff Radebe 
which purports to be an email inviting me to a meeting with the 
President of the Republic of South Africa, Mr Jacob Zuma.  I do in this 
– in the affidavit somewhere deal with what my attitude was to that 
email.  The email I was advised was from a gmail address.  At that 
point I said to my secretary tell them that we would not consider an 
email that requires me to go and meet with the President purporting to 
come from Minister in the Presidency yet it is not containing an official 
10 
address.  Tell them to issue an invitation properly.   
CHAIRPERSON:  At that time what was Minister Jeff Radebe’s 
portfolio?  He was Minister of what? 
MR MOLEFE:  I think he was – he was Minister in the Presidency. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the Presidency. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the Minister of Transport was who at the time? 
MR MOLEFE:  The Minister of Transport was Ms Dipuo Peters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now before that … 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  We will later return to this issue about protocol which I 
raise later on because ideally… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  The invitation should have come through my Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 68 of 146 
 
MR MOLEFE:  (Indistinct). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I wonder whether it is not the time to talk about 
it nows. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because you did say you want to mention this before 
you go into the discussion.  Is it not the right time to talk about 
protocol?  Do you think you want to deal with it later? 
MR MOLEFE:  The matter of protocol I deal with in the topic but further 
down. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  In the topic (indistinct). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry Mr Molefe.  The Chairperson is saying given 
what happened and your attitude towards protocol would it not be more 
appropriate to talk about it now and then we can leave it and we will 
not talk about it where it appears in your affidavit? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think – I think Mr Molefe… 
MR MOLEFE:  My counsel used to say as it pleases My Lordship.  I will 
deal with it now Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You – you know your statement – your affidavit 
20 
obviously much more than I know it and if there is a particular reason 
why you think you – it would connect better with the story to deal with 
that later aspect later it is fine but I thought you do make the point that 
you said if you are inviting me to meet with the President do not use an 
unofficial email address, use an official email address.  And I thought 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 69 of 146 
 
that is part of insisting upon proper communication which might fit in 
with – well with the issue of protocol.  But if you think look maybe the 
aspect you want to deal with further about protocol fits in better later 
that is fine. 
MR MOLEFE:  I will deal with it now Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Later on if I refer to it it will be merely for emphasis. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay no that is fine. 
MR MOLEFE:  So a few days later I – I then receive a message that the 
President would like to meet with me this time in Cape Town.  This time 
10 
the request came from the Presidency.  I did not continue to insist on 
anything written.  I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was telephonic message? 
MR MOLEFE:  It – I think it was telephonic message. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  To my office. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And then I – I then rerouted my flight – my journey to go 
to Cape Town.  The President did not meet me.  I waited there forever. 
At about five or so late afternoon he said no, no let us meet another 
20 
time maybe in Pretoria I cannot meet you today.  So I went back and it 
was in April. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the period would have been around about what 
month I assume in 2015? 
MR MOLEFE:  The period was in April. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 70 of 146 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh ja it was in April. 
MR MOLEFE:  Say April Chairperson it was shortly after the meeting 
that I had with Mr Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Because I was still in Knysna. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  I had not yet gone back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay.  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Molefe before you go on did you find it relevant 
that that request to – for you to meet the President came soon after the 
10 
meeting with Mr Montana? 
MR MOLEFE:  At that time I did not really question anything relating to 
the request and I thought well if the President says come and meet me.  
But the subsequent events put one in a position of now connecting the 
dots.  Especially because it comes shortly after my meeting with Mr 
Montana where he had what I call a litany of complaints.  And then of 
course later on as we know the meeting is held in Pretoria. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the – the email that had come from Mr Jeff 
Radebe on the basis of – through a gmail email address had it 
indicated what it is that the President wanted to meet with you about or 
20 
had it not indicated that you took it that it might be PRASA issues? 
MR MOLEFE:  The email had said that he wants to discuss the affairs 
of PRASA.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  Affairs of PRASA. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 71 of 146 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And the telephone conversation – message 
confirmed that or just said the President wanted to see you? 
MR MOLEFE:  The telephone message confirmed … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That it was PRASA affairs. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes it was about PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
MR MOLEFE:  But I do – we spoke about protocol earlier on.  I found it 
bizarre that although I met the Chairman of the Board reporting to a 
member of the executive cabinet Minister appointed by the President 
that when he wants to communicate he circumvent the – the office of 
10 
the Minister and the Minister herself that it becomes direct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then the Minister gets involved also. 
MR MOLEFE:  The Minister is not getting involved in that regard. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  The – and it is a matter I raised because in the topic 
under discussion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  At the meeting at that stage I did not even know that Mr 
Montana was going to be part of that meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  I said to the President, Mr President could you explain 
to me what is the nature of protocol that you apply?  You have invited 
me to this meeting – it was a direct invitation to me and you have 
invited my Minister to the same meeting.  Now I report to the Minister. 
Should you not rather have invited the Minister and say to the Minister, 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 72 of 146 
 
I would like you to come with the Chairperson of the Board.  He got 
very irate when I said that.  He said, why are you asking me that 
question?  Why are you asking me?   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  Well I have appointed her I can invite anybody I want to 
appoint. 
CHAIRPERSON:  hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  So that – so I said, well Mr President that is your 
prerogative we can leave the subject.  Ja and it is similar to this one.  
The one of the gmail he – what is worrisome is that it comes across as 
10 
something done by a person who when some difficult issues might arise 
– arising out of – arising – might arise as a result of a meeting 
requested by gmail you would say but the gmail is not mine.  I do not 
know if that would have been sustainable but it is – it – the meeting 
could easily have ended as an informal affair.  Yet the subject for 
discussion would have been PRASA.  And I could have said look this 
really it is about us as comrades which you will see Chairperson with 
regard to the meeting of the 20 August also.  It was convened as – it is 
called by the President.  The President to the guest house of the 
Presidency but we now talk about the ANC but we talk about matters 
20 
that the Board of Directors had decided upon and we purport to review 
the decisions of that Board in a meeting.  That is fundamentally a 
meeting of the party.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  May I ask you two questions relating to firstly the 
invitation from Mr Jeff Radebe.  Did you know Mr Jeff Radebe prior to 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 73 of 146 
 
that meeting or prior to the communication to you? 
MR MOLEFE:  I – I knew Mr Jeff Radebe Chairperson.  I spent a bit of 
time with him on Robben Island as well and I served with him on the 
National Executive Committee of the African National Congress until 
the conference of Polokwane of 2007.  I had been serving with him for 
about 16 years on the MEC.  So – and I knew him also from many 
activities of the party.  He was made Head of Policy in the party so 
policy discussions and plans for elections all resorted under him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And former President Jacob Zuma did you know 
10 
him? 
MR MOLEFE:  I – I knew President Jacob Zuma Chairperson.  He too I 
served with him on the National Executive Committee of the African 
National Congress since 1991 until at the time when we went through 
the conference of 2007.  Of course at that time he had already been 
asked to resign – he had been asked by President Mbeki to step aside 
as the Deputy President of the country but he remained the Deputy 
President of the party because that is an elected position by a party 
conference where he could not be removed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now when you said that the invitation from Mr 
20 
Radebe had come via a private gmail address I understood you say – 
you said that that was worrisome.  What worried you?  I mean you knew 
about the (indistinct) persons why would you be worried that you had 
been called via a private email? 
MR MOLEFE:  I was worried that we are ostensibly going to discuss the 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 74 of 146 
 
affairs of a state – an organ of state which report to another Minister.  
But I am being invited in a very informal way of a gmail and my concern 
was that this cannot be really a proper meeting and that is why I 
insisted that a formal invitation be sent.  And it should have been easy 
to send that invitation on a government address and it was not done.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Of course there was this difficulty that as you 
point out you are a reportee to the Minister of Transport and it would be 
out of protocol for the President to supersede her and make the 
invitation to you.  That is how I understood you to be concerned. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes I am saying so but you know people sometimes just 
10 
ignore protocols.  But it is something that is not conventional and I 
would have expected him to communicate through the Minister. But 
Chairperson as we go along I think it is important for us to separate 
between the meeting of the 20 August and – and the meeting of the one 
that was requested in April. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Because they follow different. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Methods altogether. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ja. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  The one… 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the one that you have been talking about was for 
April? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ultimately it did not happen in April? 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 75 of 146 
 
MR MOLEFE:  It did not happen – I flew to Cape Town but the meeting 
did not happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  You availed yourself for the Cape Town one and 
it did not happen.  Is that right? 
MR MOLEFE:  May the Chair please repeat the question? 
CHAIRPERSON:  You availed yourself for a meeting in Cape Town. 
MR MOLEFE:  I did avail myself Chairperson. I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But the meeting did not happen. 
MR MOLEFE:  Did not happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Alright so that meeting did not take place in April.  
Did something happen later on again about a meeting? 
MR MOLEFE:  The picture that had happened the context was that Mr 
Montana had said he was leaving.  We had released him and he 
engaged in all these activities which resulted in us saying to him, well 
your stay in the company does not serve the purpose for which you 
were asked to stay in the company so go now.  So (indistinct) that we 
had allowed him to go at that time.  And of course at that point in time 
after we had allowed to go he had started making public statements 
saying that he – if the government requires him to return he is willing to 
20 
return as a Group CEO of PRASA.  But the conditions for his return 
must be that the existing board must be dissolved, it must go, he will 
not work with that board.  He would not work with my board.  So a lot of 
publicity was given to this matter.  In the interim I must say that the 
Minister also begins to say, but you did not consult me properly before 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 76 of 146 
 
you released the Group CEO.  But he resigned and I – he said he does 
not want an extension of the contract.  So the Minister keeps saying 
that – and they start – beginning to say what Mr Montana was saying.  
He says, I am the best person for the job.  I am the GCE.  I have been 
trained in matters of rail and public transportation you know.  I know 
this job so the country needs me.  So the Minister says that and we say 
we have taken a decision and there is now no going back on that 
decision.  It was clear to me that the Minister at that point was 
beginning to get pressures from other quarters to try and get us to 
review our decision or to get it reversed.  She raised a number of 
10 
issues about starting to talk about the performance of the business – 
this and that he asked for a report.  There is a substantive report that I 
wrote on behalf of the Board in response to some of the issues that the 
Minister was raising and that report is available should the Chairperson 
read it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It would be good to get it because as I read your 
affidavit one of the things that seemed to be quite unexpected for me is 
that at a certain stage or before the Minister – Minister Dipuo Peters 
left the Portfolio it seems her attitude towards your Board may have 
changed.  I – I have got the impression for quite some time in your 
20 
affidavit that he seemed – she seemed to have the – been very positive 
towards your Board and supportive.  But that from a certain time before 
she left the Portfolio she seemed to have had a different attitude.  I 
may be misreading you affidavit but I seemed to pick that up. 
MR MOLEFE:  The assessment is correct Chairperson. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 77 of 146 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  I need to – to also say because I think we may – with – 
may well also draw some connection with the ultimate dismissal of the 
Minister herself.  The – I do refer to this matter in my affidavit that 
there were concerted efforts to discredit the investigators we had 
appointed.  And one of those ways to – to undermine that was to 
suggest that they should have been vetted by state security agency – 
the State Security Agency.  We were going to be the first state owned 
company when it appoints professionals to provide professional 
services they have to be vetted by State Security Agency.  So the 
10 
President asked the Minister to tell me that – to explain whether they 
were vetted by State Security Agency.  When the Minister came to me I 
dismissed it because it was a very strange approach and I said, as 
PRASA we are not a government department where somebody could say 
we would be privy to classified information of the state – of the cabinet 
or the government and to that extent such classified information would 
not be safe in the hands of the Board or our investigators unless they 
were vetted.  So – so I killed that argument at that point in time 
demonstrating that there have been several appointments of service 
providers in range of public institutions, companies, and state owned 
20 
companies.  Not once to my knowledge had they been required to be – 
to avail their professional considered for appointment to be vetted by 
them.  And my view was that this professional organisations they have 
got their own Board or institutions which make decisions on whether 
they are worthy of being in that profession and we left it there.  So 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 78 of 146 
 
there was this concern.  Now – but I do not want to go into details. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  About that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  If you want to return to the topic with the former 
President meeting of August. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  But before we get to that I just want us to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Remember to raise your voice. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh sorry Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you do move away so whereas your voice is 
10 
soft by nature so okay try and raise it. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  You – as you please Chairperson.  Mr Molefe I just 
would like us to have attention to the timeline.  The question of the 
investigators obviously comes in after Mr Montana has left because that 
is when they – they are – are appointed. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And I just want you to keep this in mind because I 
want to ask you questions about it later.  It seems to me that you say 
that the Minister even before your meeting in August that the President 
had already asked you – had already suggested that maybe the 
20 
decision to accept Mr Montana’s parting of ways with you were – should 
be revisited. Am I right that that issue between you and the Minister 
came before the meeting with the President? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now just keep that in mind.  So that would be 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 79 of 146 
 
before August 2015? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Alright.  The investigations come afterwards.  
Now… 
MR MOLEFE:  No the investigations do not come after August 20 t h.  
The investigation has started slightly earlier than that because even at 
that point in time the Public Protector’s Report was out and I do 
indicate the comment that the Minister made at that meeting about the 
fact that the Board was investigating. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  When Mr Montana left I think you said yesterday on 
the 15 July 2015, is that right? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So Werkmans would have started … 
MR MOLEFE:  Shortly after that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Shortly after that ja but before the meeting of 30 
August. 
MR MOLEFE:  Before the meeting with the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now later in your affidavit and I just want us to 
20 
stick to timelines so that we know whether reasons given for certain 
decisions are proper reasons.  When Mr Montana left the Minister and 
soon thereafter the Minister as I understand your affidavit did not raise 
questions about the appointment of the – of the forensic investigators.  
Or am I wrong about that? 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 80 of 146 
 
MR MOLEFE:  You – the Counsel is correct Chairperson she did not.  In 
fact we have meetings with the Minister informing her about what the 
Board was doing.  One of those meetings was held at the – what is now 
knows as the OR Tambo International Airport in the VIP lounge in the 
Board there.  But several others have taken place between me and the 
investigators and the Minister.  Because as new things were emerging 
we wanted the Minister to understand what is – what was emerging 
from the investigations? 
CHAIRPERSON:  And she had no – at that stage she expressed no 
difficulty with the (indistinct). 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  She had no objection. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  To the investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  I did say also that earlier on in my evidence today 
Chairperson that after the ...[indistinct] in the context in which PRASA 
had already begun its own investigations the question arose of how do 
you then coordinate action related to the remedial where actions are 
required by ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The implementation of the ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR MOLEFE:   The implementation of the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Remedial action. 
MR MOLEFE:   Remedial actions of the Public Protector and it is at a 
meeting with the Minister, the Director General of the Department of 
Transport and the Chief Procurement Officer of National Treasury, Mr 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 81 of 146 
 
Kenneth Browne, that we then agreed that there needed to be 
coordination but coordination will be under the Board of Trans – PRASA 
sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm, mmm, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I wanted again to keep the timelines Mr Molefe, a 
little earlier you said that the President had asked the Minister if the 
investigators had been checked by the State Security Agency. 
MR MOLEFE:   I did say so Chairperson and that happened before the 
meeting of the 20 t h of August. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Before the meeting of the 20 t h of August? 
MR MOLEFE:   I think so, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:    Okay, okay, so that means the question of the 
investigations was one of the matters that in a sense preceded the 
meeting of the 20 t h? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now did the Minister tell you that it was the 
President who had asked if the forensic investigators had been 
scrutinised. 
MR MOLEFE:   She did Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you find it odd that such an enquiry came from 
the President or you didn’t know if it was usual or not usual, you just 
responded? 
MR MOLEFE:   Certainly Chairperson I found it odd because why when 
we were just beginning to investigate that the President should be 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 82 of 146 
 
concerned about the firm who ...[indistinct] that he is investigating 
when in fact such a question never arose about very many other 
investigation what had happened in respect of public, affecting public 
enterprises of government owned companies, State owned companied, 
let me put it that way. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I understood you to say the Minister also raised the 
issue of the ...[indistinct] to the extent that you may have said that was 
that connected with simply her conveying to you what the President had 
raised or was she also raising it of her own accord. 
MR MOLEFE:   She – I think it was connected with what the President 
10 
had raised with her because had it happened out of her own accord she 
would have raised it ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Much earlier. 
MR MOLEFE:   Much earlier as we were implementing the remedial 
actions of the Public Protector and the findings, investigating the 
findings of the Auditor General, she did not raise it.   In fact in the 
same meeting where she raises it she says the President wants to know 
if this firm has been vetted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh so to the extent that I may have understood you 
to say the Minister raised the issue is not a separate occasion, it is the 
20 
occasion when she said the President has raised this issue. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And what was your response to that? 
MR MOLEFE:   I attempted to respond to that and say that I challenged 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 83 of 146 
 
the basis upon which a firm of professionals investigating on behalf of 
PRASA outside Government Department needed to be vetted by State 
Security Agency, and I did say that there is no basis because when you 
do this vetting of this institution and you get State Security Agency to 
do it one would expect that they are doing it because there is fear that 
if they don’t do it classified information of the cabinet and the 
government could go into the hands of people who are not sworn to 
secrecy or confidentiality. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni he is giving this answer for a second time, 
he has given it before. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so I just want to say ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no I understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...you must keep an eye on that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And I had the same difficulty as you Mr Chairman, 
I didn’t know if it was the same occasion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, okay, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now what was the Minister’s reaction to that 
when you said this that look I am surprised you are asking me, I am 
surprised the President has asked.  In other words did she accept it or 
20 
was she resisting your explanation? 
MR MOLEFE:   Well I believe that the Minister accepted because she 
had no argument against what I said and if she disagreed with me she 
would have had to present a rational case for disagreeing with me and 
she did not do so. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 84 of 146 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now I get the impression that in your exchange with 
the Minister it seems that she was just conveying what the President 
had raised, is that a fair impression? 
MR MOLEFE:   It is not my intention – well she was conveying what the 
President said but also what she presented as her concern as well, but 
the meeting was not about that only. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, no that’s fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now after the attempt, the meeting that didn’t 
take place in April in Cape Town, we now have the meeting in August, 
how did that meeting now come about? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   The meeting in August ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Now August 20? 
MR MOLEFE:   In August 20 yes, is now convened again by the Minister 
in the Presidency.  This time they informed the Minister and they had 
told her that they had invited me because I also get a separate 
invitation but the Minister came to me to say the President wants to see 
us at three o’clock on the 20 t h of August at the President’s Guesthouse. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And this time too there was an indication that it was 
about PRASA? 
MR MOLEFE:   It was an indication about PRASA.   In fact it was about 
20 
PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:    And just before Mr Soni has another question, as at 
that time how was the relationship between the Minister and the Board 
as at that time when she told you about the meeting that had to take 
place on the 20 t h?  
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 85 of 146 
 
MR MOLEFE:   The relationship at that time between the Board and the 
Minister appeared to still be normal, but of course there was a 
behaviour that was strange and that behaviour comes out when we deal 
with the appointment, the need to appoint a Group CEO, so we start 
seeing this what appears to be resistance but the Minister not saying to 
us I will not do it, I actually says to me thank you very much for the 
work you have done, I am going to, I have to talk to the President about 
your intention to appoint the GCE, I am not going to change anything, I 
am going to present as it came from the Board of Directors. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Right, so the meeting is scheduled for three 
o’clock on the 20 t h, am I right? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Did the meeting start as scheduled? 
MR MOLEFE:   The meeting Chairperson started three hours late, I 
started at about six pm, actually when – at about that time I had started 
saying to the Minister if that is how you are treated in the cabinet but 
the president can ask for a meeting with you and the President makes 
you wait for more than two hours, close on to three hours and he 
doesn’t say anything about what is happening, why is keeping you 
20 
waiting.   
I am not prepared to sit here indefinitely and of course that 
time I had a bit of flu, and I said to the Minister you stay I am going to 
go home now, and of course it was at that point in time as I was going 
out that I met with the President in the passage, and I said to him Mr 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 86 of 146 
 
President as you see him, I was actually going home, because he asked 
for a meeting at three o’clock and you’re not there, you are not giving 
us any apology.  Of course before that I had been advised that Mr 
Montana was seen in the premise coming out of one of the rooms with 
Mr Roy Moodley and I think they had been talking to the President 
before I met him in the passage. 
What they were discussing I don’t know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   During the time between three o’clock to about the 
time when you saw the President had you and the Minister been 
informed what the reason for the delay was, like maybe the President 
10 
was not in the premises or at any meetings, had you been informed of 
anything like that? 
MR MOLEFE:   We were given conflicting information, he said no he is 
flying from Cape Town and then they would say he has landed, say 
maybe an hour and a half later or so, but he was not arriving at the 
meeting that he had requested, and we were not being given an 
explanation, why this long delay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now you then meet the President and you 
indicate you were going to be leaving, what was his reaction to that? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   His reaction was that but you know I told them to tell 
you that I am in Cape Town, ja you might have been in Cape Town and I 
knew you would be in Cape Town, but you set up a meeting of three 
o’clock Mr President knowing that you would be in Cape Town on that 
day, we would have at least expected that somebody should have 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 87 of 146 
 
notified us that you would be late, and then he said well now I am here, 
and let us go back, let us go to the room and let’s go and meet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Where was this meeting again? 
MR MOLEFE:   The meeting was at the Presidential Guesthouse in 
Pretoria. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now as I understand your affidavit four people 
were president at this meeting on the 20 t h of August, that’s you, 
Minister Dipoa Peters, former President Zuma and Minister Jeff 
Radebe, or were there other people there as well? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   Initially that was what we understand, we understood to 
be the individuals who are going to be participants in that meeting, but 
of course later on it turned out that Mr Montana, who happened to 
...[indistinct] by the Board of Directors of PRASA had also been invited 
into the meeting, to the meeting.  We did not know anything about that.   
 
The Minister and I did not even know what would be the details 
of our discussions save that they wanted to discuss PRASA.  Now there 
are formal ways in which reports are given to the Minister and/or the 
Government because the Board gives quarterly reports about the work 
of the company and its performance in accordance with the key 
20 
performance indicators and key performance areas identified and these 
would have been identified in the Board’s Charter informed of course by 
the mandate of the company also and they operate a corporate plan of 
the company.   We would give ad hoc reports if there are things that the 
Minister needs to know about and they happen in between the quarterly 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 88 of 146 
 
report, so this one we didn’t know what its focus was going to be. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As I understand now the four of you were there at 
the commencement of the meeting and Mr Montana joined a little later. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct Mr Montana joined but let me say that 
prior to that meeting, I want to draw our attention to this again 
Chairperson, Mr Montana had started making public statements 
announcing that he is willing to return to ...[indistinct] PRASA if the 
Minister required him to do so, or the Minister and the Board required 
him to do so.   He walked away, we tried to persuade him to say, now 
suddenly he says he wants to return and then publically, on a public 
10 
platform he wants to return conditional upon him serving under a 
different Board of Directors and at that time also the environment was – 
contained a lot of other campaigns by groupings I refer to a person 
called Stephen Sangwene, who was mobilising, he called himself – he 
said he was the President of a thing called Commuters Association but 
of course you can’t say who is a member of that organisation, but he 
was the President and was being given money for that and was 
mobilising unemployed youth in the townships and of course they said 
it’s good because he can use them to protect the trains, to patrol the 
railway tracks and so on.  That so-called commuter association would 
20 
then issue public statements saying that they want Mr Montana to 
return, that if he doesn’t return we should know that you know there will 
be no stability. 
 
Of course in preceding meetings between Mr Sangwene and 
one of my directors, Ms Mklala, because I could not attend that 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 89 of 146 
 
meeting, he openly said that if you don’t bring Mr Montana back your 
trains are going to burn.  Well we made no big deal of that but I am 
saying this to demonstrate how the environment was polluted already 
and then you have of course this SATAWU of Mr Zanzo Mhlangu also 
issuing public statement in that regard. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now I wanted to ask you this earlier, you have said 
from time to time that at a certain stage Mr Montana began to issue 
public statements in some of which, as I understood your evidence, but 
you must correct me if I am wrong, he seemed to attack the Board and 
to attack you.  I want to find out whether that began before the Board 
10 
asked him to leave on the 15 t h of July or that happened after he had 
left, after the 15 t h of July? 
MR MOLEFE:   It began before the Board asked him to leave, if that is 
before the 15 t h of July Chairperson, and in fact I must say that in one 
of the publications there was a very expensive article, again that was in 
the Financial Mail, which kind of article the Financial Mail would not 
publish unless it was paid for, several pages which we asked Mr 
Montana to explain and he confirmed that he said the thing that were 
being said in that article. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And this was now, this article was published before 
20 
the 15 t h of July? 
MR MOLEFE:   It was before the 15 t h of July, the rest of July we had no 
relationship with Mr Montana really, we would have no basis to hold him 
accountable to PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  So but these attacks by him in the media 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 90 of 146 
 
on the Board and the various statements did they occur between the 
31 s t March, ...[indistinct] between the 31 s t of March and the 15 t h and 
maybe continued beyond or did they start even before the 31 s t of March 
when his contract ...[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   They did not start before the 31 s t of March Chairperson, 
they started after. 
CHAIRPERSON:   After okay.  And did they continue ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   They continued, they continued, I mean in the latter 
period ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, became more ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR MOLEFE:   ...they manifested themselves in social media, Twitters 
and Facebook and so on, but it was continuing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   This ...[indistinct] Mr Montana’s letter to you is 
dated the 15 t h of March as I understand it, telling you that he is going 
to leave at the end of March but would serve a six month period of 
notice. 
MR MOLEFE:   Well I would imagine ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes we looked at that ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   ...because I can’t – I was not looking ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, we looked at that. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...but I know it was in March, it was before the 21 s t 
...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I am trying to get to something Mr Molefe.  You 
accept on the 1 s t of April that is your letter to Mr Montana. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 91 of 146 
 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That we accept and the six month period is 
conditional upon our not finding somebody as a replacement for you.  
That’s what your letter to him of the 1 s t of April said. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now I am just taking up a theme raised by the 
Chairperson as to the time when this started, the accumulations by Mr 
Montana against you and the Board, did it start soon after you accepted 
his resignation? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson, it started soon after that 
10 
and soon after we had imposed those restrictions on him and after we 
asked him to withdraw as the Chairperson of the Boards of 
Subsidiaries. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Coming back now to the meeting when you heard 
that Mr Montana and Mr Moodley had left the meeting room what was 
your reaction to that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Well Chairperson I was, I was surprised that they would 
have had the opportunity to meet with the President and given 
preference to the Minister and the Chairman of the Board of PRASA, 
and him actually having no standing in PRASA anymore because he had 
20 
left. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course I take it that you thought along those lines 
only because you took it that the discussion that the President might 
have had with them related to PRASA. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is true Chair and I would not have known and I 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 92 of 146 
 
don’t know much about what ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, what they discussed. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...they would have been discussing now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But of course a further implication whether it 
registered with you or not was that the President, former President, had 
in fact delayed meeting you while he was in fact meeting the CEO of 
the Board together with a contractor. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is so Chairperson but at that point in time it was 
not a big issue for discussion but it was a concern that continued to 
10 
register in my mind and it became even more so when the President 
after he had – we had had a discussion, the Minister of Transport, the 
Minister in the Presidency and I, had had a discussion with him, he 
suddenly said I have invited that boy, Lucky, to join us, so it was just 
something that was sprung on us, and as he was saying so he asked 
the Minister in the Presidency to call him.  I did say Chairperson 
preceding that part of the meeting and when there were just four of us 
without Mr Montana I asked the President to explain to me the kind of 
protocol that he was using in – he used in convening that meeting, and 
I have also already explained what is the answer that I got from the 
20 
President. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now before Mr – before the President said I have 
invited – you said he said I invited that boy, was that how he put it? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is how he put it. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 93 of 146 
 
MR MOLEFE:   That is so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Meaning Mr Montana? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before he said that tell me about the discussion that 
happened between yourself, the Minister, Minister Dipau Peters and the 
President and the Minister in the Presidency, is there anything of 
significance you want to tell me about what happened, what discussions 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   We did not have any discussions save for me raising 
this question of protocol, we didn’t a discussion that meant, a 
10 
discussion substantively were going to start when Mr Montana is in the 
meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now in your affidavit you mentioned a reference 
to the document called PRASA in Turmoil. 
MR MOLEFE:   I do sir, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And was there a discussion about the document? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh you mean before Mr Montana came in? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Before Mr Montana came in. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   There was a discussion on the document but I think it 
actually happened when Mr Montana was there. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright, so very little took place before Mr 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 94 of 146 
 
Montana was called in? 
MR MOLEFE:   Very little yes Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And when Mr Montana came in what happened 
then? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then the meeting really – that’s when the meeting 
really started. 
MR MOLEFE:   When the meeting started the purpose for the meeting 
was explained by Minister Jeff Radebe, he said that he had been – well 
he starts off really by painting or attempting to paint a picture about 
what character I am, he starts off by saying I tried to get Comrade Popo 
10 
Molefe to come and meet with the President, I told him that the 
President wanted him, and I sent my secretary to say so to his 
secretary and his secretary told my secretary that he is on leave 
playing golf in Knysna and he wouldn’t come.   Saying of course that I 
am on leave and I will not break my leave now because I mean, nobody 
tells me that there is, there will be train smash if the meeting does not 
happen during my leave.  So, and also, I have already indicated the 
unconventional manner in which the meeting was being convened.  So, it 
is not that, but basically he is saying look here is this guy he is merely 
the Chairman of the Board of Control of PRASA.  When I tell him the 
20 
President, the Head of State, wants him he does not take my comments 
seriously.  So, I just ignored that I wanted to wait to hear if the President 
was going to say anything about it and he did not.  Having said that he – 
he then said that he had attempted to have a discussion with me and Mr 
Montana and the Minister of Transport [intervenes]. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 95 of 146 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   This is now the President or Minister Radebe saying 
that? 
MR MOLEFE:   It is then Mr Radebe saying that.  He is talking about what 
they had been discussing elsewhere.  He says no we had a meeting of the 
National Executive Committee and at that meeting I had hoped to ask to 
get Minister Dipuo Peters to get Chairman of the Board and Comrade 
Popo and Lucky to come and meet with us because we were concerned 
about the public’s spec,  about what was going on in the media.   
 
So, so he went on like that and then the Minister of Transport 
says well ja you attempted that but I told you, you Mr Radebe me being 
10 
Minister Dipuo Peters that you should reign in Mr Montana tell him to stop 
making public statements which are bringing PRASA into disrepute and I 
asked you because you are close to him he worked under you. 
Because at that point Mr. Radebe said no I actually Mr Montana 
is not close to me.  The person who is closer to me like than Mr Montana 
close to me is Comrade Popo Molefe.  I mean went with him to Botswana 
we had we were there and with President of Botswana and other people.  
It was nice, you know, I was with him in jail so he says all of that in 
response to what the Minister had said – says, had asked him.  So, 
maybe I should let counsel lead me. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What happened then insofar as the purpose of the 
meeting namely to get you and Mr Montana closer together that is what I 
understand the purpose of the meeting was. 
MR MOLEFE:   Well maybe before even that the Minister stated, Minister 
of Transport stated that, Mr Montana had resigned and the Board had 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 96 of 146 
 
accepted that it is not like that it is an issue now that he should accept 
that the Board has made its decision and that it was important to him to 
avoid personalizing these matters. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, just to go back   [intervenes]. 
MR MOLEFE:   Before we and then of course the President also repeated 
what Mr Jeff Radebe said.  So, I think he said he was he had in on a state 
visit to the People’s Republic of China and he got reports that two 
members of his party were having a public spat about each other and that 
is matter that concerned him and that members of the National Executive 
Committee were also worried about it and that is why he has asked us to 
10 
meet. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now just taking Mr Dipuo, Minister Dipuo Peters’ 
reaction he says but look Mr Montana should accept that he resigned and 
the Board accepted his resignation that is how she put it.  But that is 
inconsistent with what she had said to you a few weeks earlier.  She had 
said but look you should have before accepting the resignation you 
should have discussed with me. 
MR MOLEFE:   I do not dispute that it is inconsistent, but of course in the 
meeting she did also say that she was informed after the fact after the 
Board had decided.  So, [intervenes]. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Distancing herself from the decision. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct.  So, that was – that was her position but 
at that point I think also there was another matter.  Counsel refer to a 
document called a PRASA in turmoil. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, before you – you talk about it if you intent talking 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 97 of 146 
 
about it.  I am not sure whether I follow the proposition that what Minister 
Dipuo Peters said, at the meeting is inconsistent with her earlier attitude. 
 
As I see it is possible that it is inconsistent but it is possible 
that it is not inconsistent because as I understand your evidence she 
makes statements suggesting that she thought you should have consulted 
her before accepting the – accepting the resignation in quotes of Mr 
Montana but it may be that once Mr Montana had left she was at peace 
with the fact that rightly or wrongly he was gone and if that is the position 
it may be that therefore her saying at the meeting of 20 August 
Mr Montana must accept that he is gone, maybe it is not inconsistent but 
10 
it might be inconsistent with the earlier attitude which may have 
suggested that she might have wished to be consulted before.  I just want 
to make sure [intervenes]. 
MR MOLEFE:   The latter – the latter is what I [intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is what you are talking about. 
MR MOLEFE:   Is what I was talking about.  It is inconsistent 
...[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   With the initial ...[intervenes].  
MR MOLEFE:   With the initial position because this time now, she seem 
to have accepted the decision of the Board and of course we had already 
20 
at that time had discussions.  I have had discussions with the Minister 
about it and the Minister was very clear that the Board was not to about 
to reverse. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   So, she knew then that that was the case then of course 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 98 of 146 
 
we had written a detailed report to her setting out to her a number of - 
responding to a number of questions she had asked to her letter to the 
Board.  So, at that meeting, I think, she had accepted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And you were obviously welcomed her intervention 
at that level where this was now a fair company,  both PRASA and 
Mr Montana has moved in their separate ways? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is – that is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What is the President’s attitude, the former 
President Zuma’s attitude to all of this? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   The thread of discussion of the president took in that 
meeting by thread I mean t-h-r-e-a-d.  Was that [intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is T not tea. 
MR MOLEFE:   Not a tea – not a tea.  Was along the lines in what 
Mr Montana had been saying in his Public statement that is available if 
the Minister wants him back and the Board want him, he is willing to come 
back.   
 
But of course he was also contradicting himself because he 
wanted to make a condition of his return the fact that this Board that he 
did not like should not be there.  So the President says this young man is 
20 
very experienced, he is knowledgeable on Rolling Stock and Rail matters, 
he has got the skills that the country needs and in my view he should not 
be lost to the country that some solution should be found to allow him to 
continue to ply out his skills, to use his skills in this important 
organization that is serving the best interest of commuters in our country. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 99 of 146 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And what was the solution he was suggesting? 
MR MOLEFE:   The solution he was suggesting was that the decision be 
reviewed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And what was that decision that he was suggesting 
should be reviewed? 
MR MOLEFE:   It was that the Board had accepted that, released 
Mr Montana so you now change it to say come back Mr Montana.  So the 
Board should then recede its decision, but this is a meeting of the ANC 
which means I must now go and say to the Board of Directors I was in a 
meeting of my party, my party says that the decision that the Board of – 
10 
the Board of Control of PRASA took in releasing Mr Montana should be 
reviewed.  Now, this is an untenable position there is no way in which one 
can justify that because this is there should be a distinct separate – 
separation of roles and powers between the party, the State and in this 
instance the State being represented by its organ called PRASA. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And how did you respond when the President, when 
the former President Zuma made that suggestion? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Your voice again Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, sorry, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Raise it. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, how did you respond when former President 
Zuma said the Board should consider rescinding its decision.  
MR MOLEFE:   My response to the President, Chairperson was that I 
cannot make a commitment in a private meeting about a matter that was 
decided by the Board of Control.   
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 100 of 146 
 
 
I did not understand what the President’s problem was even after 
I had listened to him, and I said to him,  
“Mr Montana did not have a lifetime contract.  He had 
a contract for a limited period.That period arrived, he 
said he did not want an extension.  The Board agrees 
with him and persuade him to work with it, he begins 
campaigns against the Board and his campaigns were 
no longer serving the purpose for which the Board 
wanted him to stay.  Therefore, Mr President, I 
cannot agree with you, but I am happy to convene a 
10 
Board meeting so that you can address the Board 
and explain to them what is your problem with the 
decision that the Board has taken.   
Of course, I must say that this is, in it was the tail end of the meeting.  
We had not yet dealt with what Mr Montana did in the meeting.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well I want to hear a lot about the discussion 
because I think that meeting and the discussion may be very important 
and from your affidavit I know the meeting took quite long because I think 
you said it ended at two a.m. so there must be a lot that was discussed 
about PRASA affairs.  So, if you can tell, tell me more and Mr Soni carry 
20 
on, can indicate areas.   
MR MOLEFE:   But from my side I have already covered a lot that I 
needed to cover (Intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MR MOLEFE:   My attitude in that meeting was that I was not going to 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 101 of 146 
 
follow all thrills mentioned in speeches and so on.  I was more interested 
in what is the decision of the Board, what was the basis for that decision, 
and that the Board can’t,  I can’t change that decision of the board and I 
did so advisedly, Chairperson because Mr Montana had already 
threatened to take the Board to Court to challenge its decision so in that 
meeting I said, I am dealing only with the fact that the man’s contract has 
expired, they asked him to stay on, he agreed.   
He started working against the purpose for which he was being 
asked to stay and we had to release him and that for me was the most 
important thing and every other thing that he says he is going to 
10 
challenge, he is going to, we will wait for that and I did say in the meeting 
I am not going to respond to the many things that Mr Montana has said, I 
will respond when we go to Court on those matters.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You say that you would respond to the many things 
that Mr Montana said.  Are you saying at the meeting? 
MR MOLEFE:   The things he said at the meeting, in and outside that 
meeting.  In public domain.  Maybe we should come back quickly and talk 
about Mr Montana.   
 
I will not be able to deal with the details of what he said.  Safe 
to say that what became apparent to the Minister of Transport and I, and 
20 
me, was that whereas we did not know the, the objective of the meeting 
and details what we were going to be dealing with except that it is a 
discussion about PRASA.  Mr Montana appeared to have been thoroughly 
briefed and had prepared a long report for that meeting which to me it 
appeared that he had discussed it with the Minister in the P residency 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 102 of 146 
 
and the President and they wanted him to present that report in our 
meeting with the President.   
It was a very long report and it is this one that I refer to as 
PRASA in Turmoil which was preceded by a provision, a section of the 
Management Report to the Board of Directors held during the month of 
May when those many demonstrations were taking place at the 
headquarters of PRASA but the meeting was elsewhere at a hotel called 
Nichol, but it is a hotel on William Nichol, ja.  Now Mr Montana was 
allowed to speak.  He spoke for a very long time, a very long time.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you able to estimate? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   We, we left the meeting at 2 o’clock in the morning.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Having started at around 6 p.m. the previous day? 
MR MOLEFE:   It started at around six the previous day in the evening.  
The lion’s share of that day was that of Mr Montana.  Minister Dipuoit 
Peters said quite a number of things as well, but the essence of the 
presentation of Mr Montana was that he is working with a Board of 
Directors that does not have a good relationship with him.   
It sometimes convenes meetings without you know the in-
committee meetings of non-executive Directors without involving him.  
Now the Chairman of the Board, half the time when he convenes the 
20 
meeting he does not plan the agenda properly with the group’s CEO.  I do 
not know how because he would present reports to the meeting but he 
says he does not have enough engagement before that but in fact the 
Board should not choose a date that he, he did not approve of something.  
By the way, Chairperson, the Board had the year planner.   
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 103 of 146 
 
Meetings are planned when it is going to be, but because of the 
crisis at PRASA there were many other meetings which took place which 
were not scheduled meetings and we took a view that a meeting of the 
Board could not be postponed because one person is not coming even if 
that person is the group’s CEO.  We would rather not discuss what he 
would have presented in his absence, but we would discuss everything 
else that needed to be discussed.   
So that is the turn that I took and then he stated that it was 
very clear from the beginning that this Board of Directors which is a 
Board of people who know nothing about rail was appointed without 
10 
consulting him.   
He was not asked to give his opinion on and that it is a Board 
that it is clear was appointed to get rid of him.  Then he also says that 
the Minister actually appears to have had a different mandate for the 
Board.  That is was clear from the beginning that the Minister when she 
insisted on bringing this Chairperson of the Board, she actually must have 
given him instructions to get rid of him.   
Then he systematically laid complaints about other Directors; 
the Chair, the Chairperson of the Audit and Risk Committee, the 
discussions about discussions of the FCIP and Mr Steenkamp who was 
20 
chairing, I think that committee would have been, was called SHEQ.  
SHEQ Security, Safety, Health, and Quality Committee of the Board.  It 
was a very long document.   
Yesterday Council said that, a request had been made to 
Mr Montana to submit that document.  To me, Chairperson, the discussion 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 104 of 146 
 
unfolded, it meant nothing to me except there is an attempt to use what 
Mr Montana was saying and the demonstrations that happened against 
the Board at PRASA to justify bringing him back to say, in fact it is the 
employees of PRASA who are demanding that their group CEO must 
come.   
In fact, that was said in the meeting during the discussion.  So, 
I am saying if I appeared to have not followed every accusation that was 
there, that was not fundamental to the role of the Board and its decision.  
It is a problem that the Minister in the Presidency.  The President himself 
who wanted to consider these matters and the Minister of Transport 
10 
needed to form a view of what they say should happen about it.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Did anybody in the meeting ever explain or maybe let 
me start with this.  Did you understand as you participated in that 
meeting why, what the basis was for the Minister in the Presidency should 
be part of that meeting since the Minister of Transport was there? 
MR MOLEFE:   One could not question that the presence of the Minister 
and the Presidency.  At the time the Minister and the Presidency was 
responsible for performance monitoring and evaluation of the Government 
and by extension you could say there are certain state-owned companies 
which fall under various department, therefore, department therefore my 
20 
job requires that I also seek to understand and have concern if there 
appear to be problems in a state-owned company so I did not find that 
(Intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:   But your understanding was that it was not inconsistent 
with his portfolio? 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 105 of 146 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, Chairperson I did not consider it inconsistent, but 
what I found inconsistent is the fact that I go into a meeting where any 
participant that we were not advised that would be part of that meeting.  
The Minister knew I was coming.  I knew she was going to the meeting.  
The only participant we did not know was coming was Mr Montana and he 
comes in there with a detailed report.   
Not even the Minister was asked to prepare a report for the 
meeting so that was what was strange and that having been preceded by 
the demonstration, my meeting with Mr Montana in Knysna where many of 
the issues, complaints he raised in his detailed presentation to the 
10 
meeting called by the Presidency were similar or the same and also of 
course at that point in time I was also aware that as we were working on 
disciplining the members of staff who, when some people from outside 
came to demonstrate at the headquarters of the company opened the 
doors and gates for them to get into the building and they themselves 
spent hours on end not working without permission and we insisted that 
there should be consequence management for those people.   
The 
consequence 
management 
during 
which 
once 
the 
individuals had been advised that they would be disciplined some of them 
begging not to be fired began to confess, at least I have been advised of 
20 
one that she is sorry and they participated in these demonstrations.   
They were encouraged by the Minister in the Presidency 
because he said that Mr Montana was coming back which is something 
similar to what we heard previously that certain managers were told that 
you better find yourself on the right side when that moment comes and 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 106 of 146 
 
these individuals participated so there is this background or backdrop to 
this meeting and, which therefore explains why Mr Montana was allowed 
to give this long report to the President even in preference to the Minister 
who is directly accounting to the President even though we are told 
reports, we are meeting as members of the African National Congress but 
at least we should have been given the opportunity also to know what was 
expected of us that did not happen.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you have said earlier on that this was like a 
pattern and you have just made reference to that now.  Was it said that 
that is- that was not an official meeting in the sense of the state, organs 
10 
of state and ministers or what was the position? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson.  It was made clear that ... 
(intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was made clear. 
MR MOLEFE:  Well the President convened this meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  As President of the party. 
MR MOLEFE:  President of the party concerned about members of the 
party engaging in public spend.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  But effectively the discussion was one that was 
meant to be affected by an organ of state. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson.  I mean if it is a party 
discussion it should be talking about what is the role of the branches of 
party, regional committees, the provincial structures.  And it should be 
saying this, put this on the agenda but I do not know how anybody would 
have taken a matter of a state organ and said now it is going to be 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 107 of 146 
 
discussed and be resolved by on a party platform.  Well it was bazaar. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would it not whether it is right or wrong let us leave it 
that for now- would it not be taken by somebody who believes the centre 
of power is the party? 
MR MOLEFE:  Well it is probable that that is what they believed but I was 
on the national executive committee for a long time and I was the 
secretary of what was called the Governance and Legislatures Committee 
subcommittee of the National Executive committee.  The chairperson of 
that committee was Dr (indistinct Frini Tshinwala) and in the discussions 
that committee put all the time in the ANC National Executive committee 
10 
was there emphasis on the separation of powers.  Separation of the party 
and the state and separation of the Executive arm of Government and the 
Legislature as well as the Judiciary so we were very clear on those 
matters.   
 
But of course I think after the Polokwane conference people 
started- things started being conflated.  I will imagine that the role of the 
governance and legislatures subcommittee of the NEC also diminished 
and we continued to see that also in public statements that are being 
made even now by leading members of the party. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then going back to the meeting.  Just another question 
20 
before Mr Soni continues.  You have said that what was sought by Mr 
Montana and Mr- and the former President, I do not know whether also by 
the minister and the Presidency but at least the former President and Mr 
Montana seemed to be that the board should review its decision by which 
I suspect what was meant is change its decision. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 108 of 146 
 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now are you quite clear that the decision that they 
wanted the board to change was the board’s decision to accept Mr 
Montana’s decision not to seek an extension of his contract as opposed to 
the decision of the board in July to say to Mr Montana, sorry you will 
have to step down because your continue stay does not serv the purpose 
for which we wanted you to stay. 
MR MOLEFE:  I think there is a- a connection between the two 
Chairperson.  What I understood to have been wanted by the President 
was firstly that rescind the decision that he should go.  Secondly consider 
10 
giving him a contract, another contract maybe 5 years contract that is the 
best person to run this organization.  This organization cannot afford to 
lose him.  Of course, this discussion was also preceded by a statement 
made by Mr Montana in the same meeting that he had written to the 
Minister advising that should she want him to return, I think he probably 
wrote to the board as well that he was willing to return to take over as the 
Group CEO of the company.  So, the President says the man might have 
decided to go but he is now willing to come back.  He is the most skilled 
person in this field.  The country and the company need him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did anybody in the meeting, I guess it could only have 
20 
been either you or Minister Dipuo Peters, did anybody in the meeting say, 
hang on, what are we talking about really here?  Because he made the 
decision, that is Mr Montana, that he is not interested in an extension of 
his contract.  So where does this thing come from now that if the minister 
wants him, he is prepared to come back.  Who has prompted that?  Why 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 109 of 146 
 
is he saying that?  He made this decision so where does it come from to 
say, if you need me, I am prepared to come back.  Did anybody ask that 
question? 
MR MOLEFE:  I did raise it maybe the latter part not as sympathetic as 
the Chairperson is raising it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  But I did say, what are we doing here?  I mean the man’s 
contract expires.  He says I do not want an extension.  He says but I am 
willing to help you for 6 months, the board agrees.  So, what- and the 
man is not preordained to be the Group CEO.  The man was given a 
10 
limited contract and is going so.  And it was at that point what I said- 
when I said to the President, I did not understand what is your problem?  
Maybe you will say that I may not be wise enough to understand you but I 
am happy that I convene a board meeting.  Maybe the other directors will 
understand your problem so come and address us.  So that is what I said.  
But I am aware Chairperson at that point in time that there were a lot of 
other people who were lobbying Mr Montana to say that he wants to 
return.   
 
Naturally his departure would have presented a difficult problem 
to those who benefitted through his presence as a major decision maker 
20 
at the administrative level.  Because at that time we are now going to 
deal- dealing with the Siyangena, Siyaya, Siphambo contracts and several 
others.  So, if he is there, he can continue to play the role of frustrating 
our effort to get deeper into these matters.  Make it impossible for us to 
access information in order to prove our case.  So that is really what I 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 110 of 146 
 
understood it to be. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was the President at the time aware of Mr Montana’s 
attack on the board in the media?  That is what had prompted the meeting 
actually if I understood you correctly. 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson the President was aware.  There is a matter I 
did not include in the- in my affidavit but in the light of the deep 
questioning that the President- I mean the Chairperson is raising, I need 
to bring it on board now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mm. 
MR MOLEFE:  After a long time with Mr Montana attacking the board of 
10 
directors and we having started- the board having started the 
investigations.  I and of course in my discussion with the then Treasurer 
General of the party Dr Zweli Mkhize.  I had agreed he had suggested 
that I should address the leadership of the party.  So, we then convened a 
meeting for me to talk to the top 6 of the party.  The- my recollection is 
that the only person who was not in that meeting was the Speaker of 
Parliament who in her capacity as the chairperson of the party was in the 
top 6. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mm. 
MR MOLEFE:  I addressed that meeting not talking about what is 
20 
happening in PRASA and so on simply to say, you are the ruling party.  
This country the state-owned companies are governed in terms of the 
laws of this country and those laws have either been adopted from the 
past maybe adapted to the new situation.  And several of them were laws 
which were made by our party, this party, so fundamentally you as the 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 111 of 146 
 
ruling party you are the custodians of the constitution of the Republic of 
South Africa.  But you are also the custodians of all the laws which are 
used to govern either state companies and so on.  The key provisions that 
govern which you have responsibility to ensure have to happen in respect 
of PRASA is that there is a public finance management act, there is the 
South African Transport Services Act of- I think it was 2009 Act.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Mm. 
MR MOLEFE:  So, I said to them, I am not here to ask you to do anything 
for me as a person.  What I am here to tell you that all of you, you 
approved my appointment as the chair of the board.  In a sense you 
10 
deployed me on the board of control of PRASA.  And I am running that 
organization on behalf of the country.  The board of directors was 
appointed by the Government by the governing party.  It is subjected to 
sustain attack by Mr Montana but none of you has raised a voice to say, 
why are you taking an institution that we are using to advance the 
economic and development- social development objectives of the 
Government in the country.  I said you are not doing that.  So I am here 
therefore to tell you today that although I have been quiet for a long time 
I am now going to begin to act and when I act I would be applying the 
legal instruments that you have armed me with to run that company, the 
20 
Public Finance Management Act. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mm. 
MR MOLEFE:  One of those is the critical issue of fiduciary 
responsibilities.  The requirement for us to manage prudently the finances 
of the country and to deal with corruption in the company.  So that is what 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 112 of 146 
 
I am going to be doing.  I remember them saying- and the current 
President was also in that meeting.  He says, we were not expecting this.  
We are going to have another meeting.  Eish, you have not given us 
enough time to think about this.  And I said, no, I am not asking for 
anything.  I am just making you aware so that when things happen out 
there, at least you have been forewarned about these matters.  So, the 
President was in that meeting Chairperson, he knew about this.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Mm. 
MR MOLEFE:  And that meeting happened before the meeting of the 20 t h 
of August and I do state in my affidavit that apart form that meeting of the 
10 
20 t h of August I did not have any other meeting with the President until 
today. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  How long before the meeting of the 20 t h of August 
was your meeting with the top6? 
MR MOLEFE:  I would not really be able to place time on that but it was 
when Mr Montana had started attacking the board of directors.  It could 
be that he was still on the- in PRASA but I cannot really establish that … 
(intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sure. 
MR MOLEFE:  But the reality is that what I am able to establish is that in 
20 
response to the question of the Chairperson that the President knew. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And knew quite well.   
MR MOLEFE:  And he knew quite- he knew quite well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You had told them. 
MR MOLEFE:  I had told them. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 113 of 146 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  In that meeting. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Just to follow up to the earlier questions Mr Molefe.  
At the- at your meeting with the top 6 as I understand it they were 
suggesting they want to consider it and perhaps come back to you or you 
come back to them.  Or am I wrong that that was the only possible 
meeting that was going to be on the cards? 
MR MOLEFE:  They were saying, but we have not- you have not given us 
enough time to think about what you are saying.  Well implied in that 
statement is that they would want time at some point to think about it.  
10 
But that is what- that was not what I was asking for.  I was informing them 
that there are these things happening.  You are the custodians of the laws 
of the country.  You are the governing party.  You are doing nothing 
because you wanted to allow space to see if the campaigns of Mr 
Montana would lead to the defeat of the board- the collapse of the board.  
And that is not happening. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Did they- begore this meeting of the 20 t h of August 
2015, did the top 6 call you back or informally raise this matter with you 
again? 
MR MOLEFE:  They never called me to any meeting. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And how did that meeting between yourself and the top 
6 which must have been the top 5 on that day. 
MR MOLEFE:  The top 5, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How did it end? 
MR MOLEFE:  Because one was absent. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 114 of 146 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, one was absent.  How did it end?   
MR MOLEFE:  Well it ended with the Deputy President saying, we have to 
go to another meeting of the working committee.  We are not able to 
comment on what you have said as we have not had time to think about it.  
But I was not asking for comment.  I was stating a fact that … 
(intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  You were informing them. 
MR MOLEFE:  Informing them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  That things are going to happen and they will be happen- 
10 
they will happen persuade- pursuant rather, pursuant to protection of the 
interest of the company and the country. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  What is the … (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I am- I am sorry Mr Soni.  I am glad you decided to 
tell me that part Mr Molefe.  Different members of our society in this 
country can make all kinds of beautiful statements about how much they 
are opposed to corruption and how much they abore corruption and how 
much they are opposed to State Capture.  And how much they abore it 
and how much they do not want it to happen again.  But if people are not 
prepared to tell the truth about what they know, all efforts to cap 
20 
corruption are not going to bear fruit.   
 
We need as a country to face the reality and tell one another 
certain truths and admit where we have not done the right things.  
Because as you probably know that I have been saying people should 
really come forward.  State Capture will happen again in this country if 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 115 of 146 
 
we find that it has happened and we are not able to make 
recommendations that will make sure that if implemented it never 
happens again.  It will happen again if we do not come out and say and 
speak certain truths even if certain people might not be happy with those 
truths.  Because one of the issues we have got to look at is, what did 
various institutions, what did various functionaries of the state, what did 
various bodies, what did various individuals of influence know about State 
Capture and at what stage.  And about the levels of corruption in the 
country.  And what were they prepared to do about it for the country.   
 
Then we know various people take the oath to be faithful to the 
10 
Republic of South Africa and if you ask me to be faithful to the Republic 
of South Africa means if the interest of the Republic of South Africa seem 
to clash with somebody else’s interest, those of the Republic prevail.  And 
I wrote- we send letters, the Commission to various political parties 
recently who are represented in Parliament and ask them to make their 
own contributions which includes whether over the years Parliament had 
adequate oversight mechanisms to perform its oversight functions 
effectively.  And hopeful we will get some information and so.  But part of 
what one is trying to see is how did we come to be where we are?  Did 
certain various bodies play their part properly including Parliament?  And 
20 
if they did not play it properly, had they play it properly could some of the 
things have been avoided and could we have not reached the point where 
we are.   
 
So, I just mentioned this because I just found- I just think that 
what you have told me is very important.  You do not need to say anything 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 116 of 146 
 
in response but I just thought I would say this.  But I am not preventing 
you from saying something if you want to but I am just- I do not want you 
to feel obliged to say anything. 
MR MOLEFE:  No, I- thank you Chairperson but I believe in the values 
that the Chairperson has articulated, the values that requires that to the 
extend that the interest of the country are in conflict with our own 
personal interest that we would subordinate our personal or party interest 
to the interest of the country. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The country, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is a value that I hold dear. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And that is a value for which I would continue to fight for 
and I am not prepared to compromise my integrity, my reputation simply 
to endear myself to the party.  But Chairperson not everybody can do 
that.  There are many young people, young professional who begin to 
work.  They get married, start a family, they buy a home, pay a huge bond 
and expensive car and children and private school.  They are put by- in 
the positions and certain individuals in high places in the party make 
them believe that the extend to which they could have upward mobility 
whether where they are or in the broader society is dependent on them 
20 
pleasing those occupying position of influence and decision making either 
in the state-owned companies or in the party.   
 
I would say and I am saying it here that I think the party that I 
belong to is failing the country and has failed the country over this 
several years.  That we had values which inspired and sustained us and 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 117 of 146 
 
cost me as a young person to join the struggle for freedom to sacrifice to 
go in and out of jail.  To be even in the last treason trial in the Apartheid 
government which would have meant that had the judge decided to 
impose the ultimate penalty, I would have been hanged.  I would have 
died unless I was saved by the negotiations that then came shortly after 
that.  But the party being so strong and having enjoyed so much good will 
from ordinary and poor people of this land has failed them.  And it pains 
me because I know as a young man I have had to go into communities 
and talk to ordinary people about why it was important for them to 
become part of the struggle for freedom.  It was not an easy job with 
10 
(indistinct) organisations, a few months later they are dead but we kept 
on going back to the people until finally by the 80s the mid-80s the 
movement for liberation had (indistinct) every corner of our country.  And 
the current ruling government party became a household name and the 
system of Apartheid collapsed under the pressure of the resistance of 
ordinary people in various communities.  And that huge prizes, the 
ultimate prize was paid by many of those ordinary people either through 
assassination or all forms of murder which happened to our people.  
 
So, it pains me Chairperson to sit where I am sitting and seeing 
what is happening.  I recall one time I was almost like an isolated 
20 
individual and referred to part of that where I say from a hero of the 
liberation struggle, I became this individual who was now being isolated.  
And because I could not none of this influential people in my party could 
raise a voice and say, he is doing the right thing.  We support what you 
are doing.  You others who are doing what is wrong, stop it, prepared to 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 118 of 146 
 
do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hmm. 
MR MOLEFE:  I did an expensive interview and I was very angry 
Chairperson when I did that interview. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  I did that interview with the Mail and Guardian. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  And that article would say. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  That in the governing party. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  There is a lot of riff raff. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  Of individuals who believe that PRASA is their farm.  
That PRASA is a place where they just want to come and harvest. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  They do not see it as a vehicle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  That has to empower and improve the lives of the poor 
people.  I made that interview.  It was a long interview. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  To the credit of my party they did not try to attack me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  They kept quiet.  And they did so because they knew I 
was informing them about the terrible things that we were uncovering 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 119 of 146 
 
as we were investigating. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  But probably some of them were benefiting from the 
balance that other people uses like jazz.  They were getting funding 
also this illicit funding from – from the coffers of the party the – be they 
for conferences or what.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  When I came into PRASA Chairperson I found that the 
GCE of PRASA – GCO could be instructed, look the (indistinct) has got 
a big rally and I need this – give us trains, give us busses. 
10 
 CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  And I said no Minister we cannot do this thing.  You 
cannot this is a state owned company.  If you want to use its assets you 
got to pay for using those assets. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  I do not mind if PRASA gives you preferential rates. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  But ask them to give you a quote to tell you how much it 
will cost for them to transport people to an event of the ruling party. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  We stopped that thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  And obviously I would not have endeared myself to a lot 
of people who began to feel that I am becoming disloyal to the party.  
That I am loyal to the country. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 120 of 146 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you know it is just very important because if there 
are more and more people who do not throw that line (indistinct) and 
stays and if there are more and more influential people in the party who 
would think that they can just pick up the phone and phone a CEO of a 
parastatal of a state owned entity and say the party needs A,B,C,D now 
or needs A,B,C,D and that must be done then it creates serious 
problems.  It creates serious problems.  So obviously what the country 
needs are people who are going to be in government departments, state 
owned entities and in Boards who will be firm to do the right thing.  And 
in many cases if we had the right number of people who would do the 
10 
right thing and be firm maybe we would not be where we – we are in 
many respects in terms of levels of corruption because I think 
everybody accepts that we have levels of corruption that are really 
totally unacceptable.  So I really appreciate what you have said and it 
is very important.  We – we – there are certain things that if we do not 
change we must forget about making this country better.  We must just 
forget.  There are certain things that must change.  Thank you Mr Soni 
I appreciate that we have.  But this is important what we have been 
talking about.  Extremely important.  But before we leave that meeting 
can I ask whether you shared with the top 5/top 6 at that meeting also 
20 
what the – some of the things that may have emanated from the Public 
Protector’s Interim Report because I think the Public – the final report 
might not have been out at that time? 
MR MOLEFE:  I did Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 121 of 146 
 
MR MOLEFE:  To say that there are these malfeasances, corruption 
identified by the Public Protector which is bad for the company and the 
country which we needed to deal with.  But also to say that in the – on 
the other side as well we – we are seeing things that require that as a 
board we exercise our fiduciary duty in the best interest of the company 
and the country.  They were aware of that and it was in that context 
that I was – I was saying to them we are going to act. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  And if you look at the time period Chairperson maybe in 
relation to the question that was raised by Counsel. It would have been 
10 
then after the release of the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  The Public Protector’s Report.  But of – by that time I 
was already aware of some of the critical issues identified in the 
Interim Report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  But also you confirm that after that 
meeting nobody from the top 6 ever came back to you to say, you know 
with regard to what you told us on that day we would like to do 
something about this. 
MR MOLEFE:  Nothing came. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Nobody. 
MR MOLEFE:  Nobody came back to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 122 of 146 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson there are a number of issues I 
want to deal with.  I take a caution you – placed earlier I say it is about 
seven minutes past four but I wonder if I can ask… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  For a bit of indulgence.  They are not going to be 
long but our mind set might well be different if I came to it at a different 
time Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes well I – I can sit longer but also I would be 
concerned.  I want to know Mr Molefe’s situation because he – he may 
have been justified to think we would have finished much earlier today 
10 
and we have – we did not finish.  One – there are two possibilities.  Do 
you have in mind that if we stay a little longer we would finish with his 
evidence or do you think that he might still need to – to come back? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  He definitely has to come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He has to come back. 
MR MOLEFE:  Because – those are the matters you raised about 
oversight. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And his affidavit deals quite in detail. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Mr Molefe in terms of your own life coming back 
20 
like Monday I am assuming I do not know whether that is what you have 
in mind. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:    If Mr Molefe is available. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He is available. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It would – that is the appropriate time. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 123 of 146 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  How is your situation? 
MR MOLEFE:  I do have a difficulty Chairperson with Monday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With Monday okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  I have … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  A critical Board Strategy meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Which must approve. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  A document that is required in terms of the statutory 
10 
provisions and it has to be with the Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Shortly after that meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine. 
MR MOLEFE:  On Tuesday I again have an appointment outside 
Gauteng. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  With my orthopaedic – I have had knee surgery 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  But the appointment with the orthopaedic I can postpone 
which means I can – I had already paid for my air ticket and so on.  I 
can cancel that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no. 
MR MOLEFE:  And come on Tuesday or Wednesday. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 124 of 146 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Otherwise the whole week next week I will not be 
available if I do not cancel that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh so next week the best you can do is to be 
available on Tuesday but that would entail cancelling the appointment 
with … 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and you said probably that is out Gauteng. 
MR MOLEFE:  Out of Gauteng. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Look I – I think that we can make a plan for 
10 
another day without needing you to cancel any appointment so I think 
we can accept that next week is going to be difficult for you.  Another 
date must be arranged for – on another week not next week then.  That 
is fine.  That is fine.  But let us look at – how much time do you think 
you need for us to… 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  About twenty minutes more Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  About twenty minutes.  Would that be fine with you Mr 
Molefe – twenty minutes. 
MR MOLEFE:  That would be fine with me Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But maybe let us take a short break and then 
20 
come back. That is fine. Say about five minutes really.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
MEETING ADJOURNS 
HEARING RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Soni. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 125 of 146 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson again I apologise but it just seems 
that these are short questions.  It would – I am hoping to try and 
present as complete a picture about the two meetings as possible. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Molefe at the meeting with the Top 6 you did in 
a sense indicate (indistinct) the matters that the Public Protector had 
raised? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now one of the questions I wanted to ask you is I 
mean 
then 
we 
know 
that 
you 
would 
have 
talked 
about 
10 
maladministration, corruption and so on.  Did you tell them some of the 
amounts involved?  For example you mentioned earlier today the 
Siyangena contract in the Public Protector’s Report at that time was 
R1.95 billion.  Did you indicate to the Top 6 that you know we are not 
dealing with small – small amounts of money? 
MR MOLEFE:  I would not have given the account of every amount but I 
would have given examples of them.  For example this R1.9 billion in 
the Public Protector’s Report was there.  And the approximately R4 
billion relating to the Braamfontein Depot modernisation because 
already that had arisen by November and February – November 2014 
20 
and February 2015.  Those figures we were aware of them and I would 
have mentioned – not conclusively with regard to every other figure 
because the investigations by Werksmans was still continuing. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And you would obviously have told them about the 
Swifambo contract which at that stage was marked at about R3.5 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 126 of 146 
 
billion? 
MR MOLEFE:  I did.  I did Chairperson.  Because by that time the 
Chairman of a company called Swifambo concerned that as things 
unravelled he was going to lose everything that he worked hard for and 
he will say I do not want to lose everything because of Swifambo.  
Swifambo was invited into it recently.  He then disclosed to us the 
monies that they were paying to individuals who purported to be 
collecting the money on behalf of the ruling party.  So by that time that 
was known and I think – let me not say I think.  By the time I agreed 
with the Treasurer General of the party about addressing the Top 6. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Top 6. 
MR MOLEFE:  He was aware of what was emerging and related to 
Swifambo and Siyangena and other things pertaining to your Prodigy 
and Strawberry Worx.  Because those were already emerging at that 
time.  Of course one of the reasons I met with him was to say, hey you 
– you – comrade you are the Treasurer General of the party these 
people are saying they were collecting money for the party, do you 
know them?  Because initially he did not know them so that was really – 
it is normal to do so to establish the fact.  Of course their response 
was that – his initial response was that he did not know them.  And he 
20 
did not receive any money from them.  
CHAIRPERSON:  You say initial and finally? 
MR MOLEFE:  Well the – the – later on there is a problem of English 
one needs to be careful when talking to the lawyers.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I know English is not our language. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 127 of 146 
 
MR MOLEFE:  But they – later on for example he did admit that he 
knew some of the people.  He did not say he got money from them.  For 
example a lady called Maria Gomez who would feature probably in the 
court applications or maybe evidence by other witnesses from Angola. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Where he said that is (indistinct) friend. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I think I (indistinct) in some statements about … 
MR MOLEFE:  And with regard to Mr Moodley he says he might not 
know him but he is a comrade you know.  He supports… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The party. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  The party and so on.  He did not say he gave us money. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes he said he supports the party. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja he supports the party. And I said, hey man you know I 
have been in this movement for many years nowhere did I come across 
him even when I was working in – in what is today called KwaZulu Natal 
when I worked in Durban, all those townships there – Lamontville, Kwa 
Mashu, Clermont all of those places I never came across him but you 
see if you say he is I do not expect to have known everybody.  All I can 
say is that he would not have been prominent. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Now going now back to the meeting of the Top5 
20 
/ Top6 is there room for any member of the Top 6 who attended that 
meeting when you addressed them – is there room for any member of 
the Top 6 who attended that meeting to say Mr Molefe did not give us 
the impression that there was really serious situation of corruption and 
maladministration involved in PRASA that the Board was trying to fight 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 128 of 146 
 
against or investigate.  Is there – would that be room for anybody to 
say that? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson obviously that is what is – might go on the 
mind of an individual and it would not necessarily be true where I 
suppose he can want to say that but it is not going help because if you 
say at the time when he spoke to us we were not aware that this 
corruption was so bad they cannot say the same about the subsequent 
months.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Even Nkandla. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  So that is the problem they would have. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But what you can say is, based on what you told 
them. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There should be nobody who can say that? 
MR MOLEFE:  There should be nobody who can say that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  Because the application of the Public Finance 
Management that our duty to (indistinct) the constitution of a country 
20 
and other related legislation were predicated upon the malfeasance that 
I was saying is coming out of our investigations and PRASA and the 
findings of the Public Protector so they cannot say they knew nothing.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  They would then have to explain to me why – in that 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 129 of 146 
 
context did I say I was going to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Act and apply the Public Finance Management…. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What was prompting you? 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja what was… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  They would have a difficulty. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No, no, no.  Again you know when you talk about 
the parastatal – I mean the state owned entities you – we all read what 
we read about the state of PRASA at the moment and one is bound to 
10 
look back and when one hears about things that were happening during 
the years when you were Chairperson of the Board and the things that 
may have happened before your time one is bound to say could it be 
that if so and so and so and so and so and so had given support and 
done the right thing could it be that this could have been avoided 
maybe PRASA would be in a better position today? 
MR MOLEFE:  My answer is in the affirmative Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  And eish I must also say that it must be a difficult 
witness for this Counsel it cannot be (indistinct) (mumbling). 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  No we appreciate. 
MR MOLEFE:  I know I was given this difficulty to Mr Pretorius as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  I – I wrote to leaders of my party firstly I wrote to the 
Deputy President just before I left the office as Chair – Chairperson of 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 130 of 146 
 
PRASA I identified the critical challenges which were facing that 
company and I asked him and the government to intervene to get things 
back on track.  One of the issues I raised was that here it is now the 
Board has been made dysfunctional, individuals in the Board were 
(indistinct) to resign.  Some of them resigned.  The Minister of 
Transport is holding back his nominee on the Board because for him it 
is important that the Board should not have a quorum.  The 
representative of National Treasury resigned and in all fairness in my 
statement it is not clear what was the cause of his resignation but in 
fairness to him he did not resign because he was being lobbied.  He 
10 
resigned because he ceased to be an employee of National Treasury.  
Now having resigned he could not represent National Treasury on the 
Board of PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  PRASA. 
MR MOLEFE:  But it – but it meant that a replacement could be found 
easily because you just nominate and send one of the senior employees 
to the Board.  But it was not in the interest of the new Minister then to 
make sure that there is a quorum and the Board can function fully.  
Because the Board would have functioned notwithstanding the fact that 
a few individuals had resigned having been persuaded because others 
20 
refused to resign. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:   That despite the offers which were made to them that 
look we will give you another position, money you will not be 
(indistinct) to this by resigning from this one.  They stayed on.  So had 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 131 of 146 
 
the Minister discharged her constitutional duty as an executive 
authority responsible for oversight on PRASA the Board would have 
continued to operate but he did not do so.  So I said to the Deputy 
President you got to make sure that there is a proper Board.  You have 
got to get the Group CEO for – for the company because that too was 
being (indistinct).  So there are a number of critical issues that I had 
raised so nobody can say they were not aware of problems. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you have a copy of the letter that you say you 
sent to the Deputy – then Deputy President? 
MR MOLEFE:  I think I found it but what I found was an unsigned copy.  
10 
I cannot find the signed one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you would know if it – it basically in substance 
the copy reflects what … 
MR MOLEFE:    No the substance is the same. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is the same ja.  No that would be… 
MR MOLEFE:  I will try and get it from PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If we can get that that would be important.   
MR MOLEFE:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But maybe for the sake completeness did you 
get a response to that letter? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  No acknowledgment.  They literally… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Nothing. 
MR MOLEFE:  The many letters I wrote whether to Parliament or to the 
Portfolio Committee, to SCOPA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 132 of 146 
 
MR MOLEFE:  I received no response. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Well I know that in your affidavit you do talk 
about the letter that you said you sent to the Chairperson of the 
Portfolio Committee on Transport and you did not get a response and 
then you sent a letter – also sent a letter to the then speaker of 
Parliament Ms Baleka Mbete and you say you did not get a response.  
What I cannot remember is whether you do attach copies of those 
letters because if you do not but if you can find them it would be 
important.   
MR MOLEFE:  The letters… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  They are here? 
MR MOLEFE:  The letters I can find. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
MR MOLEFE:  But Counsel can indicate what – how much of that he 
has got. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine.  No, no.  As long as they are 
here it is fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  They are annexure Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine.  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I am just finally from my side Mr Molefe at the 
20 
meeting with the Top 6 did you indicate who the individual beneficiaries 
were and you will recall that throughout the week two names have 
cropped up all the time namely Mr Roy Moodley and Mr Makhensa 
Mabunda.  Did you identify those people to the Top 6 well the meeting 
of the Top 6? 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 133 of 146 
 
MR MOLEFE:  No I – I did not do so Chairperson and neither would I 
have had the motivation to do so because we are busy with the 
investigation.  If the matters are going to result in – in litigation you do 
not start talking about them until you reach that point. So I did not.  
And I do not think I made a mistake by not mentioning them. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, no I was just for the sake of completeness as 
to what they knew. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now in relation – sorry – in relation to the meeting 
of the 20 August you say it was described as a party meeting in 
10 
obviously an ANC meeting.  Who described it as that? 
MR MOLEFE:  It was described as meeting of comrades of the ANC by 
the President of the ANC who at that time was also the President of the 
Republic of South Africa. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So at that meeting it was quite clear that this is at 
whatever level not a meeting of organs of state or matters of an official 
nature it was a party meeting relating to an organ of state? 
MR MOLEFE:  It is so Chairperson because it was not official if it was 
the element of the state the organ of state, the official the Minister 
would have had to submit a report or would have had to ask me to 
20 
submit a report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I wonder why it may have been decided that it should 
be seen as a party meeting apart from the fact that as you indicated 
certain concerns had been expressed at some meeting of the party from 
what you have said because as far as having that meeting as an official 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 134 of 146 
 
meeting of organs of state if that was what was wanted it could have 
happened because all the relevant functionaries were there in terms of 
the Chairperson of the Board was there, the Minister of Transport whom 
the Board reported was there, the President of the country was there 
and then the other one was the Minister in the Presidency.  But that is 
something you might not be able to – to answer? 
MR MOLEFE:  I would not know why. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  But all I can say is that there would probably be no other 
reason save to say that those who convened the meeting did not want 
10 
to give evidence as by way of record because if it was an official 
meeting I would have had to go and report to my Board of Directors as 
the Board of Directors. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   And it would have been minuted and I probably would 
have had to write a proper report.  So people don’t want that to lead 
any evidence so they would not want it to be an official statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I’m not going to be much longer Mr Chairperson 
but these are issues [indistinct] to distinction that Mr Molefe made and 
20 
I’ll just raise it with him.  One of the issues you raised Mr Molefe, was 
the distinction between the State, for example PRASA as an organ of 
State and the party which governed the State, that’s the distinction you 
made earlier in your evidence. 
MR MOLEFE:   Correct Chairperson. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 135 of 146 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now when Mr Montana complained that he had 
not been consulted before the Board had been appointed what was the 
reaction of Minister Dipuo Peters, the President and Minister Radebe? 
MR MOLEFE:   There was no response from the President and Mr 
Radebe but Minister Dipuo Peters said, but you are an employee of a 
company you can’t demand that the appointment – you should be 
involved in the appointment of the Board.  So you don’t have that right, 
Minister Peters did make that point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Actually I’m glad that Mr Soni has gone back to it 
because I wanted to ask – I wanted to say, did Mr Montana really say 
10 
that, even in that meeting, that he was not consulted before your Board 
was appointed because it seems to me, maybe it might be the kind of 
thing that somebody would say outside of a meeting involving the 
people that he thinks should have consulted him because it’s some kind 
of criticism and those would be the Minister, maybe the President as 
well, so I was quite surprised that you said, even in that meeting he 
complained that he had not been consulted before your Board was 
appointed. 
MR MOLEFE:   He complained in that meeting Chairperson and that is 
precisely the reason why the Minister responded to that complaint in 
20 
the meeting otherwise there would not have been a platform to respond 
to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but she was the only one who…[intervenes]. 
MR MOLEFE:   She is the only one who spoke about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 136 of 146 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And in response to what she said what were the – 
what was the reaction from President Zuma and Minister Radebe? 
MR MOLEFE:   My recollection is that they said nothing about that 
specific point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, did Mr Montana respond to that or not or did he 
leave it at that? 
MR MOLEFE:   I think he left it – he was happy with that detailed report 
that…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes that you had given. 
MR MOLEFE:   Just his views…[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now you said earlier on that he took the [indistinct] 
of the time of that meeting in presenting his report, if I understood you 
correctly are you able to say, maybe he took – he must have spoken for 
more than an hour presenting his report or you are not sure but what 
your impression is that most of the time he did – he took quite some 
time? 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson it was far more than an hour. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Far more than an hour? 
MR MOLEFE:   It was more than two hours, it was a long presentation.  
I spoke very little in that meeting so did Minister Jeff Radebe and the 
20 
President, probably the only other person…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who took some time. 
MR MOLEFE:   But was not prepared for the meeting because he didn’t 
know what to expect because Minister Dipuo Peters [indistinct] who 
would have spoken about the meetings he had with me with Mr 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 137 of 146 
 
Montana, her concern about the relationship and so on ja.  So I think 
we did have a meeting early in July or in June between me and Mr 
Montana at the residence of the Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So – I don’t want to forget this part, before you came 
to the meeting you only knew that the meeting was about to be – was 
going to be about PRASA affairs, nothing more specific? 
MR MOLEFE:   Nothing more because…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, once you get there – once, or as you left the 
meeting what was your impression of what the purpose of the meeting 
was, having been there for hours and having heard who spoke and so 
10 
on, were you able to say, okay I think the real purpose of this meeting 
was A? 
MR MOLEFE:   My impression when I left the meeting was, the real 
purpose of the meeting was to get Mr Montana as the Group Chief 
Executive Officer of the company and I think the President was being 
used, hopefully to intimidate me because you have the [indistinct] of 
the President and you know, it’s very difficult for people to say no.  So I 
think…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What was the purpose as far as you were 
concerned? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   We can express our suspicions about who was behind it 
but it doesn’t help if you can’t collaborate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but – ja okay thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The second issue I want to raise about that 
meeting, about what Mr Montana said is, he alleged at the meeting that 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 138 of 146 
 
Minister Dipuo Peters was trying to get rid of him, now that’s quite a 
serious charge against a sitting Minister in the presence of the 
President.  Let me ask you, what was her reaction to that, Minister 
Dipuo Peters? 
MR MOLEFE:   I think Minister Dipuo Peters took umbrage to that 
allegation and pointed to the fact that, that matter was a matter taken 
by the Board and the fact that – a decision taken by the Board and the 
fact that she appointed this Board, had nothing to do with any agenda 
to remove the Group CEO.  I suppose Mr Montana probably would have 
needed to say to the Minister, you actually told me previously that you 
10 
don’t want me.  So the decision that this Board has taken, actually was 
eventuating the objective that you had when you spoke to me but he 
didn’t say so. [Indistinct] say you know, the manner which you 
appointed this Board and your brought in this Chairman of the Board – I 
must say on a public domain as well he said, together with those – Mr 
Montana, that I am the Chairman that fires Group CEO’s, I fired the 
Group CEO of Petro SA, I had fired the CEO of the Armaments 
Corporation of South Africa, ARMSCOR and he says there is this 
pattern and wherever this person goes, he destroys State owned 
companies and he is intent on destroying PRASA. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But he didn’t say at this meeting? 
MR MOLEFE:   No he didn’t say it in that meeting…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Public Domain? 
MR MOLEFE:   In the media. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 139 of 146 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now what was the President’s reaction to Mr 
Montana’s allegation about Minister Dipuo’s motive? 
MR MOLEFE:   The President kept quiet you would have expected him 
to say, look he’s a member of my Cabinet, if indeed he did that, 
somebody should have reported through the proper channels, the 
Minister – he didn’t say anything.  I think the objective of the meeting 
and of the President and – the Minister and the President was, look, we 
hope that this meeting will convince the Chairman of the Board to 
rescind through whatever mechanisms the decision that his Board has 
taken and to some extent he put the Minister under pressure to say, it 
10 
is the desire of the President that you stop – you reverse the decision 
of the Board but the Minister didn’t want to go that route it would have 
been a very ugly scene because there was no way in which the Board 
of Directors would meet and allow a Minister, outside the Board of 
Directors to reverse it’s decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now you have already said, and you do say in your 
affidavit but you said also in your oral evidence that the meeting – that 
meeting ended at about 2AM the following morning, now – and you said 
it had started at around 6PM the previous day on the 20 t h. So it started 
on the 20 t h it went on to the 21 s t of August.  Now from 6PM on the 20 t h 
20 
to 2AM on the 21 s t…[intervenes]. 
MR MOLEFE:   Is eight hours. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Eight hours, now if you are right in saying that, in 
your analysis, that the purpose of that meeting was to get you to be 
convinced that Mr Montana must be allowed back at PRASA it seems 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 140 of 146 
 
that, then those who were attending were prepared to stay for quite a 
long time to try and achieve that. 
MR MOLEFE:   They were prepared to stay for that long. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And during the process everybody had to listen to a 
former 
CEO 
of 
the 
entity 
speak 
for, 
you 
say, 
about 
two 
hours…[intervenes]. 
MR MOLEFE:   More like giving a key note address. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I’m going to end on this note Mr Chairperson.  If 
this was a meeting – an official meeting where decisions would have to 
10 
be rational and so on and a decision was taken that Mr Montana should 
be re-appointed, in law, there may have been good grounds for review 
but let me accept for a moment that this was a decision among 
comrades.  What I’m failing to understand is this, that Mr Montana 
says, he doesn’t want to work with the Board but the purpose of the 
meeting is, he must come back and work for the Board, I mean, even a 
party – if a party made a decision like that, most people would regard it 
as irrational, would you agree with me? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct but how many rational decisions have 
been made by people in high positions.  The latest of that was a 
20 
Minister waking up because people in the party say, fire the Board and 
then she fires the Board and she gets into trouble. So it would have 
been an irrational decision but it doesn’t follow that those in that 
meeting would not have done so.  In the first instance it was irrational 
to even begin to want to discuss the matter in the manner in which it 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 141 of 146 
 
had been discussed.  One would have expected that what would happen 
is that, even if it was a discussion about the party – members of the 
party, the President would have called the Minister and articulated what 
his concerns and fears were and would have called me to talk to me 
and in both instances attempt to get how we are reacting to what he is 
saying.  Even before you take it to another forum but that was not 
done.  I think it’s like - this meeting was like school kids, learners 
being called to the office of the principal for the principal to read the 
riot act to them using the office – the status of that office to get them to 
review their decision.  So that I’m saying that even the manner in which 
10 
the meeting was called was irrational, it was irrational to have Mr 
Montana preparing a long presentation which nobody was warned about 
which – in a meeting where nobody else was told that they needed to 
give any presentation, that in itself is irrational Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I was not suggesting that it didn’t happen, what 
I’m trying to suggest is, and I’m going to put this to you, one must 
question the bone fides of those taking that decision, do you agree with 
me because if it’s not in the interest of the party how can…[intervenes]. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is so, that is so Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I take it that Minister Radebe would not have 
20 
been at the meeting of the top six, top five that you addressed because 
he was not part of the top six? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And therefore he would not have known what you told 
the top six on that occasion but the, then President,  was aware what 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 142 of 146 
 
you told the top six because this meeting of the 20 t h of August 
happened after the meeting that you addressed of the top six, is that 
right? 
MR MOLEFE:   It is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   But I need to say Chairperson, that he was not privy to 
the discussion of the top six doesn’t put him in any disadvantaged 
position. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, tell me more about that. 
MR MOLEFE:   Because he is in a Cabinet, he works with the Minister 
10 
of Transport, the Minister of Transport reports regularly to the 
President and to the economic cluster on which Mr Radebe was sitting.  
So – and by the way Chairperson the issues about PRASA were very 
prominent in the – from the time when the complaints were given to the 
Public Protector and the interim report issued and so on and they 
remained – government would have taken an interest in those matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you think that he probably knew enough, you say 
he must have known enough to be able to say that we should not be 
trying to get the Board to change its decision. 
MR MOLEFE:   [Indistinct] is a Minister, he should know that one does 
20 
not do that. He had been the Minister of Public Enterprises so 
exercising on the side of many State owned companies.  So he can’t 
claim ignorance on issues of governance and the relationship between 
State owned companies and different ministries. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 143 of 146 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I have no further questions at this stage Mr 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well shouldn’t Mr Molefe tell us the end of that 
meeting so that next time he deals with other things, shouldn’t we just 
finalise how that meeting ended? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As it pleases.  Mr Molefe we now know what the 
purpose of the meeting was and so on, how did the meeting – what was 
the formal outcome at the meeting or the outcome if there wasn’t a 
formal…[intervenes]. 
MR MOLEFE:   There was no formal outcome Chairperson.  After I 
10 
challenged the President to come and address the Board of Directors – 
the Board of control of PRASA to explain why he had a difficulty 
accepting the decision of the Board of control and having said that I 
would not change the decision of the Board of Directors as a result of a 
private meeting of comrades outside government and the Board itself.  
The President was tired so he fell asleep, the meeting just ended 
abruptly like that.  There was nobody to summarise it was the person 
who called a meeting now had fallen asleep. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay is there anything else in regard to the meeting 
that you want to – that you don’t think you haven’t touched upon that 
20 
you want to highlight so that next time you come back Mr Soni can 
move on to something else? 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson save the conclusion that, what was quite 
apparent in that meeting and what was a matter of great concern was 
that the head of the State, the President of the Republic of South Africa 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 144 of 146 
 
and the President of the governing party which is the custodians of all 
the instruments of governments including the constitution was now, 
directly attempting to interfering with the matters of the Board of 
Directors of PRASA that was really of great concern. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no thank you.  I had said earlier on you should 
make notes in case there are other things that you might wish to 
mention which counsel might not have asked but because you will come 
back maybe you want to deal with those when you come back but if you 
want to deal with some now, I give you the opportunity. 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson I would rather elect to…[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, to do it next time. 
MR MOLEFE:   To sleep over the matter and if there are then I can 
come back on…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no I just wanted to keep my promise to you 
because I had made that undertaking.  Mr Soni, I think that, if at all 
possible there should not be – we shouldn’t allow a long time to lapse 
before Mr Molefe comes back, subject to everyone’s situation maybe we 
could look at the week after next and find a day, preferably not a 
Monday but that is – if you can explore one of the dates with Mr Molefe 
but also we might not need him for a day it might be – I don’t know 
20 
what your estimate is, an hour or two hours. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   About two hours. 
CHAIRPERSON:   About two hours so its sometimes easier to 
accommodate a shorter time than a whole day. So at this stage Mr 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 145 of 146 
 
Molefe you don’t know how your situation might be during that week?  
You don’t have to commit yourself I just want to know…[intervenes]. 
MR MOLEFE:   On reflection Chairperson I think if I keep my two 
commitments then I can appear here on – I don’t know what the date 
will be, on the Wednesday of next. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Wednesday next week. 
MR MOLEFE:   I’ll come for – I just want to see my orthopaedic and 
then come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay no that’s fine I think that should be fine 
with us. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Chairperson we will formalise with Mr Molefe 
what it is and we will obviously accommodate him as [indistinct] on 
Wednesday that suits him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja okay, no that’s fine.  So I’m happy as long as it’s 
something that is not too inconvenient to you, I’m very conscious of the 
fact that – I think last time you may have spent two or three days in the 
Commission, this time you’ve spent three days already so we do need 
to give you some accommodation in terms of dates, the Commission 
has taken a lot of your time. 
MR MOLEFE:   I was telling counsel that it’s not a big deal to me 
20 
because I had to give evidence in the Delmas treason trial for the 
whole month and I say whole month, meaning all four weeks appearing 
every day, cross-examined for three weeks by senior counsel.  
Evidence in chief for a week so I know these things. 
13 MARCH 2020 – DAY 223 
 
Page 146 of 146 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja so this is really not much compared to that and of 
course that was hostile atmosphere I guess. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is true. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes okay but thank you very much for having 
come to give evidence once again and that you have been able to stay 
for a little longer beyond 4 o’ clock because we wanted to finish a 
certain section of your evidence.  We are going to adjourn and then on 
Monday Mr Soni, will it be Mr Achmat? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No Chairperson it will be Ms Ngoyi. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Ngoyi from PRASA, we’re continuing with PRASA. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay no that’s fine thank you very much we’ll 
adjourn for the day and on Monday we’ll start at normal time 10 o’ 
clock, we adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 16 MARCH 2020 
 
 
