 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
14 AUGUST 2020 
 
 
DAY 251 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 18 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
14 AUGUST 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 251 
 
Page 3 of 18 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 14 AUGUST 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Ms Gcabashe, good 
morning everybody. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  Good morning Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we ready? 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  Yes we are Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  Chairman this morning the evidence 
of Ms Sylvia Seipati Dhlamini should have been heard.  
There have been [indistinct 00:00:43] Ms Dhlamini’s legal 
10 
counsel [indistinct 00:00:53] SC is here representing her 
and she would like to – to move an application.  If I might 
ask her to put herself on record and to address you? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no that is fine. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  Thank Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  May you just sanitise the 
podium first.   
ADV KOVICHI:   Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning. 
ADV KOVICHI:    Chair I – my name is Hashiela Kovichi 
20 
and I am representing Ms Dhlamini in this matter before 
the commission.  Chair as you [indistinct 00:01:50] that the 
reason for my presence here is to request a postponement 
on behalf of Ms Dhlamini as she cannot be here today.  
There has been a second application filed yesterday which 
14 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 251 
 
Page 4 of 18 
 
I am not certain if the Chair had had regard to the papers – 
to the second application but essentially the second 
application sets out that Ms Dhlamini has been exposed 
during the course of the weekend to certain family 
members who have now been tested positive for Covid – 
for the Covid-19 virus.  As a result, she has to now 
quarantine herself and she cannot be here today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV KOVICHI:    The – Ms Dhlamini had in those papers 
set out the reason for that and she had also submitted… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  And where is the second application? 
ADV KOVICHI:    Chair may I beg leave to hand it up to 
yourself.  My attorney has just arrived.  If you could just 
give me a minute’s indulgence so that I can do so?   
ADV GCABASHE SC:  Chair if I might be of assistance? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  You will find it at page 41 to 55 of 
the bundle that you have been given this morning.  It was 
inserted this morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.   
20 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  Thank you Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I can see it ja.  Okay.  It is a – oh it is 
the notes of motion that is not signed but the affidavit is 
signed.  Yes.  Ja continue. 
ADV KOVICHI:    Chair may I still beg leave to hand up a 
14 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 251 
 
Page 5 of 18 
 
further copy? 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I have got – I have got. 
ADV KOVICHI:    Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  I was not aware that it has been put 
in here. 
ADV KOVICHI:    Chair I would like you to refer you to the 
relevant paragraphs where we – upon which we seek for 
the postponement and that is essentially – I believe that 
your – bundle might be paginated Chair mine is not.  If I 
refer you to paragraph 7 which is on page 2 of her 
10 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KOVICHI:  She sets out that she had already 
participated in her first consultation with the legal – with 
the evidence leader on the 11 August 2020 that was the 
first consultation.  
 
The second consultation was scheduled for the 13 
August 2020 that was yesterday afternoon.  She then – she 
had also made the necessary arrangements to be here the 
previous day the 12 August 2020 and she intended to 
20 
consult with her legal team as well as myself and to also to 
– as well as her counsel and also to attend the second 
consultation. 
 
However, during the course of the 11 August 2020 
certain of her family members informed her that they have 
14 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 251 
 
Page 6 of 18 
 
been tested positive for Covid-19.   
 
She has been since been exposed to them on the 
various occasions specifically the funeral that happened 
over the weekend of the 8 t h and the 9 t h which included the 
vigil ceremony as well and she then went on the 12 t h in 
paragraph – she went – she sets out that she went on the 
12 t h August 2020 to her doctor who then advised her that 
she should stay in quarantine for a period of – until the 23 
August 2020. 
 
Chair in that regard I would like to refer you directly 
10 
to the medical letter – the certificate from the doctor.  It is 
SSD12.  It is annexure SSD12. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV KOVICHI:  Page – page 53 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no, no I have quickly read through 
the affidavit.  Subject to what Ms Gcabashe is going to say 
it does appear that the – the fact that she needs to 
quarantine 
herself 
requires 
that 
the 
hearing 
of 
her 
evidence be postponed.  What I do not know is whether if 
somebody had been in contact with somebody who has 
20 
tested positive and they are quarantining themselves 
whether if they do not feel sick there would be any problem 
with giving evidence over a video link because the 
[indistinct 00:04:53] are no longer going to give evidence 
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday subject to the availability of 
14 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 251 
 
Page 7 of 18 
 
all concerned it may be that we could consider whether we 
could arrange if she does not feel sick and counsel who 
might need to consult with her is able to consult with her 
on Zoom or whatever.  That could assist because then we 
would not take too long before we have her evidence.  Do 
you know anything about whether that kind of arrangement 
is something that could be looked at Counsel? 
ADV KOVICHI:  Chair this is the – I mean you have 
addressed me on that and I am going to have to take 
instructions but the other difficulty is that I think it would 
10 
be to the advantage of Ms Dhlamini if she has the second 
consultation with the legal team because that is when she 
is going to be given – I mean she has been – she will be – 
she will have sight of the evidence bundles. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV KOVICHI:  And she will be in a better position to be 
able to assist the commission and to give evidence 
because right now I – I must also add Chair that I have not 
– I – in the second – in the first application I have not even 
had an in person consultation with Ms Dhlamini as yet and 
20 
I have not been able to consult with her at all.   
But the issue is that I think that for her benefit and 
for the commission’s – for her to assist the commission 
properly if that second consultation which was supposed to 
be a face to face consultation and it was supposed to 
14 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 251 
 
Page 8 of 18 
 
happen last night would really assist her to – a great deal.  
And in that regard, I seek your indulgence to the extent 
that we can actually have the physical consultation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you see I hear from a lot of lawyers 
that during Level 5 and Level 4 of the lockdown they were 
not sitting at home doing nothing they were consulting with 
clients without a physical contact using technology Zoom 
and so on and a lot of work was happening.  Indeed, within 
the commission I understand that a lot of work was being 
done through those kinds of consultations.   
10 
So I am wondering whether there is any impediment 
to do – to doing it that way because even she is needs to 
be taken through the bundles of evidence that she will 
need to deal with if she is – if bundles are couriered to her 
and when she has a consultation either with you or with the 
evidence leader you have the same documents that she 
has in front of her and the pagination is the same it ought 
to be possible to consult.    
Or do you think there might be some difficulties with 
that? 
20 
ADV 
KOVICHI: 
 
Chair 
there 
are 
some 
logistically 
difficulties and I am not – I do not want to delay the 
commission’s work and I am not speaking on behalf of Ms 
Dhlamini at this moment.   
The only difficulty that I am aware of with regard to 
14 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 251 
 
Page 9 of 18 
 
Ms Dhlamini is the fact that she sits in Kroonstad and she 
cannot move from there in order to get the evidence – in 
order to travel to her office even to get all the other 
documents and the affidavits that she had had regard to 
previously. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV KOVICHI:  She will have to make arrangements for 
that.  Now that it being a weekend and Chair I am – we 
must also bear in mind that although the commission had 
advised her that there is – I mean she is aware of all the 
10 
witnesses that have testified   
She specifically set out in her affidavit only in 
respect of two witnesses and after the first consultation 
with the evidence leader it came to light after I have now 
been on brief that we might have to supplement the – her 
affidavit and not extensively Chair because I think the 
issue is to try to get her here as soon as possible.   
So we are only asking – so what I am asking and 
requesting the Chair is to give me a short indulgence but 
just a reasonable indulgence so that if she is not tested, I 
20 
will make sure that she has all the bundles.  I am not sure 
what the commission leader – I mean the evidence leader 
would like to do?   
Would they like to ask her to look at it electronically 
or not?  But I think that within the span of the – of next 
14 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 251 
 
Page 10 of 18 
 
week it is a bit too soon and I am really asking for that 
indulgence so that I will be given – so she will be given at 
least sufficient time to prepare.  I have not even had the 
benefit to consult with her Chair and the reason why I am 
saying that is – and this goes to the first application.   
I do not want to belabour the point and it is not an 
issue anymore due to the compounded effect of the this 
second application but her counsel – her previous counsel 
was ready to consult with the commission already and he 
unfortunately was tested for Covid positive on the weekend 
10 
of the 2 n d.   
And it was only when the commission advised us 
after a postponement was sought on the 4 t h , we were 
advised that on the 5 August we – the legal representatives 
for Ms Dhlamini was advised that it is not going to go past 
the commission she has to be ready.   
On the 8 t h when she was supposed to – of August 
2020 when she was supposed to meet the evidence leader 
that is a day her aunt’s funeral took place.  I mean the vigil 
took place on the 8 August 2020 and on the 9 August 2020 
20 
she – that is when the funeral took place.  And in that time, 
she was unable to travel.  She was going to come up in the 
week so that I could consult with her.   
Now with her condition being like that and the fact 
that she would not have all the documents I think that we 
14 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 251 
 
Page 11 of 18 
 
need to give her – it is just a few days to get all of the 
documents, to get all the information.  It includes several 
witnesses it is not only those in respect of which she 
supplemented.   
Having said that I also understand that we cannot 
prejudice this commission and its work and we cannot ask 
for an unreasonable delay.  That is why in her first 
application she just asked for a few days however with this 
issue I – it is not that there has not been on-going 
consultations with her because we are trying to get her up 
10 
to speed.   
But I think that during the course of next week if 
she is given that time to go through the evidence properly, 
she will be ready to assist the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If we go beyond next week, we might 
have to use an evening session.  We have begun to have 
evening sessions. 
ADV KOVICHI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  For the commission.  What happens is 
that during the day I would hear evidence of witnesses who 
20 
were scheduled to give evidence on that day and then in 
the late afternoon when we are done with the day’s witness 
about four o’clock or five o’clock I start another session 
with another witness whose evidence might have nothing to 
do with what I was hearing during the day and we go into 
14 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 251 
 
Page 12 of 18 
 
six, seven, eight, even half past eight.  We might even go 
to nine because we are trying to finish the work because 
we have very little time left.   
You see for a number of weeks from now there are 
witnesses scheduled. There may be some changes here 
and there but I was hoping that if we postpone the hearing 
of her evidence, we would be able to proceed on one of the 
days next week when I know – on one of the days when 
where some or other witness will not appear.  But the week 
after that is quite full and I think the week after that is full.  
10 
The – the Estina matter I think she is the – if I am not 
mistaken, she is the last witness.   
There might be one or two others but we are – we 
are about to wrap up and I would like to have it wrapped it 
as soon as possible.   
So – so if we – if next week is difficult for – for her 
and yourself if we go to that other week, we might have to 
do an evening session.  Either that week but latest that 
other week I would not like us to go beyond that. 
ADV KOVICHI:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You understand that?  You accept that? 
ADV KOVICHI:  Yes I am – I am in your – I am in your 
Chair ’s hands. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KOVICHI:  In that regard. 
14 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 251 
 
Page 13 of 18 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Well let me hear Ms Gcabashe what 
she has to say?  You wish to – you might wish to take your 
books there. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  Thank you Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  Chairman the legal team has 
actually prepared some submissions because we thought 
we should place on record the facts as we have understood 
them.  
 
I beg leave to hand up to you even if it is just for 
10 
your records Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  The submissions we have prepared. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  The submissions deal with both the 
first and the second application. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  And we – we focussing those 
submissions on the – on the notices that were served on 
the fact that there are 3.3 Notices that we believe Ms 
20 
Dhlamini has had at least a year to attend to etcetera, 
etcetera.   
 
I really do not want to dwell on that Chairman 
simply because the new application really has overtaken 
the issues that we raise in relation to the first application. 
14 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 251 
 
Page 14 of 18 
 
 
Unfortunately, this Covid pandemic has got all of us 
running helter skelter so I – as you seem to be indicating 
Chair I understand why she is not here today. 
 
So on the basis the second application we are not 
opposing the relief sought. 
 
I think what is more important Chairman is for me to 
address you on the practicalities of how we go forward. 
 
The legal team is ready to proceed but I have 
understood why counsel who is new on the matter feels she 
really does need to get on top of some of the material that 
10 
we discussed at the consultation of the – of the 11 t h.  It is 
rather unfortunate that Ms Dhlamini’s erstwhile senior 
counsel who was very familiar with all the facts I actually 
had a short discussion with him really is indisposed and 
there is nothing anybody can do about that. 
 
So I think the request is reasonable for a little bit of 
time.  What I was going to suggest Chairman is that we 
possibly try Saturday if the Chairman and the teams would 
be available on a Saturday because we need at least a 
whole day to take her through the issues that arise from 
20 
various witnesses.  But that also arise from the functions 
that she discharged. 
 
Night sessions Chair we would probably need at 
least of those to complete her evidence.  So I think that in 
relation to the practicalities we will be ready on whichever 
14 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 251 
 
Page 15 of 18 
 
date that you set.  We have kept our diaries clear and I – I 
would at least like a full day Chair whichever you split it if 
we do the night sessions.  Thank you Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is fine.  I forgot about 
Saturdays we – we did last year begin to sit on Saturdays.  
Was it not with you? 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  It was. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  Chairman but fortunately even that 
was cancelled. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  At the last minute for whatever 
reason. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  We then moved it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  And it was fortunate if I might say 
Chairman because both Ms Buthelezi and I had weddings 
to attend on that particular Saturday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
ADV 
GCABASHE 
SC: 
 
So 
we 
reinstated 
our 
old 
appointments. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja so… 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  But yes we are available Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
14 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 251 
 
Page 16 of 18 
 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  To work on Saturdays. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So we could look at a Saturday or we 
could look at an evening session and if it is an evening 
session we might have to do it on two evenings in 
succession. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  Correct Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja.  No, no that is fine.  I think I will 
look at the dates and then we will accept date if it is a – in 
case we find a normal day – business day then we can use 
it but there – it is maybe unlikely.  But then we can look 
10 
either at two evening sessions or look at a Saturday.  Ja. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  Yes Chairman might I point out that 
her doctor ’s note says she should self-isolate until the 23 r d 
August. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  That might be a consideration you 
want to bear in mind. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Oh no, no – ja that is 
important.  That is important so it cannot be earlier than 
the 23 r d? 
20 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  Well I suppose not Chairman.  The 
other way of dealing with it of course is to ask to go and be 
tested. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  And wait for those results. 
14 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 251 
 
Page 17 of 18 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  It is really a practical conundrum. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja.  Well – ja maybe one can wait 
and she – maybe she probably would know her results 
sometime next week.  
ADV GCABASHE SC:  I suggest we simply ask her to come 
up anytime from the 23 r d. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  She must be available at short 
notice. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  And the people she has implicated 
should know that we could call her on short... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  Our rules fortunately allow for that 
Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  On very short notice to come 
through for an evening session or a Saturday session. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No that is fine.  I think her counsel 
20 
must just tell her that as soon as that period has expired, 
she – if she has not heard from the commission in terms of 
the date by the time it expires, she must be ready to be 
called at short notice.  But I think we might have to just to 
fix a date as long it does not fall within – before the expiry 
14 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 251 
 
Page 18 of 18 
 
of that date – of that period. 
ADV GCABASHE SC:  Yes Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  So that also there is certainty on 
everybody in terms of everybody and their – they can make 
their arrangements.  Okay no that is fine.   
ADV GCABASHE SC:  Thank you Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  The hearing of the evidence of Ms 
Silvia Seipati Dhlamini is adjourned to a date to be 
determined.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
