 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
15 JULY 2019 
 
 
 
DAY 133 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 2 of 101 
 
PROCEEDINGS COMMENCE ON 15 JULY 2019 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good Morning Mr Pretorius, good morning everybody, 
good morning Mr Zuma.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Before we start I have a few remarks to 
make.  Today the former president of the Republic Mr Jacob Zuma 
appears before this commission without having been compelled to do so 
and in response to a request from the commission to give an 
undertaking that he would appear before it this week which he gave.  
The commission appreciates that he is here.   
10 
I accept that through his lawyers he had indicated that he has 
certain reservations about the commission and that he reserves his 
rights in appearing before the commission.  The commission has no 
difficulty with this and accepts that everyone is entitled to have an 
opinion about the commission.   
I just want to make it clear that the former President is not the 
only leader in this country who is going to be appearing before the 
commission.  There are others who will be appearing before the 
commission and I also wish to point out that the commission is not 
mandated to prove any case against anybody but it is mandated to 
20 
investigate and enquire into certain allegations and as I have indicated 
over a long period it invites everyone who has information or knowledge 
of matters that fall under its terms of reference to make that 
information available to it so that it can investigate those matters.   
In doing its work this commission will seek to hear from as 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 3 of 101 
 
many people as possible within the time and financial constraints that it 
has.  It will seek to have the benefit of different perspectives from 
different people in our country in regard to the issues that it has – that 
it has to investigate.  So that as far as possible at the end of its work it 
will be able to make findings based on as full evidence as possible and 
based on having heard as different – different perspectives from 
different people about the matters that it is investigating.   
It is important to emphasise that the evidence leaders are 
mandated to seek to establish what the facts are through questions that 
they ask and not to prove any particular allegation against anybody.  
10 
But they are required to assist me as the Chairperson of the 
commission by asking questions including those that will seek to 
establish what the truth is.   
This commission attempts at all times to treat all those who 
appear before it with respect and courtesy without comprising its 
mandate but will be firm where firmness is required.  The former 
President in appearing before the commission this week is expected to 
deal with various matters in respect of which certain witnesses who 
have been identified have submitted statements before the commission 
and given evidence.   
20 
It is anticipated that this will not be the last appearance of the 
former Presidents before the commission but that it may be necessary 
at a later stage to ask him again to appear before it in order to deal 
with other issues.  It is possible that although we have set aside five 
days this week for the evidence of the former President it is possible 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 4 of 101 
 
that we might not use all the five days.  I thank the former President for 
having given the undertaking to appear before the commission and 
having actually appeared as he does this morning.   
Those are the remarks I wanted just to make before we can 
start.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  The former President is 
represented by a legal team.  May his counsel place himself on record 
and I understand that he wishes to address you on certain matters? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Thank you. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Thank you Chairperson.  Chairperson I 
10 
make this address because I think there has been a lot of exchanged 
correspondence exchanged and the propaganda machine out there has 
been quite alive and I thought it is important that we place certain 
things on record because the – I said this on the first day of this 
commission and the letters demonstrates that people do not believe our 
undertaking. 
 
I said to the Chairperson that the former President established 
this commission and is willing to cooperate.  So all the speculation 
about … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you did. 
20 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Is untrue.  Mr Mantsha did set out some of 
the problems that emerged here the notices that he did not – we did not 
receive.  So I do not want to traverse that ground. 
 
The ground I want to traverse starts from the 30 April because 
the speculation and some of the misunderstandings emerge from the 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 5 of 101 
 
correspondence starting from that day from the commission. And the 
most important paragraphs in that letter of the 30 April this year is that 
it says in paragraph 1 [a] and [b] the former President is being invited 
here to put his side of the story, to state his side of the story.  And the 
second one says that the commission wishes to ask him a couple of 
questions.   
 
And the second letter then from there and I want to state this 
because there has been a misunderstanding about why the attorney – 
his attorneys were enquiring.   
 
You will recall Chairperson that in terms of your rules – the 
10 
rules of this commission 3.3 in particular one the rights of the 
witnesses or implicated people is that they make an election when you 
tell them that you believe they are implicated.  They make an election 
that I have listened to this, I have read the statements, I do not think I 
am implicated.  And they do so at their peril of course because they 
must accept that you may an inference. 
 
And the former President made that election in respect of all 
and this was done in careful consideration of whether or not he had 
been implicated in the two crimes that this commission is about, fraud 
and corruption.  We are not sure about the other one because its 
20 
elements are not yet established.  The one called state capture. 
 
So in the second letter we request the questions. The 
Chairperson will recall that in 3.10 it sets out a number of ways in 
which we could come – he could come here and we asked for 3 – for 
that specific – we made that request.  We were not being facetious.  It 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 6 of 101 
 
was a request because as you will see today I hand over Mr Zuma to 
you, the former President without knowing what he is going to say. 
 
None of us in this room know which names he is going to 
mention and we were asking that question because an unfairness has 
happened in this – in this commission where people have been blurting 
names of people connecting their dots about people and those people 
have not been able to be noticed – to be given notice in time. And of 
course there is some injustice that Mr Zuma may do today and that is 
why we were asking for specificities so that we could prepare him, we 
could advise him to go to certain people and not mention names of 
10 
people without you as the commission giving them notice.  That was not 
appreciated by Mr Peddler or – on your behalf because there was a 
belief that we were doing a Stalingrad or a Zuma tactic as it is called.  
 
You will see that the other letter – we have annexures until the 
24 June.  Chairperson the letter that really, really I think we must 
record it for your attention although it is done on your behalf but I am 
certain that these particular words because they were difficult for us is 
the letter of the 7 June. 
 
We tell the – your Mr Peddler or the attorney tells him “please 
in terms of which Rule are we coming?” and of course because he has 
20 
adopted or there is a position that this is not genuine he tells, he says: 
“this is done in terms of no rules.”  And that is one part that is missing 
out there is that we are told by a state – a creature of statute that they 
are calling a witness in terms of no rules.  He says it is a courtesy. 
 
We write because we say this is dangerous, we want to 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 7 of 101 
 
prepare him. Well the next letter is the letter of the 12 t h it explains 
exactly what I have said to the Chairperson.   
 
On the 20 t h there is another letter.  Then on the 24 t h June 
Chairperson you will see the tone of Mr Mantsha’s letter he does give 
up because his client has given up and he says: “well I will bring him.” 
 
Chairperson I am raising this – that was the last letter.  I am 
raising that because there is – there is truly a particular – a disturbing 
attitude that one finds in the letters and it is an attitude that one does 
not expect in a legal process like this that is designed to treat each and 
every witness as a witness who must put to rigger and we believe that 
10 
had we been given an opportunity to – to prepare Mr Zuma to advise 
him about people’s names that he may mention that he cannot do so 
without those people being given notice.  This process today would be 
much better. 
 
And so I am going to hand him over to you Chairperson.  I am 
making these things because he is not my guest today he is yours.  Is 
that I have brought him here to you with reservations about how he has 
been called.  With reservation about the unfairness that may happen to 
people he may mention.  He may mention you, he may mention Mr 
Pretorius, he may mention all sorts of people we do not know and what 
20 
do we do about the unfairness of the process. 
 
Chairperson those are the words insofar as the acrimony about 
his stance about this commission I think we all know that the question 
about biased is not whether it is actual bias it is when there is conduct 
in the commission that makes the witness feel some reasonable 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 8 of 101 
 
apprehension that he is biased. 
 
So I am going to hand him over to this commission because he 
is your guest and hope that he will be protected from himself and those 
that he is going to mention are going to be treated fairly because they 
do not know he is about to ‘out’ them. 
 
Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well before you sit – before you sit down Mr 
Sikhakhane.  As you say the letters from the acting sector of the 
commission were written on my behalf. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Yes Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Actually I fully approved each one of them and – so I 
just want to – to make that clear that the words in the letters can be 
taken to be my words.  But we – we accept that the former President 
and his legal team have a certain view of the letters which we have 
articulated.   
 
We remain committed to making sure that this process is as 
fair as possible. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Thank you Chair.  The last thing I want to 
say is that 1[a] of your first letter then is that because you asked him to 
come to do two things is that he has asked me to allow him to do 1[a] 
20 
of that request which is to address you to put his side of the story as 
he sees it to connect his own dots and that is what he is about to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is – that is fine. We asked him to come and 
give his side of the story and he will be allowed to do that. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Thank you Chair. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 9 of 101 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Just very briefly we have not 
had notice of any substantive application and I do not believe there is a 
substantive application before you Chair but just to clarify on a number 
of issues.   
 
The question of an election having been made we will deal 
with in due course to the extent that it is necessary.  The question of 
whether there should have been a rule in vote or whether it is simply an 
order for a witness to be invited to the commission is a matter if it has 
any substance or merit at all will be addressed in due course. 
10 
 
But our position is clear that there is an invitation, the 
invitation has been accepted.  There can be no quarrel with that.   
 
It seems to us however Chair that the nub of the complaint 
raised by Mr Sikhakhane in his address to you Chair is that former 
President Zuma is going to quote, unquote ‘out’ certain people.  He has 
not had an opportunity to give notice to those people because of the 
procedures that have proceeded the former President’s hearing and 
therefore unfairness may result. 
 
I am not sure I understand the logic of that in any manner at 
all Chair.  If the former President’s intention here today is to implicate 
20 
certain parties under whatever clause of our terms of reference then 
that is his prerogative.  But to say it is unfair because he is being 
prevented from giving notice is simply illogical.  We do not know as a 
legal team.  The secretariat does not know what he is going to say or 
who he is going to implicate.  How that problem could be solved simply 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 10 of 101 
 
by giving questions of matters that we do know to the former President 
escapes us Chair.  Quite simply it has always been open if the former 
President and his legal team were concerned about this particular issue 
and fairness in relation to this particular issue to have given such 
notice.  And to say we are going to implicate.   
 
To expect us somehow through questions of matters we have 
no knowledge of to foreshadow or foretell what is going to be said does 
not bear scrutiny Chair. So that complaint cannot be accepted by us 
certainly Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you.  Mr Sikhakhane do you want to 
10 
respond?  Okay.  Let Mr Sikhakhane respond to that before we proceed.  
Please switch on the microphone. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Now that he has started on his 
condescension let me deal with it now.  First I did not say Mr Zuma 
wanted to give notice to anybody.  I said an injustice can happen 
because we would have liked to prepare him, right.  So everything he is 
saying that I was – it is a com – it is false.  I simply was raising the 
issue that we are running a process, a truth finding process and if we 
do not run it fairly all of us we run the risk.  I did not say he – he 
should have given people notice.  The problem is this attitude exactly 
20 
of this commission is that people bring their views outside and treat 
certain witnesses as sweethearts and others as accused.  I am saying it 
is important that everybody who comes here gets the same rigger and 
the same questioning.  People must not bring their own ideas out there 
and I think Mr Pretorius is doing exactly that.  I was articulating to you 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 11 of 101 
 
Chairperson the dangers that we saw and that is why we kept asking.  
And I do not think I was inviting his condescension because he did not 
understand what I was saying.  He truly did not and this is the problem 
we have been speaking past each other and I am raising this because 
he does not have to interpret what I am saying.  If he did not 
understand me he must say so.  It is this attitude that I think is making 
your process … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you Sikhakhane.   May I request that there be 
no clapping of hands please?  Thank you Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair I will not 
10 
respond.  We will try and maintain a collegiality and a dignity in these 
proceedings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  You are ready to start? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Mr Zuma we will need to do an oath or 
affirmation. May I ask you to switch on your microphone in front of you?  
Which one would you prefer an oath or affirmation? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes I do not know… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh I think she must go and help you actually. Go and 
help him.  It is on.  Oh I am told that microphone is on. 
20 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes it is on now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay alright.  Which one will it be oath or 
affirmation? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Oath. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oath thank you.  Maybe if you could stand.  Would 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 12 of 101 
 
you please state your full names for the record? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I am Jacob Gedleyihlekisa 
Zuma. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you have any objection to taking the prescribed 
oath? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you consider the oath binding on your conscience? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you swear that the evidence you are going to give 
will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing else but the truth, if so 
10 
please raise your right hand and say, so help me God. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much you may be seated. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I think Mr Pretorius we will start with the part that Mr 
Sikhakhane indicated that Mr Zuma would like to start with. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  As you please Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Thank you.  Mr Zuma I understand from your 
counsel that before any questions can be put to you you would like to 
state your – you have – you would like to state your side of the story or 
20 
to address me on certain aspects or to indicate what you would like to 
say on various issues.  This is the opportunity that I am giving you to 
do so before any questions can be put to you. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 13 of 101 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Zuma you may use the 
microphone with the red light. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do not use that one.  Ja use the red one ja thank you.  
Thank you. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Thank you very much Chair.  
Chairperson and of course the entire commission firstly Chair I have 
got some flu so my voice is up and down.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I had flu from Thursday so – but I think I am fine 
now. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes.  Chair you will realise that 
10 
me as an individual I have been a subject of talk in this country for 
more than a decade.  I have been vilified alleged to be – be king of 
corrupt people.  I am the most corrupt.  I have been given every other 
name and I had never responded to those issues.   
 
Firstly because I believe it is important that we all respect one 
another.  That we must say things we know about other people not just 
tell things that we cannot prove. 
 
This has been my nature as I grew up and I joined the ANC in 
my early age in addition to the teachings from my own homestead and 
my parents I also got taught in the ANC to behave in a particular way. 
20 
 
And I have paid for my activities in the ANC including going to 
prison serving a term of ten years.  At some point I had to leave my 
country to go out and in the process the ANC gave me different 
responsibilities at all material times that I have been active and 
participating.  Then finding myself finally in the leadership of the ANC.  
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 14 of 101 
 
The reason why I am starting here Chair is because when this 
commission was proposed to all a recommendation was made that I 
should establish a commission by the Public Protector, the previous 
one.  There are certain issues that I was not happy the manner in which 
they were handled and of course the Commission was to deal with an 
important point but as I will indicate part of the reason why I am here 
that is the background I am going to deal with why I find myself sitting 
here today and where it comes from particularly because this 
Commission from my understanding was really created to have me 
come here and perhaps to find things on me. 
10 
I will deal with how it was conceived and therefore I made the 
Commission as – as to what it is.  Because the ANC gave me tasks 
perhaps I had to know things that other people might not have known 
and the question how would I handle those and I was taught how to 
handle them.  That is why in the background that I am going to give I 
will stand on this point I am making – (clearing throat) I am sorry.  
(Talking in Zulu). 
CHAIRPERSON:  That was Zulu for saying: 
“The flu is preventing him from speaking.” 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  There has been a drive to 
20 
remove me from the scene.  A wish that I should disappear and I will 
explain where it comes from and why perhaps it is important that I deal 
with in this Commission and it arises out of perhaps my work in the 
ANC and also because of who I am.  This conspiracy against me has 
been stretched at all material times when there are things to be done or 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 15 of 101 
 
said. 
It has come in different forms and that is why there are even 
people who say I have got a way of trying to dodge things in one form 
or the other and I am going to connect the dots over a decade that talk 
to this point and talk to why I am here.  As you know in 1990 the ANC 
was unbanned and I was one of those who was sent ahead of everyone 
to make contact with the then Government to study the process of 
finding a solution in this country. 
People referred to it as talks about talks.  I then became part 
of the negotiating team and we finally reached a point where those who 
10 
were in prison were out.  Those who were in exile came back.  At that 
time my specific task among many was to be the Chief of Intelligence of 
the African National Congress.  In other words I was part of the 
leadership at that very sensitive area with my late comrade 
John (indistinct). 
Leaving many things just to go to the point straight in 1990 
when we were already inside the country I received a report – an 
intelligence report – which was saying there were three intelligence 
organisations that met had a meeting to discuss me and had a plan to 
begin in 1990 a process of character assassination of Zuma.  Two of 
20 
these organisations came from two different big countries and one of 
them came from inside South Africa under – which was one of the –
structures under apartheid which was part of this conspiracy. 
When I received this report, had a discussion with my 
colleague (indistinct).  We did not know what the reason is.  We are 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 16 of 101 
 
very keen to hear why Zuma’s character must be assassinated.  I then 
used the knowledge we had to ask this question and get an answer but 
to those who would be receiving the question and give an answer they 
should not know that this question comes from me because we had 
people in the intelligence had lots of net workings and networks as well 
as people dealing with different things. 
So we sent the question.  After a brief period the answer 
came back.  The answer was the reason why we wanted to character 
assassinate Zuma’s character was because he has a lot of information 
that he – he holds among the type of information as – as a Chief of 
10 
Intelligence.  There are spies that are infiltrated by us in his 
organisation whom we want to nurture that they grow within the 
structures of the ANC to a point that at some point they will have to 
lead the ANC. 
Now Zuma has information about these.  We do not know 
when will he use this information to stop that process that plan of theirs 
and therefore they took a decision that Zuma must be removed from 
decision making structures of the ANC and that is why they character 
assassination began.  That is the beginning of the process that has put 
me where I am today and – and I thought it is important to go through 
20 
this whatever else would be the end of your process but at least some 
truth should be known. 
We handled this very, very delicately those who were dealing 
with intelligence but we are now where.  There was going to be a 
conference in 1990 of the ANC.  It was a consultative conference not 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 17 of 101 
 
elective conference but these three organisations thought that it was an 
elective conference.  That is why they were engaging in this plan and 
this conspiracy. 
Then the ANC in the course of the period was explaining that 
was a consulted.  So they realised they made a mistake by thinking it 
was elective.  So in the course of the same year I received another 
report.  We said that they have postponed this campaign because they 
realised this was not an elective conference.  So we kept quiet but the 
ANC of course had that conference and one of the resolutions of the 
ANC was that during 1991 it will have its first elective conference – in 
10 
December 1991 and therefore that was information out there. 
In 1991 another intelligence information came that said that 
these three organisations have decided to change their plan slightly 
because having investigated further in the ANC they discovered that 
this Zuma had a very large support in the ANC and 100 percent support 
in the Province of Natal.  It would not therefore be easy to remove 
Zuma in the conference that is coming. 
The time is too short to character assassinate him to a point 
that you could remove him.  What therefore they thought was important 
for them was to - because they said you cannot remove him from the 
20 
National Executive for example – the decision making structure.  What 
therefore we should do which was a fall back plan that after the 
elective conference of 1991 Zuma must be removed from the position of 
Chief of Intelligence and again we looked at this and said there – there 
were worrying things. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 18 of 101 
 
For example the issue of the – the people we were about to 
negotiate with.  What was the thinking that they may not know our 
thinking and we might not know also their own thinking but what does 
this mean?  So as we were preparing for the conference it was clear 
that this first conference was of great interest not only to South Africa 
even for other countries out there but this information was – was 
worrying. 
In fact I think there was one (indistinct) which was as a result 
of that but it ended because they realised there were no further things 
they could do.  I am saying this because there has been a process and 
10 
particularly against Jacob Zuma a conspiracy.  I am sitting there and I 
am told by other organisations that in my organisation as well as in the 
NEC there are people who are working for them whom they want to be 
in control of this country. 
It was a worrying point.  Leaving aside the information I had 
there would have been information I did not have and perhaps 
important to try to follow this very closely.  Of course the conference 
came.  In that conference I was elected Deputy Secretary General of 
the ANC and of course Tambo moved out and Tata Madiba came in as a 
President. 
20 
There were two decisions taken by the organisation that 
President Mandela and Thomas Nkobi who was the Treasurer-General 
after the conference they would go to the United States to raise funds.  
Another decision that Thabo Mbeki and Jacob Zuma shortly after 
conference they will go to attend the conference in UK which was 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 19 of 101 
 
discussed in constitutional matters and indeed after all of that when the 
NEC – when the NEC has been elected by conference then the NEC 
elects the working committee which runs the matters in between NEC – 
NEC meetings. 
So we left to our tasks.  One day as we finished a conference 
and going for supper I rushed to my room to listen to the BBC forecast 
on Africa.  We were a little bit addicted to it because out there we did 
not listen to all the – the media from home.  Among the reports that 
were given by the BBC was the report of the meeting of the working 
committee of the ANC which had met for the first time and there were 
10 
two decisions among many that were taken. 
One was that Thabo Mbeki was removed as the Chief 
Negotiator of the ANC and Jacob Zuma has been removed as the Chief 
of Intelligence.  When I – I was going down I met Comrade Thabo.  I 
said man their decisions that they have taken you are no longer leading 
us on the negotiations and he was shocked but I said no that is not the 
only one. 
I have also been removed as the Chief of Intelligence.  He 
was even more shocked knowing how the ANC deal with things 
particularly that you cannot take such a decision when the President of 
20 
the organisation is not there.  Why; but to me and I said to him you did 
not know.  Me, I knew that I was going to be removed but I did not know 
how. 
The question that I was asking myself I received information 
from intelligence sources that after the conference I would be not the 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 20 of 101 
 
Chief of Intelligence.  This is supposed to have been planned by these 
three organisations.  Why is it implemented by my national – my 
national working committee?  What does this mean?  It therefore was 
confirming that there may be spies here because it means there were 
people when these intelligence organisations took the decision that 
they directed that they must make this happen. 
Of course thereafter we – we wept and we did not even at 
that time take this matter as a general report in the ANC.  We kept it as 
an intelligence issue but it is important to say this because the 
character assassination that I faced over the years more than 20 years 
10 
this is one of the clear sources that I know.  There was a plan to deal 
with Zuma and Zuma has been dealt with all the time. 
In other words foreign intelligence organisations and the local 
one of course under apartheid for a variety of reasons thought it was 
important to deal with this man.  It is important for me to state that 
anything that happened since that time.  I have been linking the dots all 
the times and I thought it is important to this Commission part of the 
reason is I will come to that this – the matter of this Commission is not 
different from or the plan not the Commission as yet. 
Those who – who initiated that there must be a Commission.  
20 
You recall that when I was not at the national level I was in the 
province suddenly I had to be charged.  Before charged – before being 
charged I was removed as a Deputy President of the country – 2005 – 
because I was implicated in the arms deal.  Bear in mind that I was not 
in the national. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 21 of 101 
 
I was not part of the processes.  I was in the province and it 
did not make sense to me.  Of all the people who dealt with the arms 
deal not a single one was ever or there were ever allegations against 
but the allegations against me.  I had to be investigated.  In a very 
strange way even that investigation I had to be investigated by the 
Scorpions. 
At a given time the Head of the NPA and the Minister had a 
press conference wherein it was announced yes there is in our 
investigation there is a prima facie case against Zuma but it is 
unwinnable in court.  So that is why we are not charging him.  Now 
10 
there are investigations and investigations.  I have never had that kind 
of level of investigation being reported in the media. 
Why it was reported in the media for me?  There are so many 
cases.  Clearly that indicated the beginning of the implementation of 
this particular plan and the conspiracy.  I had time at some point to ask 
Ngcuka why did you not tell me you are investigating me and what is 
that you are investigating.  Ngcuka said no you were supposed to be 
told by the Ministers.  Fine I think that was a fair point, but he says 
there is no case against you. 
There are just a few letters written by Shabir where he 
20 
mentions your name as people always drop names but the week 
thereafter I was called by two leading people in Government and in the 
ANC who said man there has been an investigation against you and it 
has come to a point where we must take a decision whether to continue 
investigating you or not but this matter needs to be discussed to find a 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 22 of 101 
 
solution and I said what solution and at the end I said after whatever 
they said I do not understand because the man who is investigating just 
a week ago told me I have got no case. 
You are telling me here that you have a case.  I do not 
understand.  I think that destabilised that meeting but of course around 
the same time there was information that I am going to be talked to so 
that I resign from the leadership and go to Nkandla and I will be looked 
after.  Just resign.  There was a rumour that I would be given 
something like 20 million and I will be maintained or if I resign this 
case we will then have a way to solve this case and I was saying to 
10 
myself hm that plan is now being implemented. 
 
These people don’t know that I know something about the plan 
because myself and John (indistinct) we did not report it to the entire 
nation, it remained in the corridors of Intelligence. 
 
So the issue of Zuma must resign, Zuma must leave the 
leadership started way back, as part of this plan.  Of course I did not 
resign because nobody, at that point said it out and out and there was 
in the corridors.  That was followed by then, the decision to remove me 
as Deputy President by the President of the country and of course I did 
move away, I made it very clear that as a (indistinct) of the ANC I’m not 
20 
going to argue, I’m not going to – the President has the right to take 
etcetera, so I got out.  I was also – but shortly thereafter in terms of 
the ANC activities, I was brought back by the membership of the ANC in 
a NGC that was in Pretoria, so we continued.  Then we were also 
approaching another conference which was in Polokwane, where there 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 23 of 101 
 
was, as usual, as normal contestations people having different 
preferences etcetera and I’m sure as a (indistinct) that is known by 
many people that’s where I became the President but there were a lot 
of activities going on at the time and discussions about me in 
particular.  Later on I got to know, that in fact, there was a 
determination to arrest me before the conference in order to avoid me 
being part of that conference.  I think such facts have come to light 
particularly around the case that I’m placing in Court in what is called 
the Zuma tapes wherein police, politicians, leaders of the country were 
talking about me, that I must be arrested.  That information was feeding 
10 
into this fundamental intelligence organisation’s plan to deal with 
Zuma. 
 
Of course, perhaps it’s a long story to say what are the issues, 
why Zuma must be dealt with in this fashion, I’m sure it’s obvious.  We 
proceeded in our life and working in the Government and organisation 
when I was – when I was being dismissed in a statement in Parliament 
the President says Zuma must have his day in Court and I hadn’t been 
charged by then.  It was the first time I hear, I must have my day in 
Court but you will also remember this, I was investigated there was a 
lot of hullaballoo those who were investigating finally felt they’ve 
20 
reached a stage to charge, they’ve decided not to charge me but 
charge Shabir Shaik but the accusation was that we committed crime 
with him but not charged together charged separate.  As I got to know 
later – because they wanted Shabir to be convicted in order to charge 
me and that’s what happened.  So in a sense prolonging the narrative 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 24 of 101 
 
about Zuma is corrupt.  You’ll also recall that when Judge Squires 
convicted Shabir, thereafter there was a lot of talk about that people 
saying the Judge said between Shabir and Zuma there has been a 
generally 
corrupt 
relationship, 
that 
relationship 
was 
a 
corrupt 
relationship. 
 
The media, politicians, academics will all talk about this, this 
Zuma where this generally corrupt relationship with Shabir.  This was 
all over the world until the Judge thought this was unfair to him now 
because he had never said so and asked people to read his judgment 
because he never said there was a generally corrupt relationship 
10 
between these two individuals but everybody had been saying this, 
where did they get it from, why would they put a serious phrase against 
some individuals an allegation which was unfounded?  This was done to 
enhance the narrative against Zuma, that Zuma is corrupt even if the 
Judge did not say that they must put the words in the mouth of the 
Judge.  Fortunately, that one is a matter that many people know it was 
clear to me that this plan continues and that’s why I would say, there 
are people who would not be happy if I was not, either in jail or I was 
not removed.  Of course we continued, as I was supposed to be 
charged or again, when I’d been charged already, rather, the 
20 
investigations were going on, NPA was confronted by the tapes which 
indicated there’d been planning, conspiring to charge me with 
politicians and everybody else the tapes are now a public thing. To an 
extent that when the head of NPA at the time, came to know about 
these tapes decided to withdraw the charges and therefore I had no 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 25 of 101 
 
case against me then. 
 
Not because of anything because the plan to character 
assassinate Zuma, the plan to remove Zuma from leadership, the 
explanation was done by these three intelligence organisations that he 
should be out because if he’s there he will use information he has to 
either expose or stop our people from going forward. It means, 
therefore, that plan which was made by intelligence organisations in a 
sense, had to be implemented among others by even people in my own 
organisation.  You’ll recall that when I was building my home at 
Nkandla, problems arose there about corruption and again you’ll recall 
10 
that the media in this country mentioned the figure of the money I have 
squandered and everything.  At that place there were two structures of 
Government that investigated, they found nothing on Zuma but I’ve 
been so much vilified in the world and everywhere that I’m the most 
corrupt person.  Of course after the two institutions investigated, 
former Public Protector also came in to do her own investigation 
because people wanted to find something.  She found nothing, that is in 
her report, then she decided to say the additional security matters in 
my homestead which were put in as a result of the police and the army 
for security reasons as it is their duty to look after the President of the 
20 
country.  The Public Protector recommended that I should pay for those 
because I indirectly benefited.  No-one -  no other President has been 
made to do so but look at the heading of the report by the Public 
Protector, it said, “secured in comfort”.  Why in comfort, because I had 
built, with Government money an amphitheatre in Nkandla.  Fortunately, 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 26 of 101 
 
thereafter members of Parliament from all parties went to Nkandla to do 
inspection.  They looked for this amphitheatre and asked where it is, 
it’s not there, it was never there but an officer from a Board like the 
Public Protector who is supposed to protect us used the phrase – the 
phrases to enhance the narrative that Zuma is corrupt. 
 
If you want to see why, for an example why I have a problem 
and reservations about how this Commission was established, firstly, 
the issue of the family, the Guptas came in and the ANC felt we need to 
look at this and I think the Secretary General of the ANC was given a 
task by the NEC to investigate because there were these allegations.  
10 
Somebody also said the Public Protector should investigate also in 
addition to whatever was done.  Public Protector said there was no 
money but the Treasury found money to give the Public Protector so 
that they investigate this before she leaves, in a hurry and of course 
she left the work, tried to complete it but it was difficult but it was 
there.  The report – there should be a State Capture report this was 
again to use this phrase, that’s why I’ve had a problem with it, was the 
State Captured, why the report must say we are investigating the State 
Capture?  Now I don’t know because I never went to any school, I take 
things, perhaps, literally.  I thought that the State, in the main is 
20 
composed of three arms, Parliament, the Judiciary and the Executive 
but the Commission is not meant to investigate these three whatever 
else but these three but it’s called the State Capture.  The matters that 
have been dealt with, for me are general corruption matters, why it was 
– because I was a king pin that we must get at, this Commission, 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 27 of 101 
 
according to those who are implementing things must be the grave of 
Zuma, must be buried here and that’s why, whoever knew the Gupta 
family or they were friends, then they don’t matter but Zuma matters. 
 
Because something must be found even if the money is not 
there, those in charge of Treasury to find the money to give to the 
Public Protector so that this must be done quickly.  In other words, the 
plan continues to be implemented precisely because the opposition 
parties would want the ANC out of Government so they pick up the 
pieces, go to – we must re-instate the case etcetera, it’s mad you don’t 
even know if these people are coordinating quietly.  So I’ve had a 
10 
problem that this has not said it’s a Commission for corruption if you 
want to specify it with a particular family so why do you call it a State 
Capture, is that expression meaning that the Judges are captured?  Is 
the Government captured, is the Parliament captured?  I’m sure people 
have said I’ve got views particularly because one day when I was 
addressing the students in the Eastern Cape and these were students 
of law and I said to them, just check this for me, why would legal 
people accept this expression and work on it, what purpose does it 
serve? 
 
In other words, you are saying to the international community 
20 
South African Judges are captured all political parties in Parliament are 
captured, the Executive is captured by this family.  It’s an 
exaggeration, it is meant to enhance this narrative against Zuma. 
Perhaps it’s important to just firm up one point that I made in passing 
that I was supposed to talk to, to resign, long after Polokwane.  I’ve got 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 28 of 101 
 
a comrade that I’ve know that I recruited into the struggle who’s a 
businessman now, we had a common friend in Angola.  Because of 
Polokwane this friend felt that, well my relations with this comrade was 
never good he wanted us to talk, can you talk, so I said fine and this is 
comrade Mzi Khumalo so we met with the – three of us two of us and 
this friend, we said there is no fight among us when I got a conference 
of the ANC there’s a contestation it doesn’t mean there’s a fight.  So 
we discussed that fine, of course Mzi said I’m a cadre we were elected 
there – in fact he said I did not even support him back I was supporting 
(indistinct) but once that happens we are one but he said something 
10 
interesting, that he was approached before Polokwane conference by 
two comrades he knew and one official they were going with, this was 
Bululani Ngcuka, Penuall Meduna, they were accompanied by a 
Scorpion official which he did not know.  They presented the matter to 
him to say, we’ve come to you, to make a request, this comrade, 
comrade Zuma we’ve done investigation, it is at a stage where we need 
to go further and this comrade the case will be very serious, you know 
this comrade sacrificed, fought a lot.   Now we don’t think he should go 
to prison, we think that we should find a way to make him leave the 
work that he’s doing and retire, go to Nkandla and we’d want to look 
20 
after him.  So we wanted to come talk to you as a comrade, as a 
business, can you help give us some money to do so?  This is said by 
these two comrades to Mzi Khumalo who now relates this to me and he 
says, I said to them, how much I am fine I can do it but how much? 
They said we’ll come back to you but he says they never came back but 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 29 of 101 
 
again, the rumour and the rumour that was going in the corridors that 
Zuma must be made to resign and go to Nkandla becomes a reality, 
confirmed by the discussion between Mzi Khumalo and them. 
 
So as I said earlier it was a rumour but this was confirmed 
very firmly.  No-one has ever come to me to say could you go home and 
stay but it moves around, people try to find something that can make 
Zuma disappear and therefore many other things including the coming 
into being of this Commission influenced by this and people who are 
participating – people are participating are not aware of that and my 
concern, the Public Protector leaving aside the name of the 
10 
Commission, in my view, prescribes how this Commission is going to 
be.  All Commissions are appointed by Presidents and there is no 
question about it, the Public Protector says in the process of making 
the proposal, the Chief Justice must be the one to identify the Judge 
who must then be the Chair of the Commission and I find that very odd 
because in my view the Public Protector is taking the powers, executive 
powers of the President, is asking the Chief Justice to do the job that 
must be done by the President but of course I was the President then, 
and this was basically centred around me, I thought I should not raise 
these issues, it’s going to be against Zuma’s making tactics of delaying 
20 
tactics, whatever, so I said fine and hoping of course, hoping that legal 
people will say, but what is this but of course this Commission was 
established.  I don’t have a problem with it, I have a problem with the 
Public Protector taking the powers of the President in order to fulfil 
some agenda, I don’t know, unless I’m told otherwise Chair, that in fact 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 30 of 101 
 
there is a provision in the Constitution I will be very happy that there 
was nothing wrong that the Public Protector was saying.  Why would 
the Public Protector go to the extent of influencing how this and who 
must do the identification of the leader of the Commission. 
 
All these things put together tell me there is a huge plan which 
is being made and it has been made and it has been implemented.  
You’ll recall that the issue of Zuma must resign, the issue of the 
attempts in Parliament of the vote of no confidence, which is fine 
because that is within the framework in fact even people remembered 
that we don’t even have the way how to impinge the President it’s not – 
10 
let us do it because we must take this fellow out, we must find a way 
and here’s a Commission, this fellow he is a friend of this family, we 
are going to find something.  He tells – he’s been told by this family 
who to appoint who not to appoint etcetera, etcetera and there is 
nothing of that kind.  I still – I am still waiting for somebody to come 
and tell me I said yes you were told here that elect or appoint this one 
and you did in this way and that way.  Because I have been waiting so 
that I can really ask the kind of a person ‘where did you get this from?’  
But it has been made to be included in the narrative ‘get rid of Zuma’.   
 
The whole country at one point there was a demonstration that 
20 
we have never seen before when the white community came out in 
great numbers Zuma must go.  What has he done?  Nobody can tell.  
He is corrupt.  What has he done?  Nothing.   
 
Of all the presidents who have been before me there is not a 
single one who has been brought and even brought to commissions 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 31 of 101 
 
etcetera.  But to Zuma we must do it.  
 
I am giving this background because whatever – whatever we 
do I have listened to some of the people who have been accusing me 
coming here.  One of them said that – it was Ngoako Ramathlodi when 
we sing he must resign we ask, he ask what have I done?  We know he 
has auctioned the country.  What an exaggeration from a lawyer.   He 
cannot tell you auction what – what did I auction Table Mountain?  Or 
auction Johannesburg I do not know.  The man is sitting – he was 
sitting where I am sitting now.  Zuma has auctioned the country that is 
why we said he must go.  But it is a lie. There is nothing of that nature.   
10 
 
Finally because I am here I am about to finish my third – my 
second term.  Those people perhaps who were part of the decision 
taken that Zuma must not be Chief Intelligence within my organisation 
feel the – fail to do the task. Those who are tasked to ensure that Zuma 
goes.  They create a situation as we are about to go for the State of the 
Nation.  Zuma must not give this one, he must resign.  Including the 
NEC meets to take that decision, why?  He must be out.  Is part of the 
implementation of the plan by the intelligence organisations that Zuma 
must go.  And of course finally he must come before the commission 
and answer questions.  And I am here to answer questions but Chair I 
20 
thought it is important for me to give you this background in whatever 
conclusions the commission would come to or whatever or whatever 
questions you are going to be asking me you must bear in mind that I 
have got this background that is a worry to me. 
 
The fact that I was a President some people forgot it.  And of 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 32 of 101 
 
course clearly if there are such activities particularly from our own 
organisation I need perhaps to go back and say these three intelligence 
organisations who said there are people here. Are there people here, 
do I know whether there are people here or not?  Even from my 
intelligence work.   
 
Now I do not want to discuss intelligence but certainly the 
actions, the behaviour has indicated that it looks like there are.  Who 
are they?  Should we reach that point because for a number of reasons 
we have been very careful not to play to this ground – to that ground 
because it is sensitive?  But I have been provoked and provoked to the 
10 
last degree.  By people at times I know what they are doing because I 
have been wanting to save the organisation and to save the country.  
They make stories.  They do everything.  My own family suffers out of 
this.  Leaving me perhaps I am a soldier I can take everything.  People 
forget that I have got a family which would not want to hear lies being 
told about me.  But not just that.  You have some of my children who 
have suffered as a result of me.  One of my sons Saady was working in 
a company I think it is Marce Fire Fighting Company.  He was working 
there given a responsibility to look for – I mean to concentrate on the 
continent and there was a time put that at the end of this time he will 
20 
become one of the directors.  A company which had Nugo and others 
wanted to have a deal with this company and indeed they talked to this 
company.  When it came to the papers they saw a name Zuma.  Sum 
Saady Zuma.  They asked who is this.  Poor fellow he thought that this 
is a child of a president this guy is an ANC they will be very happy.  He 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 33 of 101 
 
says no this is the son of the president.  They said sorry we cannot 
have a deal with this name.  If this man remains on our papers there is 
no deal.  It is either us or him.  He was asked very politely by the 
employers to leave the company.  He tried to look for a job in 
Johannesburg because he was Zuma’s son he could not find it.  He 
tried to start business he could not.  He came to me to say I have a got 
a problem.  I said, my son go to Durban and look for a job.  That is 
where he went to start his own business.   
 
The young man who comes after that one Duduzane.  They 
started knowing this family when they used to come to me, when I was 
10 
still a Deputy President.  When he finished his studies he has done IT 
he went to work in the Intelligence, National Intelligence of the country.  
When these attacks on me started he was ill-treated there.  He finally 
came to me to say I wanted to work for government but I cannot 
because – because I am your son.  I am not even – what you call – 
accepted there.  He looked for an employment.  Now that he knew his 
family that they running an IT company he looked for a job in that 
company and he was employed and worked there as an employer – as 
an employee rather.  When I was taken to court he was quite agitated. 
Left the job.  He wanted to take videos of my appearance in court and 
20 
set up with his friend.  I said you cannot leave a job. He said no I am 
leaving this job.  Of course the case disappeared at some point.  He 
came back to me to say Daddy you were right I am not finding a job. I 
have been looking for a job in Gauteng.  Nobody can take me because I 
am your son.  I have been looking for partners, nobody can take me.  I 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 34 of 101 
 
said to him – you know what I said to your brother, you must go to 
Durban.  Go to Durban.  He went to Durban.  Started some business 
with some partners.  But later he discovered something that he did not 
like in the company.   
On his own he went to talk to the Gupta’s that he would like to 
come back but not as an employee this time he wants to be part of the 
company.  They discussed and finished.  I did not even know.  I was 
only informed afterwards.  And he has been there working.  Because he 
is my son he has suffered a great deal.  Of course people will not feel 
good if I am still there but I am just giving the Chair the impact of this.  
10 
As we moved towards the end as I said the NEC itself was 
influenced to take a decision that there has been calling Zuma must go 
now, he must go indeed.  In other words that plan I am talking about 
finally succeeded.  I had to resign from the ANC in order to leave the 
ANC intact because I love it. It is my organisation.  It meant nothing if I 
resigned the ANC remains.  But it is clear to me something which came 
from the answer of the three intelligence organisations that there are 
people infiltrated their spies.  They were at work.  I asked the – my 
organisation what have I done and I got no answer.  Maybe Chair 
having said what I have said let me deal with my relationship with the 
20 
Gupta family so that you do not suffer try to ask questions. Because…  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well sorry Mr Zuma maybe this might be the 
convenient time to take the tea break.  We were going to take – we 
normally take it at quarter past eleven but I did not want to interrupt – 
to interrupt you.  So we are at nine minutes to twelve – we will take the 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 35 of 101 
 
tea break and resume at ten past twelve.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES: 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am just – I am just waiting for everybody to sit down 
at the back.  Yes, thank you.  You – Mr Zuma you were about to begin 
to tell me about your relationship with the Gupta family.  You may 
proceed. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Thank you very much Chair.  I 
will come back to other points here.  I just thought it is important for 
me to deal with that matter. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA: 
 
Particularly 
because 
many 
people have criticised me even in my own organisation.  I have 
explained in proper sittings of the organisation.  Some people just do 
not want to take it but I think it is important to explain this because it 
also has elements that are funny.  Members of this family were brought 
to my residence in Oliver Tambo when I was a Deputy President where I 
saw them for the first time. 
They were coming from (indistinct) from President Mbeki.  
The person who introduced them was Essop Pahad.  They were 
20 
introduced as good business people but they were also comrades 
members of the ANC and – and that is how some of my family members 
got to know them.  The young men were still very young at the time was 
there, saw them and introduced them. 
That is why when he wanted a job he remembered that they 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 36 of 101 
 
had said they run this kind of a company – of IT company.  They were 
also introduced for the second time by some comrades in Gauteng who 
were present then in their company.  They take workers from their 
places in the morning to work and they cook lunch for them and they 
take them back at sunset. 
That is how I got to know them and I with time because I had 
now known them I got to know even some of the things they do.  For 
example one of them was a member of the international council that 
was advising the President on economic things and I found them to be 
a very - a very friendly family.  With time I got to know quite a number 
10 
of them if not all of them and they were indeed - they knew a lot of 
comrades and I got to know that in fact when Mandela was President 
they started being very close and were friends of Mandela and – and 
when Mandela was gone they were friends with Thabo whilst I was 
there as I say they saw me coming from his – his home. 
I never did anything with them unlawfully or whatever.  They 
just remained friends as they were friends to everybody else.  I have 
explained how my son got onto them when he looked for a different kind 
of business people to work with and I have wondered why I am accused 
why people think that my relationship with them is not right when they 
20 
had a relationship with other people. 
Two other Presidents have had relations with them.  In fact 
stronger with Comrade Thabo Mbeki.  He himself has appeared talking 
about – talking with them at times addressing them in – in the social 
media.  Why should people think that this was one thing to get Zuma 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 37 of 101 
 
and they did not know what was happening.  Everything that happens is 
sort of associated with me. 
I am sure you have listened here to and I have been you 
know given names and names that I allowed these people to land in the 
National Point in South Africa.  No one has ever asked me did you do 
so or is there any information to that effect because it never happened.  
I did not know where they were going to land nor whether there was a 
landing to happen on a particular day but it has been Zuma again and 
that is what Ngoako Ramatlhodi said as he was giving evidence here. 
He allowed his friends to – to land in a highly sensitive area.  
10 
Comrade Ngoako has never asked me whether I talked to them and I 
allowed them to come there and I am sure you have it now in your – in 
your records.  Perhaps not the matter to dwell so much but the point I 
am making I never did any other thing out of or breaking the law with 
this family never. 
They were business people and successful business people.  
They knew a lot of business people who are also in the ANC and I think 
some might have worked with them.  I am not a business person.  I 
know nothing about business.  I am a politician.  I know something 
about politics; because of the fact that they are comrades they are 
20 
accepted and I realise that they seem to be not just a little business 
here quite substantial. 
There had been a problem that worried us – all us that in this 
country the media is very biased.  At all material times it is just critical.  
It criticises the country etcetera.  There is no alternative voice and if 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 38 of 101 
 
people could complain and say I abused them that one I could plead 
guilty because I then one day having known that we have been trying to 
have business who are progressive to establish a media sort of or 
candid voice of what is happening. 
I think even people who are ANC members had tried even to 
partner with other people.  It had never worked.  At that time I was the 
President of the ANC.  I then said to them man and making a 
suggestion.  Can you try a business – a media business - because you 
are comrades?  We need an alternative voice.  There are many 
attempts that have been made before by progressive people but they 
10 
have never worked. 
Is it possible that you could establish a newspaper?  They 
have never thought of the idea and we discussed this.  They finally said 
I think it is a good idea because it is business as well.  I said fine.  So 
they said no we will do something about it.  They came back to say now 
they have decided they want to establish a newspaper.  As soon as - 
they agreed because this was me as an individual talking about what 
we had seen as a problem that the media in this country is very 
negative. 
In fact a number of things that are done which they supposed 
20 
to be reported about at times they do not see the light of day only 
negativity.  Once they agreed I then thought it would be important for 
me to make one person aware of this.  One leader who was the 
Secretary-General of the ANC, Gwede Mantashe.  I said Gwede I have 
talked to these comrades for them to do their business and they seem 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 39 of 101 
 
to be warm to the idea and then after that I also informed the Deputy 
Secretary-General about this to say this is an initiative of these – of 
these comrades but it is an important one. 
We as politicians pay a lot of attention to media.  Also 
running in countries because we would want for example fair reporting.  
At times the reporting in our country is not fair.  So I think they were 
happy as well.  So I said man so that you know I am not just talking.  
One day I would be happy if you could see them and hear how they 
thinking of it.  They have been thinking about it. 
So the two comrades and I listened to them at one time when 
10 
they wanted to say how they want to go about this – this thing.  So I 
agreed.  When they were about to – to – when they were moving 
forward they then said can you help asking me.  Give us a name.  We 
do not know how to call this newspaper.  So I said to them there used 
to be struggle publications we used to have called Speak, Fighting Talk, 
New Age etcetera.  So I gave all those names. 
They loved this name New Age and that is how the paper was 
named.  So they established a newspaper and started work.  We were 
very happy.  They even discussed that they were going to report about 
provinces in this paper.  So there is no problem that is not reported to 
20 
as always they are not in the national newspapers except if there is a 
big thing.  Let us do something different as they were saying. 
When this paper was operating and really being appreciated 
in the country to bring about a – an alternative voice.  I then sat and 
said man the newspaper, fine we have succeeded.  I did – I do not 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 40 of 101 
 
know and I was thinking whether I could push them further.  So I said to 
them this is very successful.  What about a TV channel?  I suggested 
the paper to them. 
I suggested the channel.  Somebody can then say we are 
abusing this – this friendship.  It was never the other way around.  It 
was me who put them into trouble because I said your paper is so 
successful.  I am sure your TV thing can be successful and they 
agreed.  They said it is a good idea and they moved on it.  I know that 
people who had problems had a lot to say about this. 
I thought it was a very good thing that they did.  There was 
10 
no law broken there.  There was no wrong things done.  I discussed 
with business people many things when I was still in the – in the 
Government.  Even suggest certain things can you not do in your 
business.  This was a normal kind of interaction.  So they established 
this and indeed the ANN7 brought fresh air in the country in terms of 
reporting, in terms of putting across progressive ideas. 
It was never a bad thing or that there is corruption about it 
nothing.  A clear suggestion about business and business people took 
it.  They then fetched their people wherever it was.  I am making this 
point because that relationship ended up insofar as we are concerned 
20 
who wants media that is progressive helping to have this media that 
was able to report differently. 
That is an extent of the kind of friendship we had.  I think 
they invite always many people for – for their functions – yearly 
functions and people go there.  Somehow because I was – this was me 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 41 of 101 
 
people thought that we found something to implement that plan because 
Zuma is friends to this.  Let us say his relationship with Guptas is 
corrupt and I do not know where it is corrupt. 
A few comrades raised the matter with me.  I asked what the 
wrong thing is.  What is wrong?  They could not tell me.  In fact one 
time it was raised in the National Executive Committee.  I made an 
explanation how I came to know this and nobody said it is wrong.  
There was nothing wrong but some people are irritated.  I do not know 
why. 
Besides this I even explained this in the National Executive 
10 
Committee that we just talked with them.  One comrade Essop Pahad is 
actually working with them in a publication called The Thinker.  He was 
editor.  I think at the end that business ended up with him.  Nobody 
says anything about that.  Nobody says anything about the relationship 
between them and Mandela, between them and Mbeki but because 
there is a narrative to be done with Zuma – Zuma there is something 
wrong and nobody is telling me what is wrong with me. 
What is not wrong with other people including other comrades 
but some people thought this is what we are going get Zuma.  That is 
why they influenced the process to establish this Commission to fund 
20 
Zuma.  They have been friends and they were friends – and they 
worked with my son and there was absolutely no problem.  In fact I was 
waiting to hear what it is that they did wrong. 
There is nothing more that I can say these are the things we 
did.  I am mentioning this because to me these were important the 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 42 of 101 
 
media thing.  The newspaper and the channel.  We talked to them.  
Once they – the idea was ripe they then went to brief the top six 
officials about the initiative we were undertaking.  They also briefed the 
alliance. 
They also briefed provinces and they also I think like all 
newspapers talked to people in Government for advertisements or 
whatever.  What is wrong with that?  No it is because they happen to 
know Zuma.  They have become friends to Zuma.  Then there is 
something wrong.  I could not take people who raising issues on this 
matter when they have no complaint just to say no, no you do not like 
10 
them. 
Never, never did I discuss anything that does not belong to 
them.  I am told that there were appointing Ministers.  Where do they 
come in?  Why should they do so?  Was I not capable of doing my work 
that I needed other people?  There is a lot of consultation with the 
leadership when it comes to placing people or forming Cabinet 
whatever. 
I have never done it alone.  What is the problem?  Of course 
unfortunately those who came never said this is what has happened.  
They just say wrong things blah, blah, blah.  It is important for us to – 
20 
to clarify that point.  Some people are so irritated but I did not know 
how to – to explain that one.  These were comrades.  These were 
business people. 
I was introduced to them even at a very high level of the ANC 
and that is how I got to know them and that is why my son felt if – he 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 43 of 101 
 
went to them and joined them and became a partner to them.  These 
are people he can work with and succeed and I thought there was no 
problem but he has been crucified for that.  Well in – in terms of the 
Guptas unless there was anything which when the time comes I will 
come to let me come back to the issue of the plan – the unfolding of 
the plan.  The people who come deal with the issues. 
I have been attacked even when I am coming here.  Part of 
the reason I have more visitors today than any other time because I am 
here.  Some people I know for a fact might know that I know things 
about them and therefore they are not going to like me but I have 
10 
behaved for decades.  I have not played around with intelligence 
information. 
I have lived with people who do not know I know about them 
because that was not what I was trained for to use intelligence wrongly 
or carelessly but these comrades have provoked me and other people.  
Not only them.  Some other people had said things for example one day 
Comrade Mbalula attend - attended an activity in the farm or home of 
Mr Rupert and then Rupert saw him he said Minister Mbalula - when 
that happened he was the Minister of Sports. 
If Zuma takes out – removes Pravin Gordhan it will shut down 
20 
the economy of this country.  You must go and tell him and indeed 
Mbalula came to tell me.  I said but what has he to do with us.  I – I did 
not know that he is a member of the ANC to decide how the ANC must 
deal with its matters.  What is his problem?  I said that he – go back to 
him to say that is his problem but he said we will shut down. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 44 of 101 
 
We will make the Rand flat on the ground.  Well fine indeed 
they did interfere with the land – with the Rand.  I think there is one 
person who confessed not long – this year that they did so and I knew 
even at that time it was a deliberate move part of the agenda.  I never 
thought I would be nasty to people and I think I can be nasty.  I have 
been over provoked. 
People coming saying things about me because I am not 
going to revenge.  Perhaps some people that the plan I at the beginning 
talked about they have reached the point.  Where they say they wanted 
them to reach I do not know.  I have survived attempts to kill me.  
10 
People looking to poison me or being instructed by their handlers to do 
so finally poisoned the very dangerous poison. 
All emanates from those people who made the plan at the 
beginning.  At some point they felt I am not disappearing and therefore 
they must deal with me.  Many attempts were made.  Firstly the court 
issue for an example was a way to get me out.  I do not think there is a 
case in this country that finished 15 years going in and out even if the 
Judges say there is no case here. 
Those who remember Judge Msimang – the late – said there 
was no case and he took it out of court and those who remember 
20 
Judge Nicholson said there is no case there.  This is just politics and 
indeed the tapes confirm what Nicholson was saying but no newspaper 
will write that because the narrative is deal with Zuma.  I am still 
having the case. 
I have made an application that the case must go.  They do 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 45 of 101 
 
everything to ensure that this case is there because it feeds to the 
narrative Zuma must go.  Everything I do nothing.  That is why even the 
nine years that I was in Government some people will say it was a 
wasted time.  Even if they were party to implementing decisions they 
were party taking those decisions but when they talk about it they are 
out of it – Zuma must account. 
It is absolutely important that we accept the fact that there is 
something we need to deal with as a country.  The very fact that 
intelligence organisations which today are key instruments to run 
countries the war today is fought at intelligence level.  No longer at the 
10 
hard guns etcetera.  A worrying point is that one of our intelligence, 
which was still under the hands of the apartheid regime conspired with 
two other intelligence organisations to do things in our country, and it 
means those who were negotiating with us (speaking isiZulu) because 
we also know that at the time a decision was taken that some of the 
agents who had been operating, getting pay from the apartheid regime 
that the apartheid regime thought that they were not known by the ANC, 
there was an agreement between the intelligence organisation here and 
the United States that those should be taken with their files to them, 
but they will remain with us and they remained with us and they are 
20 
among us. 
 
And therefore they have their bosses, they’re handled to do 
things here, and that’s why some of them were rushing to come here 
because they found a platform to deal with Zuma.   
 
When, and I must say this, when we were in the – in exile at 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 46 of 101 
 
some point having done a number of things, the organisation gave me 
the task of – to be Chief of Intelligence, and there’s a particular spy 
that I would say something about, he was Kozvaf[?] but he had given 
himself the name Fear, who infiltrated the ANC and caused a lot of 
damage and when because I had had problems with him when I was 
doing other work, when I was here I made it a point that we are coming 
to grips with this.   
 
Some people have written a book with some information, 
distorted information on this particular character, as they were trying to 
give the scenes of Zuma in some books.  He operated in Swaziland and 
10 
caused people to die.  We suddenly arrested him and indeed he 
confessed he was a spy, well trained, before he was a student in the 
Western Cape but he did not finish because there was a strike, they 
were chased out, he went to Durban to his sister, and during that time 
he was recruited by the Regime, was taken to training for six months 
how to be a spy, and trained through the ANC literature, so that when 
he comes to exile he must look like a bright student who catches so 
quickly and yet he has been taught and the material he has been taught 
here by the Apartheid Regime. 
 
He came with his wife, there is a long story about him, and the 
20 
wife herself was sent so they had a marriage that was authorised by the 
police, at the right time, part of the cover.   And he was finally arrested 
and confessed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry, I didn’t hear the words, the wife herself was 
– is it sacked? 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 47 of 101 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I didn’t hear what you said about the wife, did you 
say his wife was sacked. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I said, ja was sent by the police 
by the Special Branch. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh was sent by the police. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja, from home to join him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay thank you.  Yes? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  When he was detained he asked 
to see me, and I saw him with the Comrades (indistinct) where he was 
10 
saying I have written my confession, here it is, but I just wanted to 
come and talk to you.  I saw hatred, if I found you sleeping when there 
was no one I would cut your throat.  He said it took me time to confess 
because I have been more loyal to the Regime of Government regarding 
the ANC, but I thought  it is important for me to tell the truth now.   
 
That agent knew a number of others who are in the movement, 
because he was one of highly regarded spies of the regime.  As soon 
as he did confession he as poisoned and died, but he had given the list 
of others because he knew them, and many comrades lost their lives 
because of the work of that person.  He even made comrades inside the 
20 
country to lose their lives if he was instructed to give CADAS 
instructions to kill people inside.   
 
One of the comrades was in KZN, that he did so, sent innocent 
comrades to that comrade to say he is a spy when he was not a spy.  
Much as I have a view about spies and everything but we had a code to 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 48 of 101 
 
operate that we handle this with care, but I think other spies who have 
been sitting around (speaking isiZulu).   
 
You know just recently there was a function in Durban where 
the Maskandies[?] wanted to feel the stadium.  Some of those people 
one thing you know they planned to murder me inside the stadium, and 
I know them, they planned to murder me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is this a reference to some of those people who may 
have appeared in the list that was left behind by the spy who was 
poisoned? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Some of them. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  What saved my life is because I 
did not go there.  This is an attempt on my life, there have been people 
sent from outside the country to come and kill me, but I have been 
patient, not saying a thing, but I have been provoked to the last 
degree.   
 
Yes I have got the list and another list as well, but that’s not 
the business of me to deal with those matters here, but it is important, 
it is important for me so that you can see the behaviour of people.  
What made Comrade Ngoako to behave the way he did here, saying 
20 
that I have auctioned the country, in the ANC I just do what I like, he is 
carrying out an instruction.  He was recruited when he was a student in 
Lesotho to be a spy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please let’s not clap, thank you. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  And he finds it very comfortable 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 49 of 101 
 
to come here and say this Zuma he was a good man, and I have known 
him for years, what he is, but I have never shown it, because I thought 
he will change.  Some other people have made themselves very nice, 
join something called One Hundred and One and said a lot of things 
about me, some of them that I commanded, and some of them who 
commanded the other comrades but they are not known and perhaps 
people will realise why there seem to be some problems, somehow, 
somewhere.   
 
I think it is important for people to behave correctly, so that 
they don’t cause problems.  Some of the people I have loved, I have 
10 
worked with them, trusted them, even when I got to know, because I 
thought maybe they have left the wrong ways.  The critical point is that 
the plan made way back has been working and our enemies in fact have 
recruited more even than during the struggle.   
 
That is why you will see things when people are doing things 
in the manner in which doesn’t look like ANC, it is some of them who 
influences this Commission to bury Zuma, and I am sure in the 
discussions as we go I will be looking at things and saying what else. 
 
I want peace, I want harmony and that is why even those who 
have done things to me I am not feeling pitiable, but some – some of 
20 
them had even collected information, gave it to the writers who write 
books about me.  Maybe at some point in the discussions here I might 
come back to this issue in the Commission, whilst the Commission still 
continues, but I thought I should deal with one who has said to me I 
have auctioned the country to the Guptas.  Others have said things out 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 50 of 101 
 
there but the time is there to deal with matters, all I am saying it is 
important for you Chair to realise that some of the things you are 
dealing with are very big and very deep and it is important to know 
there is a plan that is being implemented against Zuma, and it gets in, 
in many ways.   
 
I must come here and answer questions about people of who 
perhaps – I don’t know what questions are there, but the ones I have 
heard so far I thought that somebody is going to say Zuma is hiding 
something with the Guptas, or something, something, so that leaves me 
with what is it that I have done wrong, but it is important to bring Zuma 
10 
here, so that the narrative grows, here is Zuma being questioned about 
his relationship with the Guptas etcetera, what is wrong with the 
relationship?  Nothing wrong, and then but many other people have 
friends to these comrades, they are not the issue, the issue is Zuma. 
 
Now as you call it the information and you walk towards 
making conclusions I thought that this is important that I say partly 
because some people are part of the plot to kill me, perhaps it is 
important that before I die I tell the story.  I am telling you if I can tell 
you the details of the plan to kill me in Durban was detailed, detailed.  
It involved people brought from outside of the country.  (Speaking 
20 
isiZulu) were supposed to do to me, and perhaps that will make you 
realise that for me the matter is bigger than it meets the eye, and I 
have been respectful to comrades, and to people I know, maybe I have 
reached a point where that must now take another backseat.  They 
concoct everything just to deal with Zuma.   
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 51 of 101 
 
 
As part of this narrative there is a book – or sorry the book is 
– there is a film which is being made about the case that took place, 
and I was found not guilty, rape case.  There is a journalist in South 
Africa who is doing that one, Radier Kable[?], it’s being done outside, 
to say Zuma is a rapist, it fits in this narrative, she has been doing it in 
the media where she works, Radier, because this narrative must be 
done.  The question I ask them these people who do – who participate 
in it where do they get the idea that Zuma must be put down?  Who 
instructs them? 
 
Perhaps it is important to look into this matter many times, and 
10 
say what can we do?  We have a country to save, but there are people 
who do not care, who want to give negativity in terms of what we do in 
this country.   
 
I have resigned as asked by my National Executive Committee, 
and I am staying there, far away, but even when I am staying there 
there is a plot to kill me.  When I am no longer in any activity, except 
attending the National Executive Committee meetings of the ANC, as a 
member of the ANC.   
 
Well as the Commission goes I might come back with other 
matters but I thought it is just important at this point to take the matter 
20 
up to here. 
 
Thank you very much Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much Mr Zuma.  I think it is good that 
you decided to tell the Commission what you have told it, because as 
your counsel indicated the Commission had indicated that part of what 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 52 of 101 
 
it would like to hear is your side of the story and that then there would 
be also questions, so it was important that you be given that 
opportunity.   
 
We are at five past one, we will take the lunch break now, and 
we will resume at quarter past two.   
 
We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Sorry Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes Mr Zuma  yes. 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I just two points I just wanted to 
make. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To make.  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes.  I forgot mention the name 
of the movie that is being done by Redi in the United States. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Because I think it is important 
to have the name of the movie – crossing with my – the name of the 
movie is Raped by Power. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Raped by Power. 
20 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Raped by Power. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you.  Yes I thought there is a second 
point. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  The second point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 53 of 101 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  When I talked about Ralph who 
had organised an attack when he was to be confronted because the 
reason why you had that attack he had been arrested by the Swazi 
police and leaked information about the work they are doing in 
Swaziland.  And then his commander the commander of the group and 
other members of the group were very agitated about this.  Why did he 
give information to the Swasi’s?  So they… 
CHAIRPERSON:  That would be to the Swazi government? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Swazi government ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  When he was arrested. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  He then – the commander said, 
let us go to Maputo so that we can discuss this matter.  Knowing that 
he was going to Maputo he then phoned his handler in South Africa to 
say he must be rescued.  He is being taken to Maputo they might 
perhaps never see him again.  So he needed them to undertake an 
operation against his colleagues.  So he gave them description of 
where they were sleeping.  They would have woken up at about four-ish 
to walk while it is dark to cross to Mozambique and he told them where 
20 
he was sleeping and where everybody was sleeping.  So the attack 
happened to his window with a canister… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Through his window? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja.  Through his window. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 54 of 101 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  But he went out through that 
window and nothing happened to him and even the bed was never – the 
bed showed that nobody had ever opened the blankets who come he 
was sleeping on top of it which means he was waiting for these people.  
Then in the morning he was detained by the Swazi’s once again.  Then 
few day after the detention conniving both Swazi’s and the security 
police from here wanted to release him because he was very important.  
But they wanted to test the waters as to is he being suspected of this 
or what?   
 
And they – they did something and ask somebody when he 
10 
comes out after arrest – somebody to hug him as they greet.  That hug 
was important because it will be saying he is innocent.  In other words 
nobody is angry for him that he might be responsible for this. 
 
The information was – so that hug was arranged by the police 
and somebody who hugged him had been given instructions to do so.  
And that was General Siphiwe Nyanda.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Those are the two points.  Okay thank you.  You will 
be asked questions by Mr Pretorius.  I will also ask questions from time 
20 
to time.  If there is anything you – any question you do not understand 
say so and it will be repeated or clarified.  Thank you.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Thank you Chair.  Mr Zuma 
– Chair before asking questions and before making a few remarks. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 55 of 101 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  I believe it is important for the 
legal team itself to place certain matters on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Given what has been said this 
morning and what might be said in future. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  It may be that some of the 
matters that I want to raise now or place on record now have already 
been placed on record by yourself but I do believe it is important that 
the legal team too place its position on record.   
10 
 
The first point is that this commission is at this stage at least 
investigating matters covered by the terms of reference.   It is an 
investigation.  That means it is not a trial where we seek to prove a 
predetermined or pleaded or charged case and for that reason too there 
is no cross-examination.  Cross-examination can only take place by 
prior permission granted by your Chair and it is not likely that we will 
ask for such.   
 
Our terms of reference mandate us to investigate various 
matters under the broad heading State Capture, Fraud and Corruption 
and it is pursuant to that mandate that you Chair have invited Mr Zuma 
20 
to attend.   
 
Firstly to assist the commission by presenting to the 
commission his version.  The facts as he sees them and his 
understanding of those facts as well as relevant matters connected with 
those issues. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 56 of 101 
 
 
And in particular the correspondence preceding and at the time 
of the invitation to Mr Zuma specifies matters raised in the evidence of 
a list of specified witnesses and I will list those in due course.   
 
And the second point is that you – your invitation invited Mr 
Zuma to attend – to answer questions in relation to those matters and 
the wording of the invitation is specific.  It is matters raised by the 
witnesses which have mentioned Mr Zuma or are related to him in one 
way or another.  Ultimately it is Mr Zuma’s knowledge, experience and 
owner ledged involvement in matters raised before this commission that 
we seek to investigate further. 
10 
 
The witnesses specified in the correspondence in relation to 
whom or in relation to whose evidence questions will be asked are Mr 
Maseko, Ms Mentor, Minister Nene or former Minister Nene rather, 
Minister Gordhan, Ms Hogan, Mr Ramathlodi, Mr Muofhe, Mr Mbalula 
and Minister Mbulula and Mr Agrizzi.  Those are the witnesses to whom 
questions will be limited.  Perhaps at another occasion Mr Zuma 
questions will be asked in relation to the evidence of other witnesses 
but it has been stated specifically in correspondence to the former 
President that questions related to the evidence of those witnesses and 
matters raised by such witnesses to which Mr Zuma may be related in 
20 
one way or another may be asked. 
 
Then Mr Zuma and it I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you are done.  Before you ask any questions 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe I must just also make this point clear that now 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 57 of 101 
 
that you have referred to the fact that Mr Zuma was invited here.  Let 
me make it clear the decision to ask Mr Zuma to appear here was mine 
and mine alone.  And I believed it was the right thing.  I want to hear 
his side of the story but also I want an opportunity for the commission 
to put questions to him.   
 
The correspondence that was exchanged can be taken as from 
me as well. So if there is any criticism it can be directed to me.  Thank 
you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Zuma to begin we have heard 
the narrative and the evidence that you have given this morning and we 
10 
would appreciate time to consider it in its full detail but from the legal 
teams’ point of view we can assure you that insofar as the issues you 
have raised fall within our terms of reference as they appear at first 
glance to fall within our terms of reference we will investigate further 
and we trust with your assistance. 
 
But as I understand it you say that in the early 90’s a 
conspiracy or plan and you have used both words was hatched and you 
have used the words to get rid of you and you have also told the Chair 
that that conspiracy or plan was hatched by two foreign intelligence 
agencies in conjunction with a South African Intelligence Agency, is 
20 
that correct? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  What happened to you as 
narrated by you between the early 90’s and now some 29 years has 
largely been part of the execution of this plan or conspiracy as I 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 58 of 101 
 
understand you evidence.  If you would say yes because your nod will 
not be picked up. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes.  Okay, okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Mr Zuma. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Okay yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And do I understand you 
correctly to say and this is what – is what might bring your evidence 
squarely within the terms of reference of this commission that this 
commission itself is the culmination of that conspiracy? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes I said so. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  The evidence of the 9 
witnesses that I have mentioned I am happy to repeat them if you wish.  
You may want me to do so has that evidence formed part of this 
conspiracy generally speaking. We can get to the detail in a moment? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No I did not necessarily say it 
forms part from them as individuals and I am not saying it also it does 
not.  Because they came here on specific details.  I think my contention 
is that the manner in which the Public Protector was asked to 
investigate this specific matter and when she had no money she was 
given money to do so.  And I think carefully crafted how to name it so I 
20 
am saying the commission.  I am not saying whoever comes here to 
give evidence is therefore part of that one except when I was talking 
about one individual. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Who said I have auctioned the 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 59 of 101 
 
country. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Well that question perhaps can 
be more fully answered when we talk about the evidence in more detail. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Hm. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you.  The first witness on 
the list is Mr Maseko who gave evidence before this commission.  In 
recent 
days 
a 
set 
of 
documents 
was 
handed 
to 
your 
legal 
representatives.  There were two bundles – Chair you have the two 
bundles.  It is bundle GGA and bundle GGB. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I do have but I see that Mr Zuma does not have 
10 
anything. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes that is why… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think his counsel … 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  I am introducing them now Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think let us – let me hear his counsel.  I think he 
indicates he wants to say something about it. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Chair  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  I do not have the documents and he does 
not. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  Do – do you – my understanding Mr Sikhakhane 
my understanding is that two lever arch files were served on your 
instructing attorney about two weeks ago if I am not mistaken.  You – I 
do not know if you – you… 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:   I do not know – well his – he is here 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 60 of 101 
 
because I do not have them and I have asked them.  I will ask him to 
deal with the question. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  I do not have them and I do not know 
whether Mr [indistinct] [not speaking into microphone]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  I do not know.  Mr Mantsha is here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No that is fine.  Mr Pretorius.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  They were delivered on the 1 
July to the offices of Mr Mantsha the attorneys of record of the former 
10 
President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do we have any proof of receipt? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Well we can obtain.  Just get it.  
We will obtain it now Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Sihkakhane. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Chair maybe let me raise this because it 
has been – it is the problem I was trying to avoid. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE: It is truly the problem.  Until the 24 t h June 
and I saw the acrimonious correspondence.  I am not – I was not a 
20 
party to that is that I think when that – when that broke down – that 
relationship we were trying when it broke down I believe that when we 
asked the commission about details even these files that are delivered 
only you have undertaken to come if they were delivered.  These files 
could have been given to us earlier. Really, really I do not see – unless 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 61 of 101 
 
they have stuff that only came then.  I am just raising this because I 
think it is important that this process is not run like an ambush tool so 
that it must assist you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  And the fact that these documents unless 
you are told by Mr Pretorius that they contain things they obtained later 
there is absolutely no reason why they could not have been given 
earlier and the problem we were complaining about could have been 
averted.  And I do not have them and I – that is why I keep saying… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE: Mr Mantsha may deal with them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  But this is how the commission wants to 
deal with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  My understanding is that they were prepared as a 
matter of caution because there was an understanding that your 
instructing attorney had indicated that not all the witness statements 
had been received by him and they were prepared to include all witness 
statements and annexures and that were deemed relevant so that 
whichever ones he might not have received would be there.  My 
20 
understanding is that from the commission’s side apparently maybe one 
had not been sent otherwise the rest had been sent but Mr Pretorius 
can talk more.  But we will have to find a way of how to make sure 
there is fairness. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  I think so Chair and I think the 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 62 of 101 
 
correspondence… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Between the two attorneys ja I think it can 
improve because it is beginning to affect … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  An innocent witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No thank you.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Well Chair to answer the later 
question first.  There is an acknowledgement on the 1 s t July 2019 of 
receipt of the two files.  I can hand that up if you wish.  But also a – an 
10 
electronic copy of the evidence bundle was sent on the 1 s t July as well.  
But I do not understand that to be disputed now rather the timing of the 
delivery. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Appears to be an issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  May I just say that I can go 
through all the witnesses of the nine in detail but perhaps only in 
relation to Mr Maseko a Rule 3.3 Notice was sent on the 2 August 2018 
to the attorneys of the former President. Delivery confirmation was 
20 
received on the 3 August 2018 and attached to the delivery were the 
two statements of Mr Maseko.  A full evidence bundle in relation to 
annexures was sent on the 17 August 2018.  Right.  So all this 
documentation in relation to Mr Maseko was sent last year in August 
and was responded to in the sense that there is written confirmation of 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 63 of 101 
 
the fact that the documentation and the statements were considered 
and it was felt that Mr Zuma was not implicated thereby.  But be that as 
it may it leaves us in the position now when for some reason or another 
and I do not think the fault can be laid at the door of the commission at 
all the witness is unprepared.  There are two ways of dealing with that.  
I can deal with the questions more slowly and in relation to each 
document or piece of the witness’s evidence allow the – Mr Zuma time 
to consider it.  But other than that I am not sure that there is any 
reason to delay these proceedings any further. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe what we should do is I should adjourn maybe 
10 
for a few minutes to allow you and counsel for Mr Zuma to look at 
whether there are any documents in these two files that they have 
never received.  Because obviously those that they had received and 
since it was specified which witnesses we would be dealing with they 
would have had those and therefore whatever preparation they might 
have needed to do they would have been in possession of those.  But 
just in case there may be some witness statements or other documents 
that they never received even or before the two lever arch files were 
sent because if it is maybe one or two – one or two statements that can 
– we can see whether those can be dealt with much later in the week or 
20 
not.  So that is what I am… 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Well just one qualification Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  This afternoon we will deal 
hopefully with Mr Maseko. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 64 of 101 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  There two statements were given 
with the bundle and the bundle GG two statements were given. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  So that is a fairly easy equation 
to deal with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  To go through each and every 
document will take quite a … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Time. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Some time to complete. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So your suggestion is that you restrict your questions 
for this afternoon to Mr Maseko. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then we adjourn and that gives opportunity for 
documents that the legal team for Mr Zuma might not have received to 
be identified. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  In fact in relation to Mr 
Maseko more documents were sent last year than were given on the 1 
July. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  But I am told that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Mantsha wants to say something. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Mantsha wants to address 
you. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 65 of 101 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Mantsha. 
ADVOCATE DANIEL MANTSHA:  Thank you Chairperson.  You made 
mention that you have directed the correspondences specifically the 
invite to the former President.  If I were to take you back a little bit 
during the engagements we had in chambers wherein I actually raised 
complaints that the former President who was in office when the 
commission was appointed was not even asked or to be consulted of 
anything on the matter.  But coming to the point after I have requested 
the commission to actually give us the parameters of what the 
President – former President is going to be asked upon. My last letter 
10 
dated the 24 t h June 2019 at the bottom of that letter after we made all 
attempts to actually try to find the best way to prepare the former 
President in terms of the areas where the commission is going to ask.  
And why did you do that Chair?  We did that because we were part of 
the proceedings of this commissions.  And when you then said to me 
the former President is here or he will be asked as my learned 
colleague read the list Mr Masseko, Mentor and so forth. We asked the 
questions.  What are the questions that you are going to ask?  And the 
reason why we asked the questions is simply because say for example 
Mr Mentor before you she told you she could not – the commission 
20 
could not confirm that she has left Cape Town to Johannesburg.  The 
commission could not confirm that she has left Johannesburg for Cape 
Town.  The commission - the recollection of the Gupta’s residence, the 
expert witness of the commission contradicted her recollection that she 
apparently does not seem to have appeared into the place.  So I am 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 66 of 101 
 
saying because it is important we were asking these questions to say 
are you really calling him to answer things that it was proved before the 
commission and proved before everybody who is following this 
proceeding that that witness has – there is no proof. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Mantsha right now the question is relates to 
documents that may – that the legal team says… 
ADVOCATE DANIEL MANTSHA:  Indeed Chair I am getting there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADVOCATE DANIEL MANTSHA:  I am getting there because as I have 
mentioned to you my letter of the 24 t h I then said to the commission we 
10 
trying to facilitate that these proceedings will be conducted in a spirit 
of the true people who were pursuing the truth.  Not the people who are 
pursuing some of what the former President has been saying.  And 
when that was rebuffed by this commission the last sentence on the 
letter was we are out of these engagements.  Which meant whatever 
the commission attempted to bring to my office the commission was 
doing so in its own peril.  Because I have formally informed the 
commission that since my attempts to try to have the smooth running of 
this – the appearance of the former President.  You are not interested.  
Therefore I washed my hands out of it.  So whatever you can bring to 
20 
my office was done at the commission peril and then the commission 
has to deal with.  But what I can say to you in terms of the notices 
which have been sent to my offices in terms of Maseko and others we 
confirm those notices.  But what is important is as I was saying to you 
when you get a notice that you are implicated surely you expect that 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 67 of 101 
 
there is a content that implicates you in legal sense of the word.  So 
even though what I am saying is say we are only concerned with the 
documents.  It is more than documents because we wanted to say, do 
you want to ask us about Booysens?  He never implicated us.  You want 
to ask us about Sindane?  You give us the notice they have never 
implicated us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no Mr Mantsha.  Let us – let us stick to what 
is at issue.  It is true that your – the last sentence of your letter said 
the Commission was not going to receive any further correspondence 
from you but it did not say you were withdrawing as Mr Zuma’s 
10 
attorneys. 
MR DANIEL MANTSHA:  Indeed Chair but the point we are making we 
disengaged as far as the appearance of the former President was 
concerned because we have attempted to discuss the documentation to 
discuss the questions and all of that was rebuffed.  So when the 
President – former President comes here and talks to you of a grand 
narrative these are some of the things that when we look from where 
we sit as reflected on the correspondence to say but why should people 
who are looking for truth would ask a person to come … 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no Mr Mantsha.  We – you have made the point 
20 
you wanted to make about the documents that you had notified the 
Commission that it would not receive any further correspondence from 
you.  You have conceded that you had not withdrawn as his attorney of 
record and I understand that the Commission Secretariat then made 
sure that the documents were served on you on your offices because 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 68 of 101 
 
from the point of view of the Commission you remained his attorney of 
record and they could not liaise directly with him. 
MR DANIEL MANTSHA:  But – but with respect Chairperson … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR DANIEL MANTSHA:  The Commission has got no licence to do 
whatever it wishes.  The Commission was informed in writing that as far 
as this aspect is concerned we disengaged because the Commission 
was not cooperating with us.  I think I have made my point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you have. 
MR DANIEL MANTSHA:  As – as the former President stated this 
10 
matter runs very deep.  So there are deeper things we would want to 
submit to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MR DANIEL MANTSHA:  In due course. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you Mr Mantsha.  Thank you.  Mr Sikhakane. 
MR MUZI SIKHAKANE:  Chair, I – I think in the interest of this process 
and time I would – I would allow I think Mr - Mr Paul Pretorius must – 
must proceed … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MUZI SIKHAKANE:  And to take it where he wants to take it. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  He suggested that maybe we deal with the 
evidence relating to Mr Maseko only and then after that then 
discussions can be looked at. 
MR MUZI SIKHAKANE:  Chair I – I … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would that be fine? 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 69 of 101 
 
MR MUZI SIKHAKANE:  I have no problem.  As I said I have not seen 
the documents … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MUZI SIKHAKANE:  But I take it from him it is statements that 
(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MUZI SIKHAKANE:  I – I think – I think it is important that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MUZI SIKHAKANE:  That (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No that – I – I think that would be fair to – to 
10 
do.  We – we will keep on trying to be as fair as possible. 
MR MUZI SIKHAKANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We might not always get it right but we will continue 
… 
MR MUZI SIKHAKANE:  Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To try and do our best. 
MR MUZI SIKHAKANE:  Absolutely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank – thank you. 
MR MUZI SIKHAKANE:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Zuma I am sure you have been following?  So 
20 
there were certain documents that the Secretariat of the Commission 
sent to your attorneys but you – you have heard what the instructing 
attorney has done but there seems to be an acceptance that at least in 
regard to Mr Maseko’s statement that was sent off last year and 
Mr Pretorius has suggested that he will not deal with other witnesses 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 70 of 101 
 
this afternoon. 
He will just deal with Mr Maseko so that after that the lawyers 
can talk to each other to see how to sort out the issue of the other 
documents.  Thank you.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes just for clarity to close of 
this part of the debate Chair.  The letter from Mr Mantsha dated 
24 June said in the last paragraph: 
“Accordingly 
you 
will 
receive 
no 
further 
correspondence from us in this regard and we wish 
the Commission well.” 
10 
Unless Mr Mantsha revoked his mandate and withdrew as 
attorney of record in the interim without informing us and leaving us 
under the impression through the delivery of documents to him that he 
remained on record without reply and then he will suddenly come on 
record.  One can draw the conclusion that he has been attorney of 
record throughout. 
Mr Zuma may I beg leave to hand up to you the two bundles 
of documents and I undertake to deal with the questions insofar as they 
are matters within your own knowledge slowly and in a manner in which 
you are hopefully not taken by surprise but please if there is any 
20 
document you wish to read or there is any time you need to consider 
matters we will do our best to make sure that the proceedings are fair. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  So that is – you have before you 
two files. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 71 of 101 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Bundle GGA and on the spine it 
is marked former President and your name follows.  Do you see?  
Bundle AA. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  GGA, yes it is this one. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Okay.  So you can put GGB 
aside for the moment. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  We will deal with just the few 
pages in divider one in GGA. 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  If you look at paragraph – page 
2 and when we refer to pages we will be referring to the pages in red in 
the top right hand corner.  Do you see that? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  So page 2 is the affidavit of 
Mr Maseko.  You have that? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In paragraph 2 he says: 
“I have been requested to provide an affidavit 
20 
relating to the report that I submitted to the Public 
Protector in relation to the so called State Capture 
investigation.” 
Then in paragraphs 3 and four he continues.  He says: 
“I first submitted the statement in response to the 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 72 of 101 
 
call by the Secretary-General of the South African 
National 
Congress 
Mr Gwede Mantashe 
which 
statement was subsequently submitted to the Public 
Protector’s Office.  This statement …” 
And he refers to the statement in paragraph 3. 
“…provides details of my experience with the Gupta 
family during my tenure as Accounting Officer and 
the Chief Executive Officer of the Government 
Communication and Information System - GCIS.” 
The process that is referred to in paragraph 3 that is the 
10 
submission of the statement in response to the call by the Secretary-
General of the African National Congress.  Do you know what process 
that was? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I am not sure.  At some point I 
do not know whether this refers to the ANC taking a decision that the 
Secretary-General should investigate this matter. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  That – that is our 
understanding of the matter. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Okay, okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  We would like to find out from 
20 
you Mr Zuma what you know about that process.  Firstly what was the 
mandate given to Mr Mantashe and who gave him that mandate? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Well I – I cannot be very certain 
about it but I thought that it was the meeting of the ANC NEC.  I would 
imagine that it had taken the kind of decision and I was not in that 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 73 of 101 
 
meeting. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And what decision did they take? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  That Mantashe must do some 
investigation about the Gupta things that people were complaining 
about. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right and that complaint was 
that the complaint that arose in the petition submitted to the then 
Minister Gordhan and copied to yourself from the 27 Directors General? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  From? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  The Directors General who 
10 
submitted 
a 
petition 
to 
the 
former 
Minister 
of 
Finance 
Mr Pravin Gordhan.  I can show you the document if you want to see it. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja, okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  So you can refresh your memory. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe let me also just ask.  Have you had a chance 
recently to read Mr Maseko’s statement to refresh your memory? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes.  That I (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  You have, okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  This may assist you before we 
20 
take matters any further and if you want to take a few moments … 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  You must … 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  To read it please … 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Take it. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Request same and we will 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 74 of 101 
 
arrange that through the Chair.  This document was included in the 
bundle Chair that was given last year. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Do you want to take a minute to 
read that document? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Huh-uh. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  The document is headed: 
“Statement by Former Directors General.” 
We will give it an exhibit number. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is – it is already – it was already given an exhibit 
10 
number previously.  Is it not? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So we should stick to that exhibit number. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  We will refer to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Otherwise there will be confusion. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Page 75 in another bundle.  I am 
just check.  I think it is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  E1.  So it can be referred to as 
EXHIBIT E1? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was it given as EXHIBIT E1. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Page 75.  So it is Bundle E1 
pages 75 to 81. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it one document? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 75 of 101 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  You asked him whether he wanted to have – to 
read it and have a look.  I see it is quite an extensive – it is about what 
– four or five pages? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you not want to highlight certain things in it that 
could refresh his memory? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Zuma shall we do that? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  If you look at paragraph 1 it 
reads: 
10 
“A group of former Directors General felt compelled 
to address the recent developments that are having 
a negative impact on the capacity of the state to 
provide 
quality 
services 
and 
eroding 
public 
confidence in public institutions.” 
And this is a statement that is made during May 20 … – it 
was embargoed for publication until May 2016.  I think it says.  It is not 
clear from the top but … 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is written embargoed for publication on Sunday 
15 May 20 … 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  16 I am told. 
CHAIRPERSON:  16, ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  The second paragraph reads and 
this is by way of introduction Mr Zuma: 
“We had the rare honour in history to not only work 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 76 of 101 
 
administratively to dismantle apartheid but also in 
crafting a new legal framework passed by our 
Parliament and entrenched in our constitutional 
framework.  Through these measures democratic 
institutions were established.  Our initiative to 
speak as former Accounting Officers today is driven 
by our shared commitment to our constitutional 
democracy.  This is not a party political initiative 
and we do not consider the matters we are raising 
to be party political in nature.” 
10 
The third paragraph in the introduction reads: 
“As 
former 
Directors 
General 
we 
brought 
a 
collective commitment to serve and dismantle the 
apartheid state machinery and replaced it with 
democratic institutions that were informed by 
democratic 
values, 
social 
justice, 
fundamental 
human rights and a deep desire to improve the 
quality of life of all South Africans.” 
And then under the heading: 
“Our Concerns” 
20 
On the second page of the document that is page 76 of E1 
Mr Zuma it reads: 
“As former Director Generals we are concerned 
about reports that public officials including Heads 
of State Owned Entities are being pressurised by 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 77 of 101 
 
private interests to wilfully break procurement rules 
and the rules pertaining to transparent fair and 
competency based appointments.  In particular we 
express concern at recent revelations of alleged 
“State Capture” by the Gupta family, their apparent 
influence 
over 
political 
and 
administrative 
appointments and their alleged involvement in the 
irregular 
facilitation 
securing 
and 
issuing 
of 
Government tenders and contracts.” 
It then goes on in the second paragraph Mr Zuma on page 76: 
10 
“A number of alleged corrupt practices that have 
been brought to the public’s attention that are 
tantamount 
to 
breaking 
laws 
such 
as 
the 
Constitution, the PFMA …” 
That is the Public Finance Management Act. 
“…Preferential Procurement Policy Framework and 
Public Service Regulations.” 
The next heading is: 
“A Call for Action” 
And they call for: 
20 
“The establishment of an independent public inquiry 
in terms of Section 41(a) of the Promotion of 
Administrative Justice Act.” 
And they suggest how that should be achieved and then in – 
on the third page Mr Zuma page 77 it reads in the second paragraph: 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 78 of 101 
 
“This inquiry should investigate all senior political 
and administrative officials who may in their 
dealings with the Guptas and associated companies 
have contravened the Constitution, the PFMA and 
the Public Service Act as Amended.  We recommend 
that this Commission be established within three 
months to give a public progress report within six 
months.” 
Then there are a number of other statements made calling 
upon various officials to do various things.  They say in the penultimate 
10 
paragraph on page 78: 
“We have initiated a consultative process with key 
stakeholders that we believe can help to ensure 
that the inquiry is assisted to achieve the goal of 
uncovering incidents of corruption and other forms 
of illegal activities.” 
Then the final paragraph on page 79 reads: 
“Unless these challenges are attended to urgently 
our country maybe plunged into a crisis of 
governance and lead to the collapse of public 
20 
services in general at the expense of delivering 
quality services to our community.” 
Annexed to that document dated 22 April 2016 is the 
statement of the former Directors General.  Do you see that on page 80 
Mr Zuma? 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 79 of 101 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  It is dated 22 April 2016.  It is 
addressed to the Minister of Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan, the 
Minister of Public Service and Administration Minister Ramatlhodi and 
copied to yourself the President of the Republic of South Africa and the 
Deputy President of the Republic of South Africa.  Firstly do you recall 
receiving this document?  Do you want a chance to look at it as well?  
It is in small print but it is two pages. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes I know.  I – I do not recall. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  You do not recall? 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I received so many documents. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  I understand. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Hm. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Perhaps we should start by 
going to the fourth paragraph on page 80. 
“We submit this memorandum …” 
They say and we will get to the signatories in a moment. 
“…to express our collective concern at recent 
revelations of State Capture by the Gupta family.  
Their 
apparent 
influence 
over 
political 
and 
20 
administrative appointments and their involvement 
in the irregular facilitation securing and issuing of 
Government tenders and contracts.  We also 
express our concern at the effect of the recent 
Constitutional 
Court judgment in 
the 
Nkandla 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 80 of 101 
 
matter.” 
That is not directly relevant to what we are doing at the 
moment.  Then in the next paragraph they say: 
“Whilst noting the initiative undertaken by the ANC 
to conduct an internal inquiry we as former 
accounting officers believe that to the extent that 
the issues raised are of an administrative nature 
there are adequate provisions within the PFMA and 
the PSA …” 
The Public Service Act. 
10 
“…that make it obligatory for these allegations to be 
addressed.” 
And what follows in the next paragraph is the same call for an 
independent public inquiry in terms of Section 4 of the Promotion of 
Administrative Justice Act and many of the allegations or the 
statements on page 81 follow what we have already put on record 
Mr Zuma.  If I may then point out at the bottom of page 81 is the list of 
signatories and that list has been confirmed by at least two witnesses 
or at least one witness, Mr Maseko and if I may place them on record. 
It 
is 
Frank Chikane, 
Barry Gilder, 
Ketso Gordhan, 
20 
Thozi Gwanya, Roger Jardine, Themba Maseko, Mzuvukile Maqetuka, 
Mogopodi Mokoena … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mzuvukile Maqetuka. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Maqetuka. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 81 of 101 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Itumeleng Mosala, Mpumi Mpofu, 
Mavuso Msimang, 
Andile Ngcaba, 
Gibson Njenje, 
Bongiwe Njobe, 
Ayanda Ntsaluba, 
Siphiwe Nyanda, 
Dipak Patel, 
Mallele Pitje, 
Vusi Pikoli, 
Sipho Pityana, 
Allistair Ruiters, 
Sipho Shabalala, 
Xoliswa Sibeko, 
Moe Shaik, 
Lyndall Shope-Mafole, 
Vincent Zwelibanzi Mntambo and Pam Yako. 
Are there any names in that list who fall into the category of 
persons who you referred to this morning as being part of a plan to “get 
rid of you” Mr Zuma? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Sorry.  Can you just repeat?  I 
10 
was still reading? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Are there any persons on this 
list who would fall into the category of persons you referred to this 
morning as persons being part of a plan or conspiracy to and I use your 
words “to get rid of you”? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I think Chair through you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  The plan I said it was done by 
three intelligence organisations who did what they did.  I – I said 
activities undertaken and I did not say those people who took the 
20 
undertaking were part of the plan or they planned it.  I said the plan 
was made.  There were people to implement it.  I did not give the list of 
those people. 
I – I dealt with instances where things happened and this was 
part of the plan.  I did not say the people doing it were part of the plan.  
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 82 of 101 
 
I did not say so. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Well can we just understand 
then what your view of this request for a public inquiry was in fact?  
Was it a genuine concern expressed by former Directors General in 
order to ask certain officials within Government to institute an inquiry?  
Can we accept that? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes.  I am accepting it.  To me 
that is what they did. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right and that appears to be the 
background or at least circumstances associated with the evidence of 
10 
Mr Maseko on page 2 where he says he submitted a statement in 
response to a call by the Secretary-General of the African National 
Congress.  That I understand as your evidence was the internal inquiry 
commissioned by the ANC itself? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Are you able to tell us 
more about that inquiry - again to revert to an earlier question - its 
mandate and whether you received any reports as to how the inquiry 
went?  What happened as a result of the inquiry? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No.  In fact I cannot recall what 
20 
– what happened to that inquiry.  I cannot recall right now. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Do you know whether statements 
other than that of Mr Maseko were made to the inquiry? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No.  I do not remember any 
other. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 83 of 101 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Did you know of the existence of 
the inquiry? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Sorry. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Did you know of the existence of 
the inquiry? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes.  I was aware of it. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And did you take any note of its 
outcome? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I cannot remember what the 
outcome was.  I cannot remember. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Presumably in his capacity as 
the Chair of the inquiry Mr Mantashe would have reported to you.  Do 
you recall any such report? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  There might have been a report 
but I do not remember right now.  I know that Mr Mantashe was given 
that.  I cannot remember whether there was a report back or not. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Just from your own experience 
would such a report have been in writing? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  By – by …? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  By Mr Mantashe. 
20 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes.  As a Secretary-General he 
always presented reports that were written. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  So we may be able to see that at 
some stage? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I do not know. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 84 of 101 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Mantashe may yet be asked 
about that inquiry because it is relevant as background to the 
development of the narrative in relation to investigations and the like 
and what were the concerns of various people both within Government 
and outside of Government but we can leave that aside for the moment. 
Can we go to page 3 of the statement where Mr Maseko deals 
with his role at the Government Communication and Information Service 
– the GCIS?  The GCIS as I understand it is the Communication Service 
… 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Under Government Rubric and 
Control … 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And that department resides 
within the Presidency? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  So in your term as President you 
would have been directly responsible and accountable for the activities 
of GCIS.  I understand. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  It is a Minister who is directly 
20 
responsible for its activities. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes you have the Minister in 
your … 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja, reports to. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Department. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 85 of 101 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Minister. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And that Minister was the late 
Collins Chabane at the time I understand? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right and I understand that 
GCIS had a responsibility for media buying.  So where media wished to 
publish advertisements they would be sourced through GCIS as I 
understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you mean Government departments.  You said 
when media wanted.  I think you mean Government departments of 
10 
GCIS. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
Well 
when 
Government 
departments wanted to place adverts and media right … 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And when media would negotiate 
with various Government departments that was all done through GCIS.  
As I understand it? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes, yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  So GCIS was as I understand 
the evidence of Mr Maseko responsible for the function of placing 
20 
advertisements in the media although the advertisements were paid for 
by the various departments. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Do I understand it correctly? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Hm. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 86 of 101 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And as far as you know is it 
correct that the total Government expenditure on advertising was 
valued at around R600 million per annum? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes.  I think so. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  So the advertising spend for 
which GCIS was at least partially responsible, a considerable amount of 
money R600million? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes correct. 
ADV PAUL  JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And what Mr Maseko says in 
paragraph 9, if you could have a look at it, the media buying function 
10 
mentioned in paragraph 7 above was performed on a contingency basis 
on behalf of other departments…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry Mr Pretorius, Mr Zuma is still trying to find 
the paragraph, it’s still on page 3 paragraph 9. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Sorry Mr Zuma. 
CHAIRPERSONS:  Page 3 of Mr Maseko’s statement paragraph 9, have 
you found it? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes and its page 3, the red 
numbering in the top right-hand corner. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes red numbering, if it’s page 
20 
3 is it 77? 
CHAIRPERSON:  You will see at the top there would be letter JGZ and 
then 003 when Mr Pretorius refers to a page he won’t mention double 
zero he will just say 3, so – but it’s the red numbers at the top. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Oh which is 3? 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 87 of 101 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja so what might be confusing you is that it’s 
double zero three, so he will just say 3 but he means the last number 
ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:    And just as a matter of 
politeness Mr Zuma FP is Former President. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  FP, okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja the page numbers is written letters FP-JGZ-003 
but he will just say page 3, he won’t mention the others – the letters 
and the double zero. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  If we may go then, on that page 
10 
to paragraph 9, it says, 
 
“The media buying function mentioned in paragraph 7 above 
 
was performed on an agency basis on behalf of other 
 
departments.  The budget for this function was allocated to the 
 
various line departments and not the GCIS budget’s votes”, 
 
Is that a correct understanding of the picture? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I think so. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Okay, and as I understand from 
what you said this morning Mr Zuma, you would have known that 
towards the end of 2010, that the Gupta brothers were intent, at your 
20 
instance, as I understand it now, on setting up the New Age Newspaper, 
is that correct? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Then also on page 3 at 
paragraph 10 Mr Maseko says, that around September/October 2010 I 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 88 of 101 
 
received a call from Mr Ajay Gupta on my mobile number 083 645 0810 
requesting a meeting to discuss what he said was a new project which 
he and his company were launching which he indicated required 
Government support, he says over the page, that he knew Mr Ajay 
Gupta but that he was reluctant to accede to the request, he finally 
decided to accede to the request.  Now may I ask did you have 
anything to do with arranging for Mr Gupta to speak to Mr Maseko? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No I didn’t. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:   In any event a meeting took 
place and on the date of the meeting, and that was during 2010 – sorry 
10 
during September/October 2010 he says he received a call from the 
President’s official residence, he says in paragraph 15 at the bottom of 
page 4, 
 
“I identified the incoming number as I had, had dealings with 
 
the residents previously, a female caller said the President 
 
wanted to speak to me”, 
 
And then on page 5 paragraph 16 Mr Maseko refers to the 
content of the call, will you take a moment to read that please? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:    Yes. 
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  (Inaudible mic off) 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Maybe I should ask you to read 
it, my accent not being what it should. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, let me read paragraph 16 of Mr Maseko’s 
affidavit at page 5, he says, 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 89 of 101 
 
 
“The call was then transferred to the President, after the 
 
pleasantries, the President then said the following, and he 
 
quotes “(speaking isiZulu)”, 
 
The English translation is, that is Mr Maseko continuing (my 
brother there are these Gupta guys who need to meet with you and who 
need your help, please help them), that is paragraph 16, your question 
then Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Well that is the version of Mr 
Maseko and it’s an opportunity for you, Mr Zuma to respond to that, I 
can ask you individual questions or you can respond in general, 
10 
however, is more convenient, perhaps I should ask, do you recall that 
happening? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Well I’m not sure, I don’t 
remember because I normally called the DG’s particularly this one to 
discuss a number of issues.  I can’t remember making this call, also in 
the Zulu word I normally say (isiZulu word), I’m not fond of (isiZulu 
word) it looks like somebody was trying to remember my common one in 
Zulu because I always say (isiZulu word).  I wouldn’t know but the issue 
of this new paper of the owners wanting to talk to the department but 
more importantly the department of Maseko because it was centre point 
20 
in terms of advertisement whatever, all the other departments, so it is 
natural they would want to talk to him.  So I don’t think there was 
anything out of the ordinary whether there was a call or no call but I 
don’t remember making the call and saying (isiZulu word) because I 
made a number of calls and really I can’t say, this one, I remember 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 90 of 101 
 
making it for that day to say this must happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is the position that you say it might have happened 
but you don’t recall…(intervention). 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:    It might have happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja it might have happened but you can’t recall? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  So you used the word, natural, 
would it be natural for the Gupta’s to want to find support for their 
project and you were in favour of the project, so it all fits in as it were, 
10 
there’s nothing extraordinary about that according to …(intervention). 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  That’s what I’m saying because 
generally the media houses discuss with this department their relations 
and kind of operations they must undertake. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, I must say there – in 
fairness to you Mr Zuma, the precise words used are somewhat 
different from the words used by Mr Maseko to the Public Protector, 
maybe I could ask you, Chair to read these onto the record, I’m willing 
to give it a try? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that document…(intervention). 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  They’re different. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay sorry I think Mr Sikhakhane wants to say 
something.  Please come through so I can hear. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Chair I think we better give this witness 
time to look at these things, now another document from elsewhere, 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 91 of 101 
 
he’s got to read something else and try and remember whether it’s this 
letter, whether it’s this phrase or that phrase, I don’t think it’s fair, it’s 
truly, truly unfair to the witness, while he’s battling with something that 
he hasn’t seen, that his lawyers haven’t seen, some laptop comes with 
something else elsewhere, I think it – I think he needs to get a chance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  My understanding, although Mr Pretorius had not 
finished, I think my understanding was that since Mr Zuma had 
indicated that he doesn’t normally use the word (isiZulu word) he 
normally uses (isiZulu word) I thought that Mr Pretorius wanted to be 
fair to him to indicate that maybe Mr Maseko might have used different 
10 
wording before the Public Protector, I’m not sure I don’t think he meant 
to take that any further than just to say, you may be right because 
maybe elsewhere different words were used, I think that was my 
understanding of what he wanted to say, nothing more, thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Perhaps it wasn’t an entirely 
elegant attempt but I was trying to be fair to Mr Zuma to say that other 
words were mentioned before the Public Protector. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  But in any event what we can do 
is get those put onto a piece of paper and give them to Mr Zuma to 
20 
consider in his own time with advice, but nothing much turns on it 
because we are really dealing with the meaning and import of the 
communication rather than the particular words used.  Mr Zuma if the – 
and this is a hypothetical question and I understand may be difficult for 
you to answer, but if you had and you do recall or did recall making 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 92 of 101 
 
that telephone call in order to assist the New Age project, I understand 
that you would have expected Mr Maseko to take heed of your words, 
you’re after all President, he’s a DG? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:    No not necessarily, I don’t 
think so.  DG’s are the accounting officers they do what is right, what 
they think is necessary to be done, no matter what (indistinct) says, if 
it was somebody above them they will say, but the (indistinct) I do not 
accept this even if he accepts, it’s not therefore a given that if you say, 
can you do this, that automatically they will, they’re very – as 
accounting officers, they’re very particular. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, and in fact that’s what 
occurred Mr Maseko didn’t cooperate in terms of paragraph 16 and the 
communication in paragraph 16 but clearly if such a communication had 
been made, it would have had a purpose, am I correct? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I though I just – I think I’ve just 
answered that one. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  But why – perhaps I should not 
try and put the question in particular words, but why would such a call 
be made? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Well there could be reasons, 
20 
there could be reasons particularly if, as it were, this is a DG who 
deals with matters of – relating to the media whether he knew or didn’t 
know that perhaps since other – I’m just making it as you put is, since 
media are supported for advertisement you could make that point either 
emanating from your knowledge or whatever. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 93 of 101 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  So what we do have here is, as I 
understand what you’re saying s the possibility of a call natural is the 
word you used, being made to Mr Maseko saying, these people need 
your help, please help them? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Uh-hm. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Okay the substance of that 
communication is fairly clear I don’t want to debate that unnecessarily 
with you because we’re debating a hypothetical situation. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  But if such, whether it’s made 
or not made, if such a call is made, would that call have moved away 
10 
from the normal procedures, would it be trying to compel the DG to do a 
wrong thing or whatever, even if the call was made or not made? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  I understand what you’re saying, 
you’re saying nothing in the content of that call as alleged by Mr 
Maseko is an attempt to persuade anyone to do anything unlawful, it’s 
merely a request to help, is that what you’re saying? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  That is what I’m saying. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  I understand but  lawful or 
unlawful it is a request to help and the maker of that request might 
have expected that request to be heeded, otherwise he wouldn’t have 
20 
made it, do I understand the position correctly? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Absolutely there are many DG’s 
not necessarily in this matter, some people see the President and say 
look, I’ve got a project or I can do this kind of thing but maybe it’s 
difficult to get to some people and when I say to the person who’s 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 94 of 101 
 
talking to me, I hear you but I’m not dealing with this, I’ll take the 
matter forward and then I phone the DG.  I’m at this current – they 
might even give me numbers you deal with them, mine is to help 
facilitate the kind of meeting they’ll be needing.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And then in paragraphs 15 to 16, 
on pages 4 and 5 of Mr Gupta’s statement – Mr Maseko’s statement 
about the Gupta’s…(intervention). 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Page? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  If you look at page 4, para 15 
and page 5, which we’ve dealt with, paragraph 16 it seems that 
10 
according to Mr Maseko that call was made to him on the very day of 
the meeting and the inference is, I think – which you may want to deal 
with is that the call being made on the very day of the meeting with the 
Gupta’s by yourself, you would have known that the meeting was taking 
place, do you have any comment on that? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Well whether the call was made 
or not, it could be a different day, it could be that day. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Well may I ask you, did you 
know that the meeting was to take place, and you recall? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No not at all. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  You don’t think so? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No I don’t think so but as I 
know, as I knew they were meeting, generally people to discuss the 
matter that they were sitting with here and at some point they would 
have talked to him. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 95 of 101 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Then at page 5, paragraph 23, 
Mr Maseko sets out he content of the conversation between himself and 
Mr Ajay Gupta, you may want to take a moment to read on page 6 
paragraphs 24 to 29 and then over the page paragraph 30 to 31 before 
I ask you for your knowledge about that and any other comment that 
you may have in relation to what was discussed.  Again it’s in very 
small print are you wanting me to read that…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:  I wonder whether, Mr Pretorius, you wouldn’t tell him 
the points that Mr Maseko makes in those paragraphs and see whether, 
with that, he is not enabled to answer your question but if he needs to 
10 
read then we can take it from there. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Alright let’s deal with paragraph 
24 and I’ll try and deal with the matter point by point.  Paragraph 24 
says that Mr Ajay Gupta told Mr Maseko that the Gupta family were 
setting up a media company which needed Government support in the 
form of advertising spend, the company would have interests in print 
media and a TV station, there’s nothing controversial about that I 
suppose, it’s consistent as I understand it, with what you said this 
morning? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And then paragraph 25 says, he, 
that is Mr Gupta, then went on to tell me that he was aware that 
Government was spending about R600million on advertising in media 
platforms and he wanted all that expenditure to be transferred to his 
company, the would be media company.  In essence he wanted the total 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 96 of 101 
 
budget to be utilised for advertising in the television and newspaper 
businesses the Gupta family was setting up.  The essence of what Mr 
Maseko says he was told there, was that Mr Gupta said he wants the 
whole R600million budget to be utilised to support the television and 
newspaper business the Gupta family were setting up, do you have any 
knowledge of the extent of the request? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No I have no knowledge of that. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  He then says in paragraph 26, 
 
“I then proceeded to explain how the budget and procurement 
 
process worked and why it would not be possible to transfer 
10 
 
the whole budget to is company.  I told him that in any case 
 
the budget didn’t sit with us at GCI and that we were merely – 
 
and that we merely acted as an agency for the respective 
 
Government departments”, 
 
What Mr Maseko said there, that is correct as I understand 
your previous answers that the budget was the – the expenditure of the 
budget on advertising was ultimately accountable to the departments, 
correct? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:     Yes absolutely. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:    Do you have any comment if 
20 
such a request had been made that the whole R600million be allocated 
to the television and newspaper businesses the Gupta family were 
setting up, would that be proper, improper? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I don’t think I should comment, I 
mean he was making his own point or taking his own chances that’s 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 97 of 101 
 
he’s own business I don’t want to comment on that one. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  It does seem that it would be 
taking a chance. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:    Absolutely. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, he then says in 
paragraph 27,  
 
“He dismissed my explanation and proceeded to tell me that 
 
my job is to go and identify, collect and allocate all the 
 
communication budget amounts in the various departments to 
 
is company”, 
10 
 
Would the same comment apply? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Absolutely. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  It seems to be taking a chance.  
Then he said something interesting at paragraph 28, he said,  
 
“He then told me that I should let him know if any department 
 
or Minister gives me any problems and he would deal with 
 
them directly.  I asked him to elaborate and he told me that he 
 
will personally summons and deal with any Minister who 
 
doesn’t”, 
 
Apart from taking a chance it seems to be a fairly confident 
20 
statement to put it at its least as related by Mr Maseko, if it had been 
said.  If Mr Maseko is to be believed he was told that Mr Gupta could 
deal with any Minister he likes who doesn’t follow his suggestion, do 
you have any comment on that? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No. 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 98 of 101 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Would it be possible for Mr 
Gupta to have said that? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No, no I don’t have a comment 
because I don’t know why Mr Gupta was saying that, I mean, you can 
ask him…(intervention). 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Well did he have that power, to 
your knowledge? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Sorry? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Did he have that power, to your 
knowledge, to tell Ministers what to do? 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Why should he have the power 
to tell Ministers, he had nothing to do with the Ministers. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  That’s simply the question I’m 
asking Mr Zuma.  He then goes on in paragraph 29 to say,  
 
“Matters such as the inappropriateness of what he is saying 
 
and the impropriety of trying to obtain Government business in 
 
this matter did not seem to matter to Mr Ajay Gupta”, 
 
The comment Mr Maseko makes is a fairly clear comment 
about the conduct of Mr Gupta.  Mr Gupta, if he did say it, and you’ve – 
together with my questioning put it fairly succinctly as being confident 
20 
or taking a chance, did you have any idea that Mr Gupta was going to 
these lengths if Mr Maseko’s evidence is true? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  And idea of? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  The – well let’s put it frankly the 
chances that Mr Gupta was taking as reflected on page 6, did you have 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 99 of 101 
 
any idea that he was going to these lengths to secure the whole 
advertising budget of the departments for advertising? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I had nothing to do with his 
discussion with Maseko, why should I have an idea, what is it going to 
say about…(intervention). 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes well that’s precisely the 
question I’m asking because what is happening here is, that in a 
project initiated by yourself in cooperation with the Gupta family there 
is an attempt with not a little persuasion, forceful persuasion to solicit 
the full R600million expenditure on advertising and media platforms 
10 
that the Government is responsible for.  It seems on the face of it, and 
Mr Maseko certainly thought so that this was an improper approach.  
Certainly backed, as it was by the threat in paragraph 28, would you 
agree with that? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Absolutely because Maseko was 
doing his job, he couldn’t, when somebody comes and make that kind of 
thing, as a DG not stick to a procedure. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  So if that had, happened the – 
we can agree that the Gupta’s were acting entirely out of line and 
improperly? 
20 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I’m sure, to say I take the whole 
budget etcetera, I mean I don’t want to enter that discussion because I 
don’t know what was his intention but I can’t just unpack it because I 
know nothing about the discussion that took place between those two, 
I’m sure Gupta can explain better.  
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 100 of 101 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes I understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry, of course, if after that meeting between Mr 
Maseko and Mr Gupta a report had been made to you that Mr Maseko 
had agreed to give the whole budget of R600million to one newspaper 
you would have found that quite strange to say the least? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Then my DG will explain why he 
had to do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Why was he doing that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but it would be something unexpected? 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Unexpected yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And indeed improper if it had 
happened as Mr Maseko said?  Let’s just place these questions in 
context, you’re being given an opportunity, Mr Zuma to comment on Mr 
Maseko’s version, the Chair has not made up his mind yet as to 
whether that version should be accepted or not, this is just part of our 
own investigation process, this questioning.  So on the assumption that 
Mr Maseko was telling the truth here, as I understand your version it 
would, at the very least be unexpected and something that would call 
for an explanation had he agreed to it? 
20 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I think I’ve answered that 
question. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  He says in paragraph 31 that he 
reported the incident to Mr Frank Chikane who was a former Director 
General in the Presidency.  Now in 2010, October, do you know where 
15 JULY 2019 – DAY 133 
 
Page 101 of 101 
 
Mr Chikane held a post? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Sorry? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In other words would Mr Chikane 
have reported to you in any capacity at that time, you see if I may take 
you to paragraph 31 on page 7 you will see that this incident was 
reported according to Mr Maseko by himself to Mr Frank Chikane a 
former Director General in the Presidency.  Did you receive any report 
from Mr Frank Chikane? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No these – actually these are 
operational matters between the DG – the DG’s and people at that 
10 
level, we don’t deal with those matters really they don’t have to be 
reported to the President.  Chair whilst he’s reading, could I 
go…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:  An adjournment? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  For a minute. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well we are at ten to four, we normally stop at four, 
maybe we should stop now and then proceed tomorrow, I think that 
would be more convenient. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We will adjourn now and resume tomorrow, thank you 
20 
very much. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 16 JULY 2019 
 
 
