 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
16 APRIL 2019 
 
 
 
DAY 84 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 2 of 136 
 
PROCEEDINGS HELD ON 16 APRIL 2019  
CHAIRPERSON:  Good Morning Mr Pretorius, good morning everybody.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  I am going to deliver my decision in the 
application brought by Mr Moyane for leave to cross -examine Mr 
Gordhan.  It will not be immediately or a typed version will not be 
immediately available but it will be available in the n ext few days.  So – 
but otherwise it will be subject to one qualification a full decision.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  The legal 
representatives of Mr Moyane are present and the legal representative 
10 
of Mr Gordhan have asked to be excus ed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  May I be seat during… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you may be seated thank you.  This is an 
application brought by Mr Thomas Swabihi Moyane for leave to cross -
examine Mr P J Gordhan the Minister of Public En terprises who 
submitted a statement in this commission last year and subsequently 
gave evidence.  I shall refer to Mr Moyane as the applicant.  A copy of 
Mr Gordhan’s statement was sent to the applicant by the secretary of 
the commission in accordance with  Rule 3.3 of the Rules of this 
20 
commission.  A notice contemplated in Rule 3.3 was also sent to the 
applicant.  In support of his application the applicant delivered a 
founding affidavit with extensive annexures as well as a supplementary 
affidavit also with annexures.  Mr Gordhan opposes the applicant’s 
application in support of his opposition.  Mr Gordhan delivered an 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 3 of 136 
 
opposing affidavit with extensive annexures as well.  Thereafter the 
applicant delivered a short replying affidavit with annexures. In due 
course the applicant’s counsel and Mr Gordhan’s counsel delivered 
written submissions on the applicant’s application for leave to cross -
examine and Mr Gordhan’s opposition thereof.  I subsequently had oral 
argument presented by counsel for the applicant Mr Mpofu SC counsel 
for Mr Gordhan Ms Le Roux and some limited comments by the head of 
the commission’s legal team Mr Pretorius SC.  I am indebted to all 
counsel for their written and oral argument.  After hearing argument I 
reserved my decision and indicated  that I would announce it due 
10 
course.  Subject to one qualification that I will deal with later this is my 
decision.  In order to proper consider the applicant’s application it is 
necessary to first refer to the legal framework within which an 
application for leave to cross-examine a witness before this commission 
must be evaluated in order to decide whether leave should be granted 
or refused.   
The legal Framework  
This commission was appointed in terms of Section 84 of The 
Constitution.  The Commissions Ac t has been made applicable to it.  
Certain regulations have been promulgated that apply to it.  Neither the 
20 
Constitution nor the Commissions Act contains any express provision 
relating to the cross -examination of witnesses by anybody adversely 
affected by any statements or evidence of a witness in a judicial 
commission of inquiry such as this one.  However Regulation 83 of the 
Regulations applicable to this commission provides and I quote:  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 4 of 136 
 
“Any witness appearing before the commission may 
be 
cross-examined 
by 
a 
person 
only 
if 
the 
Chairperson permits such cross -examination should 
he deem it necessary and in the best interest of the 
function of the commission.”  
Regulation 15 reads: 
“The 
commission 
may 
– 
the 
commission 
may 
determine its own procedures.”  
Pursuant to Regulation 15 the commission has determined its own 
rules.  Rule 3.1 of the rules of this commission provides in effect that 
10 
as a general rule the commission’s legal team bears the overall 
responsibility to present the evidence of witnesses to the comm ission.  
This is subject to anything to the contrary contained in the rules or 
subject to the Chairperson’s directions in regard to any specific 
witness. 
Rule 3.3 sets out what the commission’s legal team is required to do if 
the commission is in possession of a statement by witness who is to 
give evidence before the commission when his or her evidence 
implicates or may implicate another person.  
Rule 3.3 reads and I quote: 
20 
“If the commission’s legal team intends to present to 
the commission a witness whose evidence implicates 
or may implicate another person it must through the 
secretary of the commission notify that person 
[implicated person] in writing within a reasonable 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 5 of 136 
 
time before the witness gives evidence.  
3.3.1.  That he or she is or may be implicated  by the 
witness’ evidence. 
3.3.2   In what way he or she is or may be implicated 
and furnish him or her with the witness’ statement or 
relevant portions of the statement.  
3.3.3   Of the date when and the venue where the 
witness will give evidence – will give the evidence. 
3.3.4   That he or she may attend the hearing at 
which the witness gives evidence. 
10 
3.3.5   That he or she may be assisted by a legal 
representative when the witness gives evidence.  
3.3.6   That if he or she wishes  
3.3.6.1   To give evidence himself or herself. 
3.3.6.2   To call any witness to give evidence on his 
or her behalf or 
3 3.6.3   To cross-examine the witness he or she 
must within two weeks from the date of notice apply 
in writing to the commission for leave to do so and  
3.3.7   That the Chairperson will decide the 
20 
application” 
I shall refer to the procedures set out in the provisions of this rule as 
the Rule 3.3 procedure. 
It will be seen from the introductory part of Rule 3.3 that the Rule 3.3 
procedure only applies and I quote:  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 6 of 136 
 
“If the commission’s legal team intends to present to 
the commission a witness whose evidence implicates 
or may implicate another person.”  
This means that the Rule 3.3 procedure does not 
apply if the evidence of the witness proposed to be 
presented to the commission does not or will not 
implicate the person who seeks leave to cross -
examine the witness.”  
The purpose of the phrase and I quote:  
“Evidence that may implicate another person”  
10 
In the introductory part of Rule 3.3 is to ensure that where the 
commission’s legal team is not certain whether the evidence of a 
witness implicates a particular person but think that it is arguable that 
it does they send a Rule 3.3 Notice to that person and leave it to him or 
her to take a view whether or not he or she is im plicated or will be 
implicated by the witness’ evidence.  In both cases the commission’s 
legal team will be obliged to send the affected person a Rule 3.3 
Notice. 
Once a person has received a Rule 3.3 Notice he or she must take his 
or her own view whether he or she is implicated and if so what steps he 
20 
or she wants to take. 
Rule 3.3.6 makes provision for a person who for example seeks to 
cross-examine such a witness to apply to the commission for leave to 
do so.  If the person concerned does not wish to cro ss-examine the 
witness he or she is not obliged to do anything.  However even where a 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 7 of 136 
 
person has taken the view that he or she is not implicated or has not 
done anything pursuant to the receipt of a Rule 3.3 Notice the 
Chairperson of the commission still has power under both Regulation 
10 10.6 as well as under Rule 3.10.  Should he choose to do so to 
direct such a person to respond to allegations made against him or her.  
In terms of Regulation 10.6 the Chairperson may issue a directive 
directing or requiring any person to depose to an affidavit and deal with 
certain issues or directing the person to appear before the commission 
and be questioned on matters falling within the terms of reference of 
the commission. 
10 
Rule 3.3.6 provides that the Rule 3.3 Notice must notify the implicated 
person that if he or she wishes to cross -examine the witness he or she 
must within two weeks from the date of the notice apply in writing to the 
commission for leave to do so.  Once the secretary of the commission 
has received an application for leave to cross-examine he or she must 
place the application before the Chairperson and give a copy thereof to 
the commission’s legal team.  The Chairperson may then issue 
directions as to the future conduct of the application including giv ing 
the witness the opportunity to oppose the application by delivering an 
answering affidavit. 
20 
The first important point to make in regard to an application for leave to 
cross-examine a witness is that it must be made by a person who is or 
may be implicated in the witness statement or evidence.  In other words 
he or she must be able to state that he or she is implicated by the 
witness concerned in his or her statement.  If a person is not implicated 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 8 of 136 
 
or cannot be said to be implicated in a witness statement  or in the 
witness’ evidence he or she is disqualified from making an application 
for leave to cross -examine. 
Furthermore an applicant for leave to cross -examine must identify 
those parts of a witness statement which he is she says implicate him 
or her.  He or she may disagree with the contents of a Rule 3.3 Notice 
in the sense that while such a notice may state or suggest that he or 
she is or may be implicated in the witness statement or evidence or is 
or may be implicated by a certain part or parts of a w itness statement 
he may take the view that he is not implicated as suggested or at all.  
10 
Rule 3.4 is the rule that governs the submission of an application for 
leave to cross-examine and its’ content.  The Rule reads and I quote:  
“An application in terms of Rule 3.3.6 above must be 
submitted 
in 
writing 
to 
the 
secretary 
of 
the 
commission within fourteen calendar days from the 
date of the notice referred to in Rule 3.3.  The 
application must be accompanied by a statement 
from the implicated person responding to the 
witness’ statement insofar as it implicates him or her.  
The statement must make it clear what parts of the 
20 
witness statement are disputed or denied and the 
grounds upon which those parts are disputed or 
denied.” 
The second sentence of Rule 3.4 oblig es an applicant for leave to 
cross-examine to make sure that his or her application is and I quote:  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 9 of 136 
 
“Accompanied by a statement from the implicated 
person responding to the witness statement insofar 
as it implicates him or her.”  
The word ‘from’ in the second sentence of Rule 3.4 must be read as 
meaning by: 
“With the result that the statement that is said to be 
a statement from an implicated person is a statement 
by the implicated person.”  
The part of Rule 3.4 which reads and I quote:  
“Responding to the witness statement insofar as it 
10 
implicates him or her.”  
Qualifies the implicated person’s statement that must accompany the 
application for leave to cross-examine. 
That part of the first sentence of Rule 3.4 referred to in the preceding 
paragraph must be read with the last sentence of Rule 3.4.  The third 
and last sentence of Rule 3.4 reads and I quote:  
“The statement must make it clear that is the 
statement by the implicated person – must make it 
clear what parts of the witness statement are 
disputed or denied and the grounds upon which those 
20 
parts are disputed or denied.”  
This sentence requires the implicated person’s statement to make it 
clear what parts of the witness’ statement are denied or disputed and 
the grounds upon which those parts are disputed or de nied. 
The purpose of the second and the third sentences of Rule 3.4 is to 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 10 of 136 
 
ensure that an implicated person does not simply provide a bare denial 
to a witness’ statement that implicates him or her or to a part of a 
witness’ statement that implicates him or her. 
Read together these two sentences require or oblige an implicated 
person to do three things namely: 
a. Identify the parts of the witness’ statement that he or she 
accepts implicate him or her. 
b. Respond to the parts of the witness’ statement that implicate  him 
or her by stating whether he or she admits or denies them and 
setting out his or her version in regard to the incident or event or 
10 
allegation and 
c. Ensure that his or her response or statement or affidavit provides 
the basis or grounds upon which he or she disputes or denies the 
version or allegation or evidence implicating him or her as 
reflected in the witness’ statement or evidence.  
It should be clear from the above that part of the idea behind Rule 3.4 
is that the Chairperson who must decide the appl ication for leave to 
cross-examine is fully apprised of what is common cause between the 
respective versions of the witness and the implicated person or persons 
and where the areas of divergence between them are.  
20 
This enables the Chairperson to have a full picture of the position when 
he considers the application for leave to cross -examine so that he can 
take into account the extent of the divergence in the two persons 
versions in determining how much time will be appropriate to allocate 
for the cross-examination should he grant leave to cross -examine. 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 11 of 136 
 
If cross-examination is granted it takes place within the context of the 
witness’ version as well as the version of the implicated person and the 
grounds or basis upon which the witness statement is or certain  parts 
of the statement are denied or disputed insofar as the statement 
implicates the applicant for leave to cross -examine. 
As already stated earlier Regulation 8.3 provides and I quote:  
“Any witness appearing before the commission may 
be 
cross-examined 
by 
a 
person 
only 
if 
the 
Chairperson permits such cross -examination should 
he deem it necessary and in the best interest of the 
10 
function of the commission.”  
Rule 3.7 then reads and I quote: 
“In accordance with Rule – Regulation 8.3 there is no 
right 
to 
cross-examine 
a 
witness 
before 
the 
commission but the Chairperson may permit cross -
examination should he deem it necessary and in the 
best interest of the work of the commission to do so.”  
And Rule 3.6 reads: 
“In deciding an application contemplated in Rule 
3.3.6 the Chairperson may in his discretion and on 
20 
such 
terms 
and 
conditions 
as 
he 
may deem 
appropriate grant leave to an implicated person to 
and then see cross-examine the witness implicating 
him or her.” 
Rule 3.7 basically says the same thing as Regulation  8.3.  What 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 12 of 136 
 
Regulation 8.8.3 and Rule 3.7 mean is that in determining whether an 
application for leave to cross-examine should be granted the 
Chairperson must ask the question whether and I quote:  
“It is necessary and in the best interest of the 
function or work of the commission to”  
Grant the applicant leave to cross-examine the particular witness whom 
he or she wishes to cross examine.  If the Chairperson takes the view 
that it is he grants leave.  If he takes the view that it is not he does 
grant leave.  Therefore the test for determining the merits of an 
application for leave to cross-examine is whether it is necessary and in 
10 
the best interest of the function of the commission for the Chairperson 
to grant leave.   
It can be seen from the above discussion of the Rules of the 
commission that the first requirement that an applicant for leave to 
cross-examine must satisfy is that the – is that the statement or 
evidence of the witness whom he or she wishes to cross -examine 
implicates him or her.  If he or she  fails to show this his or her 
application is defective and may be dismissed or will be dismissed.  
If an applicant for leave to cross-examine succeeds in showing that he 
or she is implicated in the statement or evidence of the witness then he 
20 
or she must state in accordance with the second and third sentences or 
Rule 3.4 what he or she admits in the witness statement or evidence 
and what he or she denies or disputes set out his or her full version of 
the incident or to the allegation and state what the grou nds are for 
denying or disputing the witness statement or part or parts thereof.  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 13 of 136 
 
He or she must then show that it would be necessary and in the best 
interest of the function of the commission for the Chairperson to grant 
him or her leave to cross-examine the particular witness.   
If he or she succeeds in showing all this the Chairperson grants him 
leave or may grant him leave to cross -examine the witness if he or she 
fails the Chairperson will or may dismiss the application.  
Rule 3.6 makes it clear that in deciding an application for leave to 
cross-examine the Chairperson exercises a discretion.  That discretion 
must be exercised judiciously with due regard to all relevant 
circumstances. 
10 
From the above analysis of the provisions of Regulation 8.3 and various  
rules of the commission what emerges is that some of the important 
requirements that a person who applies for leave to cross -examine a 
witness before this commission must satisfy that must deal with is that 
there is no right to cross-examination but the C hairperson may grant 
leave to cross-examine in certain circumstances.  
The witness implicates the applicant for leave to cross -examine.  The 
applicant must clearly identify the part or parts of the witness 
statement evidence which implicate or implicates hi m or her. 
The applicant for leave to cross-examine must state whether he admits 
20 
or denies or disputes the witness allegations or evidence  that implicate 
or implicates him or her and he or she must set out his or her version 
in relation to any allegation or evidence by the witness or in relation to 
each incident and the grounds upon which he or she denies or disputes 
or qualifies the allegation made or evidence given by the witness.  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 14 of 136 
 
 
The Chairperson exercise that discretion in granting or 
refusing an application for leave to cross-examine.  In determining 
whether to grant or refuse an application for leave to cross -examine the 
Chairperson considers the test to which reference has been made 
above. 
 
In principle – a principle that is not expressly articulated o r 
covered by the rules but is of obvious application is that an applicant 
for leave to cross -examine must take the commission into his or her 
confidence and disclose his or her true and full version in regard to any 
allegation made or evidence given by the  witness that implicates him or 
10 
her. 
 
Obviously an applicant for leave to cross -examine or fails to 
take the commission into his or her confidence and disclose his true 
version of matters risks having that factor taking into account against 
him or her in the Chairperson considering the application for leave to 
cross-examine. 
 
Despite the fact that the applicant’s affidavits were deposed to 
in support of an application for leave to cross -examine they reflect the 
applicant’s attitude as being that he has a ri ght to cross-examine Mr 
Gordhan.   
20 
 
This position is also reflected in the applicant’s counsel’s 
written submissions. However to his credit when Mr Mpofu SC who 
appeared for the applicant as I have indicated presented his oral 
argument on behalf of the applicant he quite correctly made it clear 
that he accepted that in this commission the applicant has no right to 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 15 of 136 
 
cross-examine but has to apply for leave to cross -examine and will only 
have that right if the Chairperson grants him leave to cross -examine. 
Mr Mpofu also accepted that the applicant is required to also give his 
version in regard to matters in which he is implicated in Mr Gordhan’s 
statement or evidence. 
 
It is now necessary to consider or to apply the requirements 
that I have discussed above to the application before me.  In applying 
the rules as discussed above to the applicant’s application and Mr 
Gordhan’s opposition of that application the first issue for the applicant 
is whether as required by Rule 3.3 the applicant has shown that he is 
10 
implicated in Mr Gordhan’s statement or evidence.  
 
In respect of many issues in his founding affidavit where the 
applicant articulates issues in respect of which he seeks leave to 
cross-examine Mr Gordhan the applicant has not shown that he has 
implicated Mr Gordhan’s statement or evidence. 
 
However there are a few areas in his founding affidavit in 
which it is shown that he is implicated in Mr  Gordhan’s statement or 
evidence.  I shall deal with these in due course.  I have also made the 
point that Rule 3.3 requires from an applicant for leave to 
cross-examine a statement responding to the witness statement insofar 
20 
as it implicates him or her. 
 
This means that an applicant for leave to cross -examine must 
respond to those parts of the witness’ statement which impl icate him or 
her.  The applicant’s statement in this case does not at all respond to 
certain important parts of Mr  Gordhan’s statement which implicates him 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 16 of 136 
 
or does not respond adequately to some parts of Mr  Gordhan’s 
statement or evidence. 
 
One example of this relates to paragraphs 127.2 to 127.4 of 
Mr Gordhan’s statement where Mr  Gordhan implicates the applicant of 
blatant refusal: 
“To account to him as Minister of Finance on 
material issues (such as the operating model of 
SARS)”. 
 
Mr Gordhan accuses the applicant of even refusing to 
acknowledge his authority and Mr  Gordhan suggests that this conduct 
10 
on the applicant’s part appeared to have been part of a campaign 
aimed at forcing him to resign as Minister of Finance.  He says the 
applicant made serious allegations against him and continued to refuse 
to accept that he was accountable and answerable to him as Minister of 
Finance. 
 
The applicant - as I have indicated – does not respond to 
these allegations in Mr  Gordhan’s statement and put his, his version.  
Furthermore I have also stated that Rule 3.4 requires the statement of 
an applicant for leave to cross-examine to make it clear which parts of 
the witness’ statement are disputed or denied and the grounds upon 
20 
which those parts are disputed or denied.  
 
Because the applicant’s affidavit in this case do not identify 
or do not clearly identify the parts of Mr  Gordhan’s statement that are 
denied or disputed it cannot be said that it complies with that part of 
Rule 3.4 that requires that an applicant’s statement makes it clear what 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 17 of 136 
 
parts of a witness statement are disputed or denied.  One struggles to 
see which parts of Mr  Gordhan’s statement the applicant admits or 
disputes. 
 
The applicant’s statement should have made this quite clear.  
Rule 3.4 obliges an applic ant for leave to cross-examine.  To also give 
his version in regard to allegations made by a witness on regard to 
evidence given by a witness.  It will also have been clear from the 
discussion of Regulation 8.3 and Rule 3.7 that an applicant for leave to 
cross-examine is required to show that it is necessary and in the best 
interest of the function or work of a Commission that he or she be 
10 
granted leave to cross-examine. 
 
Neither in his founding affidavit nor in his supplementary 
affidavit did the applicant deal with the issue of why it can be said that 
granting him leave to cross-examine Mr Gordhan is necessary and in 
the best interest of the function of the Commission.  I have read his 
affidavits carefully and I am satisfied that he does not address this 
important issue. 
 
As an applicant for leave to cross-examine he should have 
addressed the question of why I should conclude that it is necessary 
and in the best interest of the function of the Commission that he be 
20 
granted leave to cross -examine Mr Gordhan.  By contrast in his 
opposing affidavit Mr  Gordhan specifically contended that the first 
reason why he opposes the applicant’s application is that it and I 
quote: 
“Fails to comply with requirements of Rules 3.4 and 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 18 of 136 
 
3.7.” 
 
Of the Commission’s Rules.  Both R ule 3.4 and Rule 3.7 have 
been quoted above.  Rule 3.4 is the rule that among other things 
requires an applicant for cross-examination or rather - excuse me - an 
application for cross-examination to be accompanied by the applicant’s 
or implicated persons and I quote: 
“Statement responding to the witness statement 
insofar as it implicates him or her.”  
And that such statement by the applicant or implicated person:  
“Must make it clear what parts of the witness 
10 
statement are disputed or denied and the grounds 
upon which those parts are disputed or denied.”  
 
Rule 3.7 is the rule that effectively regularise Regulation 8.3 
and is to the effect that in this Commission there is no right to cross -
examine by the Chairperson: 
“May permit cross -examination should he deem it 
necessary and in the best interest of the work of 
the Commission to do so.”  
 
Rules 3.4 and 3.7 are therefore together with Regulation 8.3 
at the heart of the consideration of an application for leave to cross -
20 
examine a witness before this Commission.  In support of his 
contention that the applicant’s application fails to comply with Rules 
3.3 and 3.7 Mr Gordhan said in his affidavit and I quote 6.1:  
“Contrary to those requirements the application 
fails to make it clear what parts of the witness 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 19 of 136 
 
statement are disputed or denied and the grounds 
upon which those parts are disputed or denied.”  
6.2: 
“Nor does it establish that cross-examination is necessary 
and in the best interest of the work of the Commission to do 
so.” 
6.3: 
“This defect is a basis to dismiss the application in 
its entirety.” 
 
Mr Gordhan also pointed out that he was advised that the 
10 
purpose of cross-examination would be to test his evidence against an 
alternative set of facts provided by the applicant, but said Mr  Gordhan 
the applicant did not put up any alternative set of facts or any evidence 
contradicting his evidence.  Mr  Gordhan stated in his opposing affidavit 
that in his evidence before this Commission he had testified about the 
applicant in three respects. 
 
He said that:  A, he expres sed his concerns about the 
applicant’s appointment and the applicant’s resistance to his executive 
oversight when he was the Minister of Finance to whom the applicant 
was accountable.  B, he provided evidence to the Commission 
20 
regarding the apparent irregularity of a contract approved by the 
applicant in terms of which New Integrated Credit Solutions (NICS) was 
appointed as a debt collector at SARS and:  
“The 
applicant’s 
misleading 
statements 
to 
Parliament regarding his involvement.”  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 20 of 136 
 
 
C, he testified about the campaign against him when he was 
reappointed as Minister of Finance that included the launching and 
subsequent withdrawal of criminal charges against him arising from a 
docket opened by the applicant.  He said I testified regarding its impact 
on me personally.  After setting out the above three issues as the only 
issues that related to the applicant that he testified about in this 
Commission Mr Gordhan made the point - in the next paragraph - that 
the applicant has no placed a complete and factual versio n before the 
Commission with which to test any of his factual evidence through 
cross-examination. 
10 
 
He said that the applicant’s disagreement with his personal 
impressions 
and 
experience 
does 
not 
assist 
the 
Commission.  
Mr Gordhan thereafter pointed out in his opposing affidavit that and I 
quote: 
“All three of the issues identified above regarding 
which 
I 
testified 
have 
been 
confirmed 
by 
Justice Nugent in the work of the Commission of 
Inquiry into tax administration and governance by 
SARS (Nugent Commission) .” 
Mr Gordhan went on to say and I quote:  
20 
“As set out below that Judicial Commission has 
investigated, considered and made several findings 
that render this application by the applicant 
redundant.” 
 
In his replying affidavit the applicant does not deny or 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 21 of 136 
 
dispute Mr Gordhan’s assertions that the three respects in which he 
says he testified about him in this Commission are the only respects in 
which he testified about him nor does he deny or dispute Mr  Gordhan’s 
evidence that and I quote: 
“All three of the issues identified have been 
confirmed by Justice Nugent in the work.”  
 
Of the Commission he chaired.  The applicant also does not 
deny Mr Gordhan’s assertion that the Nugent Commission:  
“…investigated, 
considered 
and 
made 
several 
findings…” 
10 
About those three issues.  Before I deal with what the applicant says in 
his replying affidavit let me make one point that is that after 
Mr Gordhan had delivered and served his opposing affidavit the 
applicant had an opportunity to meaningfully and directly respond to 
Mr Gordhan’s opposing affidavit.  However in his replying affidavit the 
applicant said in part and I quote:  
“I do not propose to deal with the allegations 
contained in the opposing affidavit ad seriatim due 
to the nature of my responses which are thematic 
and cut across the gist of such opposition.  Any 
20 
allegations which are not specifically addressed but 
which are in consistent with the version contained 
in this, the founding and supplementary affidavits 
including annexures thereto must be regarded as 
having been specifically denied and disputed.”  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 22 of 136 
 
 
There are three points to be made in connection with this 
passage from the applicant’s replying affidavit.  The first is that the 
applicant says that he will not respond to all the allegations made in 
Mr Gordhan’s affidavit ad seriatim because his responses are thematic 
and cut across the gist of Mr  Gordhan’s opposition.  The danger with 
this approach adapted by the applicant is that there may be material 
parts in Mr Gordhan’s affidavit in evidence to which he may en d up not 
responding which may therefore stand as undisputed or uncontroverted.  
 
The second point is that where Mr Gordhan’s affidavit 
contains a version on a certain issue and that version is inconsistent 
10 
with the applicant’s affidavits and the applicant r elies simply on the 
second sentence in the passage quoted above to say that he denies or 
disputes Mr Gordhan’s allegation or evidence.  His denial will be 
nothing more than a bear denial of what Mr  Gordhan may have said in 
his opposing affidavit. 
 
That will not assist the applicant’s application for leave to 
cross-examine.  The third point is that there may be parts of 
Mr Gordhan’s affidavit and evidence which might not be said to be 
inconsistent with any of the contents of the applicant’s affidavits.  In 
such a case the fact of the last sentence in the passage quoted above 
20 
would be that such evidence is not denied or disputed because the 
sentence only says that what is inconsistent with – what is denied or 
disputed, what will be denied or disputed or must b e regarded as 
denied or disputed is what is inconsistent with the applicant’s affidavits 
and annexures. 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 23 of 136 
 
 
The applicant does not dispute or deny any explanations that 
Mr Gordhan may have given in his opposing affidavit in respect of what 
he may have said in his statement or evidence.  In his replying affidavit 
the applicant attacked Mr  Gordhan’s reliance on the findings of the 
SARS Commission on the basis that they are irrelevant opinions.  
However he failed to substantiate this contention.  
 
All he said was that they are hit by at least three 
exclusionary rules relating to opinion evidence but he did not say what 
those three rules are.  He then set out some of his complaints about 
the SARS Commission which included that:  A, the SARS Commission 
10 
had its own terms of reference.  B, he was allegedly denied the right to 
participate in the SARS Commission.  
 
C, he will shortly be setting down Part B of his challenge to 
the SARS Commission’s Report seeking relief to review and set it aside 
and mentioned some of his intended grounds of review.  I am unable to 
agree with the applicant’s contention that findings made by the SARS 
Commission in respect of issues on which he requested leave to 
cross-examine Mr Gordhan are irrelevant. 
 
He himself fails to say why such findin gs are irrelevant other 
than to say that the SARS Commission had its own terms of reference.  
20 
Although the SARS Commission had different terms of reference they 
may have made findings of fact that relate to some of the allegations or 
facts on which the applicant seeks leave to cross-examine Mr Gordhan.  
Obviously its findings are not and cannot be binding on me.  
 
However I must have due regard to them when among others 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 24 of 136 
 
I consider whether it is necessary and in the best interest of the 
function 
of 
the 
Commission 
to 
grant 
the 
applicant 
leave 
to 
cross-examine on an issue that has been considered by the SARS 
Commission and in respect of which that Commission has made a 
finding. 
 
The applicant points out that his application was prompted by 
a Rule 3.3 Notice that he received from the Secretary of the 
Commission.  He says that that notice stated that Mr  Gordhan had 
submitted to the Commission a statement that implicated him in 
wrongdoing and pointed out two respects in which it said Mr  Gordhan 
10 
implicated him. 
 
In his founding affidavit the applicant states that the one 
respect in which the Rule 3.3 Notice said Mr  Gordhan implicated him 
was in his statement.  He quoted that part as well as the other respect 
in which the Rule 3.3 Notice suggested that Mr  Gordhan had implicated 
him.  The applicant put it in these terms and I quote, 5.1:  
“My alleged participation in the awarding of the 
contract or tender to new integrated credit solutions 
a 
company 
owned 
by 
my 
alleged 
friend 
Mr Patrick Monyeki.” 
20 
And 5.2: 
“My alleged refusal to account to Minister  Gordhan 
as Minister of Finance on material issues, a 
deteriorating relationship between the two of us 
alleged ongoing personal and institutional attacks 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 25 of 136 
 
by 
me 
and 
Minister Gordhan 
and 
related 
relationship issues.”  
 
The applicant set this out in paragraph 5 of his founding 
affidavit.  I deal later with these two respects in which the Rule 3.3 
Notice said Mr Gordhan had implicated the applicant.  A proper reading 
of the applicant’s paragraph 6 of his founding affidavit reflects that  the 
applicant makes the point that a cursory reading of Minister  Gordhan’s 
statement submitted to this Commission reveals that the issues that 
Mr Gordhan raised in his statement which directly or indirectly affected 
him - that is the applicant – included the following and I quote, 6.1: 
10 
“The role played by Minister  Gordhan as Minister of 
Finance to assist or oppose perceived state 
capture.” 
6.2: 
“Minister Gordhan’s request for my removal.”  
6.3: 
“His complaints about the manner in which I was 
employed.” 
6.4: 
“His belief that I was responsible for the charges 
20 
against him and others of the alleged rogue unit.”  
6.5: 
“The lawfulness or otherwise of the rogue unit and 
if it existed Minister  Gordhan’s role in it.”  
6.6: 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 26 of 136 
 
“My allegation of racism and disrespect toward s me 
by Minister Gordhan.” 
6.7: 
“His conduct and abuse of power related to his 
return to the Ministry of Finance in 2015 and more 
recently the victory of President Cyril Ramaphosa 
at the ANC Conference.  This is coupled with a 
personal 
vendetta 
and 
campaig n 
driven 
by 
Minister Gordhan to influence President Ramaphosa 
to 
complete 
Minister  Gordhan’s 
dream 
of 
my 
10 
removal as Commissioner of the South African 
Revenue Service (SARS) for the sake of revenge 
and misplaced hatred towards me.”  
 
For convenience I shall refer to the issues listed under 
paragraph 6 of the applicant’s founding affidavit as the paragraph 6 
issues.  In paragraph 7 the applicant lists seven “additional issues” 
which he says and I quote: 
“Are related to [the paragraph 6 issues] but are not 
directly raised in the papers.”  
 
I shall refer to the issues he lists in paragraph 7 as the 
20 
paragraph 7 issues.  Paragraph 7 reads and I quote:  
“Seven additional issues which are related to the 
above but are not directly raised in the papers 
include.” 
7.1: 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 27 of 136 
 
“Mr Gordhan’s narrative that when it comes to state 
capture there is a line between the devils (led by 
former President Zuma) and the angels of which he 
counts himself as one.”  
7.2: 
“Related 
to 
the 
above 
Minister Gordhan’s 
misleading of Parliament about his r elationship with 
the Guptas which is similar to that of other self-
styled angels such as former Minister  Nene.” 
7.3: 
10 
“Minister Gordhan’s role in rogue unit saga.”  
7.4: 
“Minister Gordhan’s improper leading role in my 
disciplinary inquiry.”  
7.5: 
“Minister Gordhan’s improper role in the Nugent 
Inquiry including his holding of an improper and 
undisclosed 
meeting 
with 
the 
Commissioner, 
Judge Robert Nugent and the legal implications 
thereof.” 
20 
7.6: 
“Minister (or Commissioner) Gordhan’s track record 
of mismanagement, lawlessness and flagrant breach 
of procurement rules which I confronted with at 
SARS.” 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 28 of 136 
 
7.7: 
“Reports of the above of one of my predecessors 
Mr Oupa Magashula by Minister  Gordhan and his 
rogue unit and the views of the current Acting 
Commissioner thereon.” 
 
In the first sentence of paragraph 8 of his founding affidavit 
the applicant states and I quote: 
“The above make seven topics for intended cross -
examination.” 
 
It is not immediately clear whether the reference to and I 
10 
quote “above” in the first senten ce of paragraph 8 of the applicants 
founding affidavit is a reference to the paragraph 6 issues or a 
reference to the paragraph 7 issues because under both seven issues 
are listed.  However it would seem that the applicant must have 
intended to refer to th e paragraph 6 issues because he said that those 
were raised by Mr Gordhan in his statement whereas he said the 
paragraph 7 issues were not “directly raised in the papers” or 
accordingly this matter must be approached on the footing that the 
issues or matters in respect of which the applicant seeks leave to 
cross-examine Mr Gordhan are the paragraph 6 issues.  
20 
 
If I am correct that the reference to the seven topics in the 
first sentence of paragraph 8 is reference to the paragraph 6 issues 
then the first sentence of paragraph 8 of the applicant’s founding 
affidavit must be understood to mean that those are the seven topics 
for the applicant’s “intended cross -examination”.  However the 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 29 of 136 
 
applicant goes on to say in paragraph 8 that these seven topics:  
“Can be reduced to five broad cross-examination 
themes”. 
He lists those things as follows and I quote, 8.1:  
“The general credibility and general attitude of 
Minister Gordhan characterised by a propensity to 
distort and spin the facts.”  
8.2: 
“Bias hostility and vindic tiveness as guiding attitude 
of the relation between the two of us leaving no 
10 
room 
for 
professionalism, 
objectivity 
and 
impartiality in our mutual dealings.  This calls for 
any evidence given by Gordhan about me in any 
ongoing forum including this one to need to be 
taken with more than the proverbial pinch of salt.”  
8.3: 
“The distortion of the evidence in order to support 
the false narrative of devils and angels and 
specifically my alleged breach of procurement 
procedures.” 
20 
8.4: 
“Racism 
and 
other 
unbecoming  
behaviour 
by 
Minister Gordhan 
towards 
me 
symbolises 
regrettable behaviour which has no place in the 
nation we are all trying to build and which there is 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 30 of 136 
 
no place for looking down upon African people.  The 
deep role of Minister  Gordhan in the rogue unit 
saga also referred to a Sunday Evening Project 
which was a form of state capture.”  
 
It seems to me that the applicant’s case is that he seeks leave 
to cross-examine Mr Gordhan on the paragraph 6 issues using the 
cross-examination themes which he sets out in paragraph 8 of his 
founding affidavit.  After outlining in paragraph 8 what he calls his 
cross-examination themes the applicant says in paragraph 9 and I 
quote: 
10 
“The rest of this affidavit will briefly outline my 
submissions herein organised along the line s of the 
above mentioned five cross -examination themes or 
headings and in respect of which my version will be 
outlined and the relevant supporting documents 
where applicable will be identified and annexed.”  
 
Paragraph 9 seems to emphasise that if one wants  to consider 
the basis of the applicant’s application the proper place to look at is 
not after paragraph 8 except for what the applicant indicates are his 
versions.  Paragraph 10 of the applicant’s founding affidavit seems 
20 
contains a request about the amou nt of time that the Commission or the 
Chairperson should allow for cross -examination should he grant 
cross-examination or leave to cross-examine. 
 
It is important to point out that from paragraph 1 to paragraph 
9 of the applicant’s founding affidavit the a pplicant does not anywhere 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 31 of 136 
 
draw attention to any allegation made by Mr Gordhan that implicates 
him in any wrongdoing.  The closest to which he comes is in paragraph 
6.3 and paragraph 6.4.  In paragraph 6.3 the applicant suggest that Mr 
Gordhan had “complaints about the manner in which he was employed”.  
That does not say that Mr Gordhan implicated him in any wrongdoing in 
regard to his appointment.   
 
In paragraph 6.4 the applicant refers to “Mr Gordhan’s belief 
that he was responsible for the charges again st Mr Gordhan and others 
of the alleged Rogue Unit”.  On its own this does not amount to Mr 
Gordhan implicating the applicant in any wrongdoing.  In any event the 
10 
applicant has admitted in his affidavit that he laid a complaint with the 
Police which led to Mr Gordhan and others being criminally charged.  
 
Other than this none of the paragraph 6 issues refer to any 
statement or refers to any statement by Mr Gordhan that can be said to 
have implicated the applicant in any wrongdoing.   
 
When one goes to the paragraph 7 issues there to what the 
applicant does is to list his own allegations or complaints or 
accusations of alleged improper conduct by Mr Gordhan.  They are not 
instances or areas in Mr Gordhan’s affidavit where he implicates the 
applicant.  By the applicant’s own admission the paragraph 6 issues are 
20 
not directly raised in Mr Gordhan’s statement.  Therefore he cannot 
apply for leave to cross-examine Mr Gordhan on issues that are not 
raised in Mr Gordhan’s statement or in Mr Gordhan’s evidence.  
 
I have already referred to paragraph 8 of the applicant’s 
founding affidavit which contains what the applicant calls five broad 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 32 of 136 
 
cross-examination themes.  In paragraph 11 of his founding affidavit 
the applicant states that he is proceeding:  
“to outline issues to be raised by him as (his version) in 
respect of each of the broad themes identified above”.   
 
The so-called cross-examination themes start from paragraph 
11 and go up to paragraph 30.7 of the founding affidavit.  The balance 
of the founding affidavit is  then taken up by a condonation application, 
subject to what is contained in the applicant’s supplementary affidavit 
with which I shall deal shortly, the applicant’s case on whether or not 
he should be granted leave to cross-examine Mr Gordhan is based on 
10 
paragraphs 5 to 30.6 of his founding affidavit.  I have dealt with all the 
above paragraphs except that I have not dealt with the contents of 
paragraphs 11 to 30.6.  These paragraphs relate to the so -called cross-
examination themes.  I deal with them one b y one. 
 
Cross-examination theme one, that is general credibility.  
Under this theme the applicant does not state what Mr Gordhan said 
about him in his statement or evidence, which implicates him.  He 
simply sets out his version on certain issues.  In the f irst sentence 
under this theme the applicant states that:  
“his version is that Minister Gordhan’s affidavit is more 
20 
significant for what it omits than what it says.”  
I have examined everything that the applicant says under this theme, 
he does not anywhere state that Mr Gordhan implicated him.  
Accordingly there is no basis for him to apply for leave to cross -
examine Mr Gordhan on an issue in regard to which Mr Gordhan does 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 33 of 136 
 
not implicate him.  
 
Cross-examination theme two, that is anti-Moyane bias and 
hostility.  Under this cross -examination theme the applicant states that 
he:  
“will seek to demonstrate that the levels of acrimony, hostility, 
enmity and anger harboured by Mr Gordhan towards him as a 
person is sufficient to disqualify him as an impartial and 
dispassionate commentator on any issue in which he is 
allegedly involved.”  
Also under this cross-examination theme the applicant states:  
10 
“It will be demonstrated that Gordhan has made it his lifelong 
mission to have me removed from office by hook or by croo k.” 
He also alleges that: 
“Minister Gordhan’s meddling in [that is his disciplinary 
enquiry and the Nugent Inquiry] is in the circumstances 
improper, unlawful, unfair and in breach of the Constitution 
and the rule of law in various ways.”  
I have also examined everything said by the applicant under this theme 
in the founding affidavit.  He does not anywhere articulate anything that 
was said by Mr Gordhan that he says implicates him in any wrongdoing.   
20 
 
Cross-examination 
theme 
3, 
that 
is 
alleged 
breach 
of 
procurement procedures by the applicant [the Monyeki case].  It is only 
under this heading, or this is one of the headings where the applicant 
points out that Mr Gordhan made a direct accusation against him.  The 
applicant states that Mr Gordhan made a direc t accusation that he at: 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 34 of 136 
 
“2.1 
Improperly participated in the award of a tender to my 
 
friend Mr Patrick Monyeki; and  
2.2 
Lied to Parliament about such involvement by denying 
 
it.” 
In response to this the applicant provides a bare denial, and after 
pointing out that it is not clear where Mr Gordhan made the above 
accusations because they are not included in his affidavit, nor in his 
evidence before the Commission the applicant says:  
“In any event I deny these accusations and will put questions 
to Gordhan to demonstrate their falsity.”  
10 
He does not say whether he admits that he participated in the awarding 
of the contract but denies that his participation was improper.  He 
denies the entire allegation.   
 
In his opposing affidavit Mr Gordhan points out that he  
mentioned the Monyeki case in his evidence.  He says that he has no 
personal knowledge of the matter, but mentioned it in his evidence 
before the Commission as a suggestion that the Commission should 
consider investigating the case because there appear to  have been no 
compliance with procurement procedures.   
 
He points out that the Monyeki case has already been dealt 
20 
with by the SARS Commission of Inquiry.  He refers to passages in the 
final report of the SARS Commission, in which that Commission made a 
clear finding that the applicant participated in the award of a tender to 
a company called New Integrated Credit Solutions.  It is also stated in 
the SARS Commission Report that the applicant approved the 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 35 of 136 
 
appointment of New Integrated Credit Solutions to th e panel of service 
providers on 17 December 2015.  It is also stated in that report that the 
applicant approved the appointment of that company to Phase 2 of the 
Project on 15 February 2018.  It is said that in each case the applicant 
did so by signing the report of the National Bid Adjudication Committee.  
 
That Commission’s report says: 
“Later on SARS ...” 
no I am sorry, the affidavit by Mr Gordhan continues and says:  
“Later on the SARS Commission this finding in its report: ‘it is 
also not true that Mr Moyane does not get involved in such 
10 
appointments.   His was the final approval for the award of the 
contract, indeed that assertion contradicts the assertion he 
made in the application to set aside the contract with LTC, the 
very foundation of which was tha t he was involved in the award 
of the contract.  In his replying affidavit he acknowledged 
expressly that he had been involved in the award of the 
contract; “as a matter of fact I was involved with the evaluation 
and adjudication of the bids.  The National  Bid Adjudication 
Committee’s process resulted in that recommendation made to 
me in my capacity as SARS Accounting Officer which 
20 
recommendation I personally signed.  I was also involved with 
the evaluation and adjudication in the sense that I am 
responsible for ensuring that all procurement occurs in 
accordance with a lawful system and in that the ultimate 
recommendations emanating from that system needed my 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 36 of 136 
 
approval.” 
The SARS Commission also made this finding:  
“So far as Mr Moyane conveyed that he had no hand in the 
appointment of New Integrated Credit Solutions that is not 
true.  It is apparent from the documents that on each of the 
occasions that New Integrated Credit Solutions was appointed 
to the panel and again appointed to Phase 2.  The National Bid 
Adjudication Committee made a recommendation to Mr Moyane 
who then approved it by appending his signature to the report.  
He cannot but have known that the NPA’s decision was not the 
10 
end of the process and cannot but have known that New 
Integrated Credit Solutions was appointed bearing in mind that 
he approved it.” 
In regard to this transaction, the award of this contract it is important 
to also point out that in his opposing affidavit Mr Gordhan referred to 
an affidavit that he said he sent to the discipli nary enquiry before which 
Mr Moyane was supposed to appear and he pointed out that in that 
affidavit, and that affidavit was attached to his affidavit as one of the 
annexures, that in that affidavit he pointed out that indeed there was 
even a transcript of what was said by Mr Moyane in Parliament in 
20 
regard to the award of this contract.  Mr Gordhan made it clear that the 
transcript indicated that Mr Moyane had denied that he had been 
involved in the award of the contract to that company and according to 
that transcript and according to Mr Gordhan Mr Moyane, the applicant, 
had admitted when he appeared before the relevant committee in 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 37 of 136 
 
Parliament that he, Mr Monyeki, of that company, was a friend of his, 
so the question that arises therefore is what it is that  the applicant said 
to Parliament about whether he was involved in the award of the 
contract.  If he said as the transcript or the affidavit by Mr Gordhan 
suggests that he had not been involved the position is that the SARS 
Commission found that in fact he  had been involved in the awarding of 
that contract.   
 
What then becomes important is the fact that in this 
Commission, in his application for leave to cross -examine Mr Gordhan 
in regard to this issue the applicant took the position that the allegation 
10 
that made as quoted by him in the paragraph that I indicated earlier on 
which is in paragraph 49 of this decision, he indicated that all those 
allegations were false, or that allegation of his involvement was false 
and the allegation that he lied in Parliame nt was false. 
 
However he did not proceed to give his full version as to what 
exactly he said in Parliament and to also state whether his version is 
that he did not take part in the award of the contract or whether he 
admits that he took part but denies that such participation was 
improper.  It seems to me that in this regard to say the least the 
applicant failed to give his version of what happened in regard to an 
20 
issue on which he seeks leave to cross -examine Mr Gordhan.  In terms 
of the rules as discusse d earlier he was obliged to give his full version 
in regard to that issue but he has failed to do so.  
 
For that reason in regard to his request for leave to cross -
examine Mr Gordhan in regard to that issue therefore his application 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 38 of 136 
 
cannot be accepted in regard to that issue.   
 
The next is cross-examination theme four, that is alleged racist 
and hateful utterances, impairment of dignity and vendetta.  This is the 
fourth cross-examination theme on which the applicant seeks leave to 
cross-examine Mr Gordhan.  Under it the applicant simply says:  
“26. 
These issues which will be treated as a discreet 
 
theme will have already been alluded to in different 
 
context above. 
27. 
Under this theme the issue will be invoked in a 
 
separate context of the constitutional obligation 
10 
 
contained in inter alia Section 96(2)(b) of the 
 
Constitution as well as Section 195 thereof.  
28. 
No new documentation will be relied on other than 
 
what 
has 
already 
been 
annexed 
[AGTM2, 
the 
 
Constitutional 
Court 
Affidavit, 
Annexure 
TMZ3] 
 
hereto.” 
The applicant does not make any effort in his discussion of this cross -
examination theme to demonstrate how it is necessary and in the best 
interests of the function of this Commission that he should be granted 
leave to cross-examine Mr Gordhan on these issues or on this theme 
20 
and that would be a reason why leave should not be granted that he 
should cross-examine Mr Gordhan in regard to that issue.   
 
The last cross-examination theme is cross-examination theme 
five, and that is about the role of the so -called Rogue Unit.  Under this 
cross-examination theme the applicant seeks leave to cross -examine 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 39 of 136 
 
Mr Gordhan on the alleged Rogue Unit, its existence and lawfulness.  
The applicant does not say under this theme what it is that Mr Gordhan 
said in his affidavit or evidence before this Commission that implicated 
him in State Capture or corruption in regard to the Unit.   
 
Interestingly the applicant states in paragraph 30.1 of his 
founding affidavit under this theme:  
“This issue plays a central role in that the existence and 
lawfulness 
of 
the 
Rogue 
Unit 
was 
repeatedly 
and 
independently exhausted.  The likes of Mr Gordhan falsely 
assert that this is not the case.  In this regard I attach a copy 
10 
of the Sekane report as Annexure TMZ4.  I will soon also 
provide a copy of KPMG report in due course.”  
The question arises if the existence and lawfulness of the alleged 
Rogue Unit have been repeatedly and independently exhausted why is 
it necessary and in the best interests of the function of the Commission 
to allow cross-examination on it.  In his opposing affidavit Mr Gordhan 
points out that the SARS Commission considered these very issues in 
regard to the unit and concluded that the unit was lawful.  It seems to 
me that the applicant has not shown that in regard to the so -called 
Rogue Unit it is necessary and in best interests of the function of the 
20 
Commission that he should be granted leave to cross -examine Mr 
Gordhan.   
 
In his supplementary affidavit the applicant indicated that he 
or his legal team had had the opportunity of studying the transcript of 
Mr Gordhan’s oral evidence.  He said that except for one issue he saw 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 40 of 136 
 
no reason to add to what he had already covered in his founding 
affidavit.  He said that the exception related to Mr Gordhan’s evidence 
regarding his laying of criminal charges relating to the so -called Rogue 
Unit against him with the Hawks on 15 May 2015.   
 
The applicant quoted what Mr Gordhan said about him having 
laid charges against him.  The applicant said:  
“About that issue Gordhan had the followin g to say.  This 
envelope contained 27 questions addressed to me from the 
Hawks demanding that they be answered by 2 March 2016.  
The questions related to the high -risk investigation unit within 
10 
SARS formed years earlier.   Charges against me relating to 
that unit had been filed by Mr Moyane on 15 May 2015.”  
After quoting this passage the applicant says I intend to cross -examine 
Mr Gordhan extensively on this issue so as to assist the Commission in 
evaluating a number of issues which the applicant sets out.  He gives a 
list of three issues, he says that these are”  
(a) 
“The actual events and evidential material which led him to 
lay charges against among others Mr Gordhan so as to 
assess whether or not there was probable cause or 
whether as implied by Mr Gordhan I was out of malice and 
20 
personal vindictiveness and the like.  
(b) 
The credibility of Mr Gordhan as a witness and whether 
anything he says including his implication of me in alleged 
State Capture can ever be taken with anything less than a 
pinch of salt. 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 41 of 136 
 
(c) 
His motives and painting himself as innocent untainted by 
State Capture and a paragon of virtue namely to conceal 
his own central role in State Capture.”  
Out of all these three issues that the applicant has set out in the 
preceding paragraph which I have just finished reading the only issue 
that has caused me some concern is one relating to the allegation that 
Mr Gordhan alleged malice on the part of the applicant in laying 
charges against him.   
 
When one reads Mr Gordhan’s founding affidavit there are 
places where one gets the impression that he may be suggesting that in 
10 
laying charges against him the applicant was part of a scheme that 
sought to capture the National Treasury, but when one reads certain 
paragraphs in the founding affidavit one may also get sometim es the 
impression that what he says in that regard might be limited to the 
Hawks who served him with 27 questions when they were under the 
leadership of General Ntlemeza.  Also when one has regard to Mr 
Gordhan’s opposing affidavit in responding to the aff idavit of the 
applicant there one sees that it appears that he might be equivocating 
with regard to whether he presses the point relating to what the motives 
of the applicant were in laying the charges, but also when one has 
20 
regard to the applicant one can  see that in paragraph 5 of his affidavit 
where he sets what I’ve called paragraph – in paragraph 6 rather not 
paragraph 5 in paragraph 6 where he sets out what I’ve called the 
paragraph issues in regard to which he sought leave to cross -examine 
Mr Gordhan there is no reference to any allegation by Mr Gordhan that 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 42 of 136 
 
he acted with malice or he was accusing him of malice in laying the 
complaint. 
 
It seems to me that it would be better that I get clarification 
from both sides in regard to this issue before I mak e any final decision.  
I therefore propose that in regard to this particular issue I will issue 
directions in the next few days in which I will set out clearly what I 
would like both parties to address before I make a decision in regard to 
that issue.   
 
Other than that issue I am satisfied having regard to all the 
circumstances that there is no other issue in regard to which the 
10 
applicant should be granted leave to cross -examine Mr Gordhan and 
therefore in regard to all other issues the applicant’s applica tions falls 
to be dismissed and in regard to the issue to which I have referred that 
issue remains reserved and I will issue directions and ask, direct the 
parties to file written submissions so as to afford me more clarification 
as to exactly what – where they stand in regard to that issue.  Once all 
the written submissions are in I would give the issue further 
considerations and announce my decision in due course.   
 
Therefore the decision I make is the following:  
 
20 
DECISION 
 
(a) 
Subject to (b) below the APPLICANT’S APPLICATION FOR 
LEAVE TO CROSS-EXAMINE MR GORDHAN IS DISMISSED ; 
(b) 
Directions will be issued in the next few days for the parties to 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 43 of 136 
 
deliver written submissions in regard the issue of whether or 
not Mr Gordhan’s position is that in laying charges again st him 
the applicant did so with malice and both parties will submit 
written submissions and then I will make my decision 
thereafter. 
That is my decision. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Noted, thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think we will need to take the  tea adjournment now. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then we can proceed after that.  It is eleven 
10 
o’clock, we will adjourn and resume at quarter past eleven.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Thank you Chair. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS  
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Those who might not have been here earlier on good 
morning to everybody.  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Morning again Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Thank you Chair.  Before th e 
adjournment yesterday Mr McBride we were dealing with the transcript 
20 
of the telephone conversation at page 1557 of the bundles which is Yd.  
We had got to page 1564 and we were discussing the list of persons at 
the top of page 1565 who were at the very l east subject matter of an 
investigation.  Do you see that list of persons at 1565?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes I have it. 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 44 of 136 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  That list would have included Mr 
Mahlangu one of the speakers on the transcript as well as yourself as  
ED? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Executive Director. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes that is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Now you going to tell the Chair 
in a moment hopefully in a moment of the – of the investigation 
conducted by IPID into certain police officers and of what is referred to 
as a counter investigation by those police officers or persons 
10 
associated with them into IPID and we will deal with that.  That matter 
eventually came before His L ordship Mr Justice Touchton who dealt 
with the result and dispute in matters arising from the investigation and 
the counter investigation. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  So we will explain the origins of 
that list of names in due course but it – what you have already told the 
Chair is that the context of all this is what you described as at least a 
questionable counter investigation by police into IPID investigators.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes that is correct.  I think the larger 
20 
picture is important because it – it exhibits the extent to which police 
are not doing their work and are busy with protecting themselves from 
previous and continuing wrongdoing.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Alright now we are going to 
come to that in a moment. If we could just complete the references in 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 45 of 136 
 
the transcript and go to page 1566.  At the top of the page the English 
portion reads: 
“Okay I do not know but if you have something on 
those seniors you will present it along then you 
would explain what they were up to.  We had a 
meeting on that date they briefed us on what to do 
which I personally know that.”  
And this is now a person referred to as male 2, do you know who that 
is?  Perhaps Mr Mahlangu will give some clarity in respect of  that but 
once again the theme that emerges is that the persons involved in this 
10 
telephone conversation seemed to be talking about the obtaining of 
evidence in respect of a counter investigation and cooperation required 
in order to obtain those – that evidence against the background of an 
offer of promotion.  Do you see that?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Chair yes except I do not know the 
exact context and why it is male 2.  If I hear it maybe I will be able to 
see whether this is… 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Alright well let us just 
summarise. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Okay. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Your references to this transcript 
insofar as we are able.  This is a transcript of a telephone conversation 
of an uncertain date between a Mr Mahlangu an I PID investigator and 
Mr Gomo a senior officer in Crime Intelligence, correct?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 46 of 136 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  The first part of the conversation 
deals with what is in effect an offer or a prospect of a substanti al 
promotion to Colonel in Criminal Intelligence – in Crime Intelligence. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Correct? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  There is then a brief reference 
to a fear that this might constitute favouritism or corruption and those 
issues are dealt with.  There is then a discussion on evidence in 
relation to a criminal investigation where Mr Mahlangu might be an 
10 
accused? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And he is clearly speaking to Mr 
Gomo about bringing evidence against his co -accused? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And you say this is the counter 
investigation? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRID E:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  In that context you are said to 
be going down? 
20 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Right and then finally we see 
indications which Mr Mahlangu will explain or sugg estions of finding 
evidence? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes that is correct. 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 47 of 136 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  In pursuance of what is being 
discussed.  If we can move on then to paragraph 79 of your statement.  
You have told the Chair already in another paragr aph about your 
discovery when you returned after your suspension that cases being 
investigated by IPID had been prematurely closed without carrying out 
proper procedures and this was done in certain instances you say to 
manipulate the statistics upwards?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Right.  You have already told the 
Chair that this was intended to portray an impression that performance 
10 
had been better under your replacement on an acting basis Mr 
Kgagmanyane – Kgamanyane better performance than under your 
watch? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And you say that the Auditor 
General had noticed this issue?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  What happened as a result of 
your investigations into these facts or allegations?  Were there any 
disciplinary proceedings?  
20 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes there was a disciplinary 
investigations into Morema I am not sure the outcome and at which 
stage it was but Mr Morema left soon afterwards.  He was also one of 
those who I never saw again.  And there was an investigating into the 
special closures and one employee was – was eventually dismissed.  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 48 of 136 
 
There was also a criminal case that was laid at Pretor ia Central about 
defeating the ends of justice with some of these cases and I think one 
of the people in the – in terms of the internal disciplinary and the 
criminal case as a suspect was Mr Kgamanyane himself and he also 
then left.  He was then transferre d to the DPCI. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Alright.  Do I understand you 
correctly one employee was dismissed and another employee resigned 
and there were others who were also subject to investigation in relation 
to these issues? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Of in effect falsifying statistics 
by closing cases prematurely and improperly?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Let us move on then to 
the counter investigation that we flagged earlier in your evidence.  At 
paragraph 80 you deal with the investigation conducted by IPID into the 
then acting National Commissioner of Police General Phahlane.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Please briefly provide the 
background to that investigation?  
20 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Okay.  So during my suspension at 
some stage March 2016 Paul O’Sullivan was approached by police 
officers at some stage prior to that.  As a result he then lai d a 
complaint with IPID and the complaint dealt with I think initially sub -
standard equipment at the forensics lab including if I remember 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 49 of 136 
 
correctly some chemicals that were used in a testing and for example 
fingerprint brushes  So the fingerprint brushes have to be of a 
particular specification but instead significant amount of the wrong 
brushes were bought and a complaint was laid and the complaint was 
given to initially Morema and Gomo to deal with.  One of the witnesses 
who had approached…  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Sorry before you go on.  At that 
time was Mr Gomo part of IPID?  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Yes he was appointed in August 
2015. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Right. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Into IPID. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  In any event you say there 
was a complaint laid with IPID about the conduct of General Phahlane?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In broad terms how would you – 
how would one categorise those complaints?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Initially the complaint…  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  You deal with that in paragraph 
80. 
20 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  80.  Well the issues about the corrupt 
relationship with General Phahlane or the allegations of a corrupt 
relations General Phahlane and a number of service providers.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Okay. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  And that was the initial thrust of the 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 50 of 136 
 
investigation. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  That was brought to the 
attention of Mr Kgamanyane during your  suspension? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  As I understand it. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Was that case then brought to 
your attention? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  On my return Paul O’Sullivan sent a 
complaint to me requesting the status update of the case which a few 
10 
months earlier he had complained about to IPID.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Is that when you discovered the 
– that two files had been opened and both of them had been closed on 
account of the fact that they were duplicates of one another?  You 
mentioned that in paragraph 81?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes – not immediately it is only after Mr 
Sesoko came back that I was made aware of the extent of 
dysfunctionality and wrongdoing.  So at that stage Mr Sesoko is not 
back yet.  I think he only comes back either December or January.  And 
that is directly linked to how he comprised the task team to then deal 
20 
with the Phahlane investigation. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Alright. You do mention the 
duplicate files being closed in the same paragraph where you talk about 
O’Sullivan’s complaint but you say they are separate in time?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes it is just – it is Mr Sesoko who 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 51 of 136 
 
briefed me that this is what was going on. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  In any event…  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Upon his return. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  As a result of the complaints laid 
by O’Sullivan and as a result of the matter again being brought to your 
attention was a task team established?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes it was…  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  When was the task team 
established in relation to your suspension and return?  You deal with 
that in paragraph 82. 
10 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Ja it is around about November towards 
the end of November we established a task team.  It could have been 
one or two weeks earlier but…  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  What year? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  2016. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Are you back by this stage?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes I am just – I arrive – I return to 
work the 19 October. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Alright.  So there is a complaint 
about corruption or corrupt relationships.  
20 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Alleged between General 
Phahlane and service providers?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  That is brought to your acting 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 52 of 136 
 
predecessor Mr Kgamanyane?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE: That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  On your return you receive a 
com – further complaint by Paul O’Sullivan that these matters have not 
been attended to? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  A task team is established?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes that is right. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Okay who were members of that 
task team? 
10 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  If I can just add also during the period 
members of POPCRU also made an appointment and came to see me at 
the office about the same complaint around about end of O ctober 
beginning of November also.  They had indicated to me that they had 
had some interaction with Mr Mandla Mahlangu and as a result of that I 
requested a briefing from Mr Mahlangu which he gave to me indicated 
he knew a bit about the case and that More ma and Gomo were handling 
it. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Alright was Mr Mahlangu part of 
this task team?  
20 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is the reason why I appointed him 
to head the task team because he had some knowledge of it.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIU S SC:  And we know is this the same mr 
Mahlangu as the person who participated in the telephone conversation 
we have just dealt with?  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 53 of 136 
 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Right.  Who else was on the task 
team? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Initially it was Mr Temane Binang and 
Mr Mantsha Raphesu and later on Mr Nkabinde was conducting a 
course or was attending a course in Pretoria.  He is based in the KZN 
office and he approached Mr Mahlangu to request to be placed on the 
task team and Mr Mahlangu wrote to me and requested that he needs 
extra help on the task team. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Now if you would go back to 
10 
page 1565 please.  This is the transcript of the telephone conversation.   
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Okay I have it. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  It seems that there is some co-
incidence between the members of the task team that you refer to in 
paragraph 82 who are now investigating General Phahlane.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is right. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Or acting National Commissioner 
Phahlane on the one hand and the list of persons who are the subject 
matter of the collection of evidence and potential charges on page 1565 
at the top of the page. 
20 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Nkabinde, Binang and Mahlangu 
are mentioned there? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is right. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  So what is the link? 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 54 of 136 
 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Well the link is that that list on page 
1565 
includes 
complainant 
and 
investigators 
dealing 
with 
the 
complaints related to the forensic lab which at relevant times were 
under the command of General Phahlane.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Right.  So what appears to be 
happening on the face of it and there will be further evidence to deal 
with this and place it into full context with further facts is that 
Mahlangu is approached with an offer of promotion or the prospect of 
promotion. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  To testify against a range of 
people some or all of whom or some of whom are members of the task 
team investigating General Phahlane?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And that I understand from your 
evidence which you are going to give to the Chair now is part of what 
was termed a counter investigation?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Right. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  I just want to add a small point on.  At 
20 
the time when this task was set up  in November Mr Mahlangu during his 
regular reports to me indicated to me that he met Gomo in the 
passages and Gomo said to him, “Ha there is nothing in that case we 
looked at it already’ meaning the Phahlane case.  And when he told me 
this I said just ignore it you go and investigate and see what you find.  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 55 of 136 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Right.  What was – in paragraph 
83 you deal with the subject matter and this is relevant to the counter 
investigation of some of the investigation against General Phahlane.   
What was that subject matter?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Okay initially the issue was that one of 
the service providers that [indistinct] information had assisted in the 
funding of the building of the – of Mr Phahlane’s house and…  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Funded by whom allegedly?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  By the service provider. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Right. 
10 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  I think it was Service Provider was 
called Criminalistics.  They were also involved in forensics equipment if 
I remember correctly.  And another aspect to it was and at the initial 
stage the link was not seen was that a motor car dealer provided 
vehicles to the Phahlane family and other police officers basically 
gratis.  Later on they would claim it was sponsorship s but usually a 
sponsorship is for some community work or something like that but 
these cars were on the Phahlane names and were insured by – by the 
Phahlane’s. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  During January of 2017 as a 
20 
search warrant issued and executed a t the home of General Phahlane?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes.  Yes that is correct.  The purpose 
of the search warrant was to verify information received that indeed a 
sound system had been installed in Mr Phahlane’s house and it was 
facilitated and processed by a service provider. 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 56 of 136 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Right.  Was that search warrant 
then the subject matter of a civil suit?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Ja the – I am going to refer to it these 
terms because there a number of such warrants that come aft erwards.  
But this is the initial search warrant which was a search and identify 
and indeed General Phahlane opposed the validity of the search 
warrant.  Now the – I just want to add this.  Whatever the outcome – 
and the litigation is still ongoing and wha tever the outcome of the 
litigation it will be in any event be mute because General Phahlane 
himself admitted that a system is installed in his house.  So the 
10 
purpose of the search warrant to search and identify the system was in 
any case negated subsequen tly by General Phahlane. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Right.  This – would you refer to 
the testimony then of one of the original task team members that is the 
task team to investigate General Phahlane?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETOR IUS SC:  Cedrick Nkabinde? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:    Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Also one of the persons on the 
list. 
20 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  In the telephone conversation 
transcript. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is right. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  What happened in regard to 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 57 of 136 
 
him? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  So General Phahlane in 2017 launched 
the challenge of the search warrant.  All well and good a response from 
IPID’s side was given and General Phahlane id entified from his 
perspective a number of technical issues with the search warrant all 
well and good.  However the matter lay dormant for almost eighteen 
months and upon the removal of Nkabinde from the task team and upon 
his resignation we became aware th at General Phahlane’s initiating and 
attempting re-enrol that initial search warrant challenge based on 
evidence testimony he got from Nkabinde.  Without going into the detail 
10 
the testimony from Nkabinde on the – his affidavit ended with a 
paragraph which in effect was saying; ‘I am available to make 
statements for any other police officers having problems with IPID and I 
have instructed my attorneys to make me available for it.’  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Alright.  Thank you.  Would you 
go to paragraph 87 please?   
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  I have that. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And just tell the Chair what you 
say in that paragraph please?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Okay.  So I say I want to pause here 
20 
and go back to when the initial investigation in to the case of corruption 
and money laundering was initiated against Phahlane.  O’Sullivan was 
the complainant and also because of his background in the matter he 
and attorney Sarah Jane Trent accompanied IPID investigators to the 
Sable Hills Estate to point out witnesses that he had identified to IPID 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 58 of 136 
 
investigators.  I think perhaps yesterday I had said Trent was a 
secretary but I am reminded now that indeed she is an attorney.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Right. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  And these witnesses later gave 
statements which in – which included statements related to the 
investigation and provided clarity on the rate of development of the 
house at Sable Hill and other matters relating to who the contractor is 
for the house. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETOR IUS SC:  Alright. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  And I think there were discussions and 
10 
a statement from the contractor also.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  What you referred to as the 
Sable Hills house is that the same house in respect of which the search 
warrant you referred to earlier was granted?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And executed? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  So now we have a task 
team investigating General Phahlane and we have the complainant.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  As Paul O’Sullivan? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And to an extent at least his 
attorney Ms Trent? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 59 of 136 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Right.  What happens then?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  So… 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And you deal with that in 
paragraph 88 if you would refer to it please?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Okay.  Okay as a result of the visit to 
Sable Hills residential estate a complaint was initiated within the police 
services by General Phahlane that there was a security breach at his 
house and that his life is now in danger.  He then requested acting 
divisional commissioner Magele for her to establish a team to 
investigate the security breach.  At some stage in his contact with 
10 
General Magele General Phahlane also contacted General Jan Mabula 
and his team from North West.  Now an investigation was carried out by 
Crime Intelligence on the alleged security breach.  A record of that 
report has gone missing.  It has gone through the hands of four 
Generals and they cannot provide it because allegedly that report is 
what resulted in General Mabula and team getting involve d.  However it 
subsequently became clear that they had been involved prior to the 
completion of the report and secondly that the people who conducted 
the report upon realising that IPID was doing an investigation came to 
the conclusion that there is no security breach.  It was IPID doing the 
20 
investigation and they made a report to that effect.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  You say that report went 
missing? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  You talk of a second charge of 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 60 of 136 
 
defeating the ends of justice that was registered against the Mabula 
Team and other Generals?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  It is all very complicated. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes, yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  But essentially what we have as 
I understand your evidence is an investigation into General  Phahlane, 
an investigation now into other Generals particularly from the North 
West and a counter investigation for security breach and the like and 
the execution of the search warrant in related matters.  Am I correct?  
10 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Let us go then to 
paragraph 90.  What happened during the course of the investigation 
and counter investigation?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  In essence the Mabula Team moved to 
Gauteng.  So from North West they came to Gauteng and they set up in 
a hotel in, in the CBD of Pretoria or just outside the CBD in Arcadia and 
were basically permanently based there for I would say almost a year  
and the only purpose for being there was dealing with O’Sullivan, Trent 
and IPID. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right and if you would have 
regard to paragraphs 90 and then 91 please and tell the Chair of what 
you say there. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Okay.  Their, sorry 91 I say: 
“Their counter investigation resulted in a case 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 61 of 136 
 
being opened in the Kameeldrift CAS 12/01/2017 
against O’Sullivan and Trent.  The charges related 
to them were amongst others of accompanying IPID 
Officials to Phahlane’s Sable Hills  home and 
impersonating IPID Officials.”  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  So as part of the execution of 
the search warrant O’Sullivan and his attorney accompanied IPID 
investigators.  Is that correct or not?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  No, no, no that is not correct.  This is 
prior to a search warrant even being obtained and prior to BS – to a 
10 
search warrant being executed. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Ja, but is it correct that 
O’Sullivan and Trent accompanied IPID investigators to the Sable Hills 
premises or estate rather, rather than the [intervenes]?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  But not during the search warrant 
execution. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Okay.  I understand and on the 
basis, is it on the basis of O’Sullivan and Trent accompanying the IPID 
Officials that there were charged with impersonation of IPID Officials?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes.  That is – so they were with IPID 
20 
Officials but they were charged for impersonating IPID Officials.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right and this was part of the 
investigation in relation to the complaint?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Made by O’Sullivan.  Is that 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 62 of 136 
 
right? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Were O’Sullivan and Trent 
arrested? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes indeed they were arrested. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  You mention in paragraph 92 an 
incident that occurred during the course of that arrest.  What is that?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  During Trent’s arrest her mobile  phone 
was confiscated by the Mabula Team and booked in for investigation in 
order to support charges that were being fabricate against the pair and 
10 
later on the IPID investigators that were added.  So at different 
occasions both Trent and O’Sullivan were arrested and I think 
O’Sullivan was arrested twice for the same case.  One of the instances 
I think there were, there was bail given and the bail had conditions 
attached to it and so which did not necessitate the second arrest.  
Some undertakings were give n during the first arrest.  In any even 
O’Sullivan was arrested twice by the Mabula Team.  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Just to go back to impersonation.  As you 
understand it what was the factual basis of the charge that they were 
impersonating IPID Officials?  Were they wearing any uniform that IPID 
20 
Officials wear?  Were they alleged to have said they were IPID Officials 
as you understand the position?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  From what I remember Chair there were 
no specifics attached to it.  Mainly it was related to the fact that they 
accompanied IPID Officials and that they had spoken to witnesses who 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 63 of 136 
 
provided statements.  I would just hasten to add here that at a later 
stage the Mabula Team visited every one of those witnesses and got 
them to change statements. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The ones on the basis of which the charges had been 
put together of impersonating?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  No, those who made statements 
implicating General Phahlane. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, yes okay. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  In, in. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  The corrupt relationship and. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  And so on.  They, every one of them 
were visited. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  And altered their statement to some 
extent or another. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  People who had indicated that they, 
they had seen bags of money being paid over to the contractor that is 
20 
in cash. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So they could not remember well?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Subsequently after the Mabula Team. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Had visited them.  So that is what 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 64 of 136 
 
resulted in the defeating the ends of justice.  I think the second one 
being opened up against the Mabula Team.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  So against the backgrou nd of 
the information and the telephone conversation transcript?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  You have Khomo talking to 
Mahlangu one of the task team members investigating Phahlane?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  About giving evidence against 
other members of the task team about collating or obtaining evidence 
10 
and the like.  The precise wording used is “instructive” but we can deal 
with that when Mr Mahlangu is called if he comes to testify.  So w hat 
you have basically is an investigation into General  Phahlane and what 
you have referred to as a counter investigation?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  That issue was taken to court?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And was dealt with by His 
Lordship Mr Justice Tuchten? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In the annexures to your original 
statement and the original annexures there are at leas t part of the 
judgment of His Lordship Justice  Tuchten, but it is incomplete.  So we 
have obtained a proper copy of the judgment together with the order 
granted.  It is EXHIBIT Y2 Chair and it has been handed to your 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 65 of 136 
 
Registrar. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  I am not going to go into it in 
any detail but just to highlight certain aspects of the judgment and 
order.  If you would just look at page 1 of EXHIBIT Y2.  Is that the 
matter where IPID is the first applicant, you are the seco nd applicant, 
Mahlangu is the third applicant?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And Binang another member of 
the Task Team is the fourth applicant?  
10 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
The 
respondents 
are 
Lieutenant General Phahlane and certain other persons including Major 
General Mabula? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Were they to some extent or 
another involved in the counter investigation ag ainst IPID and others or 
members of IPID and O’Sullivan as well?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes, yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  There is a related matter. 
20 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  That obviously was joined 
involving others as well? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Ja.  If I can just give the context of 
this.  For the Mabula Team to leave North West and come to Gauteng 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 66 of 136 
 
they would need their Provincial Commissioner’s permission.  To come 
and work in Gauteng they would need the Pr ovincial Commissioner of 
Gauteng’s permission also and, and that is why they are cited for 
allowing them to come into Gauteng to work if supposedly an offence 
they are investigating which occurred in Gauteng and just to indicate 
that Mahlangu is investigating Phahlane and was part of the initial team 
whilst I was on suspension still and that Binang was investigating 
General Mabula and his team from 2011 already under ICD.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
So 
we 
have 
two 
IPID 
investigations that. 
10 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Form the background to this 
application before His Lordship Mr Justice Tuchten? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes, yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  They are an IPID investigation 
into General Phahlane and an IPID investigation into General  Mabula. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct.  That is correct.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  General Mabula and others now 
come to Gauteng to conduct what we call the counter investigation?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  All these events are relevant to 
the transcript of the telephone conversation that you have spoken about 
and about which there may be further evidence?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes and just to – I would just like to 
add here Chair is that indeed it is the same Khomo who took 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 67 of 136 
 
Mandla Mahlangu to Potchefstroom to meet with Mabula and Ncube to, 
to concoct a story.  So it is, so the team is investigating these people 
yet Khomo is the person who takes them to Mabula.  The fact that 
Mabula sees them is sinister for the bigger games at play here in 
addition to this litigation that is going on.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Okay.  Can we go to page 12 of 
EXHIBIT Y2 please?  After obviously hearing the parties the Judge 
concludes in paragraph 22 as background to the declaration he makes:  
“In formulating the declaration I shall issue…”  
He says. 
10 
“I bear in mind the important special position IPID 
and its investigators occupy in our constitutional 
architecture.  Members of SAPS have enormous 
powers.  They can deprive people of their liberty 
and intrude upon their private spaces either with 
prior oversight at all or where oversight is required 
as in the cases of arrest or search and seizure 
under the authority of a warrant.  Necessarily 
without the subject of the action being heard on the 
question.  All members of SAPS can decline to 
20 
exercise those powers. A potential for abuse is 
obvious.  That is to my mind the primary reason why 
IPID exists to investigate complaints of such 
abuses.  I bear in mind to that members of SAPS 
are 
constitutionally 
obliged 
to 
protect 
the 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 68 of 136 
 
independence and effectiveness of IPID.  It is of the 
utmost importance that members of IPID and I may 
say of SAPS as well are able to carry out their 
duties vigorously.” 
And then there is reference to the Constitutional Court judgment in 
Glenister.  Over the page on page 13 the Judge continues.  
“Of 
special 
concern 
to 
IPID 
members 
as 
demonstrated by the allegations in the present case 
is the risk of what I might term a revenge 
investigation i.e. the risk that a member of SAPS 
10 
subject to or fearing that an IPID investigation 
might use the powers vested in that SAPS member 
to conduct a counter investigation against the very 
IPID member investigating or likely to investig ate 
the SAPS member.” 
If I may interpose there before quoting further.  That is precisely as I 
understand what you say happened?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Paragraph 25 reads: 
“It must seldom if ever be nec essary for a SAP S 
20 
member in the position I had just described to 
participate 
in 
such 
a 
counter 
investigation.  
Perhaps the participation in the investigation of 
such a SAPS member can be justified on the basis 
of very scarce skills or knowledge without whi ch the 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 69 of 136 
 
counter investigation cannot be conducted.  In such 
a rare case the SAPS member in question would 
have to be the subject or would have to be subject 
to a stricter level of oversight to ensure that the 
IPID investigation was not compromised.”  
He then refers to certain - a section of the IPID Acts and seeks to apply 
that to the facts before him and if we can refer please to page 21 which 
is a draft court order.  It was a consent order.  Is that correct?  In other 
words the parties agreed to the order.  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  (No audible reply). 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And the first respondent there 
agreed not to take part in the investigation?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes, yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  That is the counter investigation 
to which you refer? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And a further draft order appears 
at page 24 of EXHIBIT Y2.  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes, yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Where an undertaking was given 
20 
by Deputy National Commissioner Lieutenant -General Mfazi in the 
capacity of the Acting National Commissioner that certain members 
would be removed from the counter investigation and those persons are 
Major General Mabula, Brigadier Ncube, Lieutenant Colonel Dawood, 
Brigadier Kgorane and Colonel Reddy.  You see that on page 24?  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 70 of 136 
 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes that is correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
So 
whilst 
the 
counter 
investigation was no stopped the outcome of the litigation the 
application was that persons who might have an interest in the outcome 
of that counter investigation were removed.  Am I correct?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct.  Chair I just wanted to 
check.  I do not have – my page 25 is blank. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mine is blank too. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  No I am just talking – I am 
referring to page 24.  Are you saying that – if you go to page 26 that is 
10 
the completion as I understand it, paragraph 4 of that draft order there 
on page 24?  So you can ignore page 25.  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  The undertakings were made by 
the respondents – we should place on record – without any concession 
or admission of liability but the net effect of the application was the 
removal of certain interested perso ns in the counter investigation. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Just to add that a key element in 
summing up in a judgment was that IPID has a provision in its Act, 
Section 25 that no investigator may be involved in an investigation in 
20 
which he has any interest and that SAPS does not have a similar 
provision and at some stage there was a – at some stage there was a 
directive that the necessary, the necessary changes to the legislation 
or regulations of SAPS needs to be done but.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  To provide for a similar 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 71 of 136 
 
[intervenes]? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct.  That is correct Chair.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  In paragraph 94 you 
continue your evidence in relation to the counter investigation?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  This would have been – I just 
want to check its relationship in time to the application to court before 
Judge Tuchten.  Before that application the events which occurred in 
paragraph 94 would have occurred.  Is that correct o r not? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  (No audible reply). 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  You see what you say in 
paragraph 94?  If you could have regard to it please.  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes I have it. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In relation to the application 
before Judge Tuchten. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes, yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
When 
did 
the 
events in 
paragraph 94 occur before or after?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  It was before the Tuchten judgment.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  So before the Tuchten judgment 
20 
the events in paragraph 94 occur?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And were probably relevant to 
the need I understand for the bringing of the application at all?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct. 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 72 of 136 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  What happened in May  2017? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  So during May 2017 Brigadier Ncube of 
the Mabula Team on the instruction of Advocate  Molatlhwa Mashuga 
charged IPID investigators Mahlangu and Binang for alleg edly 
contravening the IPID Act. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Just to remind the Chair 
Mahlangu and Binang were part of the Task Team set up by yourself to 
investigate Phahlane? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right and were certain other 
10 
accused or alleged accused joined to that proceedings?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes Chair.  Mahlangu and Binang were 
then joined to O’Sullivan and Trent as co accused.  I think in the 
transcript Mr Mahlangu refers to this and i ndicates that he was accused 
number 1 or two or number three.  He is accused 3 at some stage.  He 
is referring to this where they are all charged together - on page 1563.  
He says I was accused 3 when he is talking about.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  When Khomo is about adding other co 
accused on.  So this is what Mahlangu is referring to.  
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  The incident you referred to in 
paragraph 95 before you testify to that is that of your knowledge or is 
that information received by you?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  No that is information received by us.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  What is the information received 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 73 of 136 
 
by you? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  The information received. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  [Intervenes] the subject of our 
own investigation? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Ja.  That Trent was arrested and after 
been driven around for a whole was then interrogated and asked for her 
phone and then taken back to go and get the phone at the office where 
she was arrested.  This was at least an hour and a half later and the 
phone was then taken.  The phone was not part of a search warrant or 
relevant to any charge of impersonating an IPID Officer which were the 
10 
charges at that stage.  The phone was then – the chain of evidence of 
the phone was last.  Rumours from within the police itself was that the 
phone was taken to Israel to get it downloaded.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In paragraph 96 you talk of 
charges being brought against Mahlangu and Binang who were  
members of the IPID Task Team?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Is that the same occurrence that 
you talk about in paragraph 94?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Alright. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  So what is key in 96 is when Ncube 
came 
to 
IPID 
offices 
to 
take 
the 
warning 
statements 
of 
Messieurs Binang and Mahlangu I became aware that he is in the 
building.  So I then approached him and to ask him is it true that you 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 74 of 136 
 
are from the North West and he said yes he is from the North West.  So 
I asked him how is it that you came here to Gauteng to carry out an 
investigation against my officers and I indicated to him that he is, is he 
aware that he is a suspect and that part of what he is doing he is 
defeating against – is an attempt to defeat the ends of justice.  He is a 
suspect in that investigation.  He then decided to charge me for 
intimidation because I enquired how he came from North West to be 
functional in Gauteng.  I am not – not sure where that case is.  I gave a 
warning statement to the investigator and I am sure it was thoroughly 
investigated. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  You referred earlier in your 
evidence to an occurrence that is or was not uncommon in relation to 
people in your position that you would be charged and charged again 
and charged again? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  After the charges and the 
rendition saga how many times after that were you ever charged with 
any offence? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Well complaints were laid but it never, 
it never went to court ja. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Okay. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  It never went to court.  Even on the – 
we know that documents were prepared to make the whole case which 
started off as a security breach into racketeering and, and that is what 
Khomo was talking about “he is going down” and all of that.  It is about 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 75 of 136 
 
the plan, the ruse, the concoction but it never comes to fruition perhaps 
as a result of the Tuchten judgment a nd that no other prosecutor would 
want to touch something so obnoxious.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One second Mr Pretorius.  Thank you.  You may 
proceed. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  On what basis were charges 
contemplated in relation to yourself of racketeering?  Do you know?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Off the top of my head I cannot 
remember what it was about.  At one stage I was – Cedric Nkabinde 
10 
brought a member who identified himself from Crime Intelligence and 
said he was aware of a conversation taking place to charge me and it 
was the Mabula Team and in particular Ncube talking to a prosecutor in 
order to obtain an arrest warrant and the Crime Intelligence person – 
you know – asked me is there any way I can help with this.  So  there 
was an arrest warrant being prepared and I said to the Crime 
Intelligence guy when I am investigating corruption there is no way I 
can come to any agreement or understanding or reconciliation.  They 
are suspects of IPID and so it cannot happen.  So they must do what 
they want.  My suspicion it might have been to do with Nkabinde’s 
20 
double game he had been playing and basically in short the allegations 
were that three was a conspiracy to undermine the security cluster by 
targeting SAPS Officials. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Let’s just summarise then at a 
general level, arising out of the rendition series of events.  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 76 of 136 
 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   You were charged.    
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIU S SC:   You were also suspended?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   The charges came to nought. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   You returned after suspension 
and you continued investigations or IPID under your watch continued 
investigations into senior police officials?  
10 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That’s correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   Further charges both in relation 
to the counter investigation and other matters were contemplated at 
least, or prepared against you?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That’s correct yes.  Just to add on 
some occasion the official who took over from General Sibiya in 
Gauteng, Prince Moketedi, on an Intelligence Report laid a charge of 
treason against myself, General Sibiya, Paul O’Sullivan and I can’t 
remember who else, and eventually Mokatedi admitted to Mr Sesoko 
that they were not after me, they, Paghlane had a bone to pick with 
20 
O’Sullivan and that was the basis of that and he was basically under 
the instructions of Ntlemeza, so that was immediately upon my return, it 
would have been December or January.  So it’s been quite relentless 
and it’s been continuing and the plots and the schemes and the 
conspiracies continued non -stop.  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 77 of 136 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And do you think the motive or aim was to drive you 
out of IPID or at least to deter you from any determination you might 
have had to fight corruption with the vigour that you might have 
displayed before, to try and slow you down and soften you.  Do you 
think it’s either of the tw o that they might have wanted to achieve with 
you in particular? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:   Chair I think it includes what you have 
said but it also includes spending resources on harassment and 
disruption of IPID’s activity, it is the same tactic that they  use when 
they’re dealing with criminal syndicates, if they’re doing their work 
10 
properly they will disrupt and they would tie them up in litigation and all 
of that.  Now ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that to keep you away from your work?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  From your work and all of what they 
have done has delayed us.  To add insult to injury they had willing 
collaborators within the Prosecuting Authority who assisted in this 
process but SAPS and I just ask for our indulgence for me to just diver t 
a bit, SAPS runs on a patronage system, I do favours for my senior, I 
get promoted, promotions, like what you see with Goomo and Mahlangu 
but also with the other Mahlangu and Mr Khuba, what you see is they 
20 
had the willingness and power and practice and c ustom to offer out jobs 
as patronage, and that’s how the police system works, it works on 
patronage and people being promoted and appointed to carry out tasks 
on behalf of seniors.  And that’s how it’s been running.  You take that 
and its related to – so promotions within the forensics lab area will be 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 78 of 136 
 
related to assisting and facilitating further corruption and mal -
administration and in the process everybody has an interest in 
protecting the seniors because it’s indeed it’s the seniors that put them 
there, they might even feel under obligation to protect.  They also have 
a process where sometimes people who were in the same college 
together or come from the same village or at the same station and they 
might have been in patrols together, they might have sur vived shoot-
outs together, so bonds are formed between them on various reasons, 
including patronage and unless you have a strong hand about good 
governance and respect for the rule of law and the Constitution you will 
10 
never get the SAPS right and it’s – and it’s a system that’s not being 
challenged, it’s a system on its own and it affects all aspects of our 
life.  
 
Criminal syndicates and corruption syndicates, not that there’s 
a difference between the two, require good senior policemen not to 
investigate past acts of corruptions, current ones being permitted and 
ones in the future, that’s how it works, because the intention of a 
corruption syndicate is to steal money, and in the instance I’m talking 
about and if it’s requested I can show a litany of cases w here billions 
have been stolen.  The best person to deal with that would be Mr Soko 
20 
to outline step by step all the theft and how it works.  
 
The point I’m making is we will have this Commission, Your 
Lordship will make recommendations and they will be carr ied out, but 
the patronage system within the police service will stay unchanged, and 
politicians will require compliant senior police officers, will come and 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 79 of 136 
 
go and they will use the police service for their own interests, and 
that’s what will happen and that’s our experience where very often we 
immediately at loggerheads with the Minister of Police, whoever it is, 
regardless of personality, because the Minister of Police is responsible 
for the Police, the police must shine, it’s under their executive autho rity 
and watch and every time the police shine and their image has been 
polished up pops a case from IPID which might become an irritant and 
there’s an institutional tension there, but it’s precisely because the 
practice of patronage and corruption within SAPS so if we have to go 
back how far back do we go, for example the removal of Dramat and the 
10 
installing of Nklemeza, Nklemeza immediately appoints other police 
officers, they get rid of Sibiya, they get rid of Booysen and they put 
other people in place, and they have appointed people, people got 
transferred out of DPCI into the greater SAPS and new people are 
installed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And of course was it in the conversation that was 
recording it yesterday where there was talk of if you do this we will 
remember you or we won’t forget you, or so and so won’t forget you, so 
that’s part of what you’re talking about?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Exactly. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja and if you want to be remembered you need to be 
pliant, you need to keep that person happy so they can remember you. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Exactly Chair, and the forces that 
should be fighting against this patronage system are being sabotaged 
politically, we’ve seen it in (indistinct) you will find other occasions, if 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 80 of 136 
 
you look at it, and by police officers resisting IPID, sabotaging counter -
investigations, or as referred to in one of the judgments revenge 
investigations, in essence we might take it as personal issues because 
we are personally affected, we get falsely charged and we go through 
our own pain and disadvantage, but for the people carrying it out it’s 
actually survival and until – and it hasn’t started now, SAPS is the 
oldest organisation in South Africa from the Act of Union in various 
forms and evolutions it started.   
 
The idea of being investigated they don’t like, number one, the 
idea of any oversight over them they don’t like.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  And being arrested. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  They don’t like that, and the issue of 
resistance to change because of old cultures and traditions so it’s 
instinctive not to do it and the Constitution of Democracy is relatively 
new, notions of Constitutional independence like in IPID, SAPS is not 
accustomed to it yet, they have not been re -orientated towards 
constitutionalism and respect for the rule  of law so that is an 
institutional and attitude problem which further feeds into the patronage 
and corruption. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And obviously if you have that culture in any 
20 
organisation but talking about SAPS now if that is the position then it’s 
very easy for those members of SAPS who are quite happy to be pliant 
to the seniors to be actually pliant to outsiders as well.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So private companies, individuals, you know criminal 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 81 of 136 
 
syndicates because there would be – I mean the seniors would offer 
them either money that they might be getting illegally or offer them 
positions that will give them money, high positions, so people outside 
can give them money and then they would be happy, that’s why they 
would be wanting if they  see the position. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Thank you Chair.  There’s another side 
which is even worse, so for the good police officers, the ones that work 
diligently, that get the work done, they come to work every day and go 
about their business, who are not in it for being compliant of 
corruption, they have to start at some stage thinking what is it all for, 
10 
this person doesn’t do half as much work as me, has half the 
qualifications but he is promoted above me because they are close to 
colonel or brigadier so and so.  What it does it then demoralises the 
good people who are actually holding the ship afloat and the result is 
not only you will get them either leaving the service or thinking why 
should I work hard, there’s nothing for me, I see no benefit an d then 
they start thinking in terms of their own material situations, and more of 
them are won over to the crooked side, and the issue of recruiting 
people as part of the crooked system as in the two recordings that’s 
ongoing, it’s going on all the time, t his is late in the Paghlane 
20 
investigation, and yet Mr Goomas is fit to do it, startlingly he says don’t 
go in detectives you will end up chasing criminals, you don’t want to be 
chasing criminals, I’m not sure what other work police is supposed to 
do and what does he imply that ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  That’s their core function. 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 82 of 136 
 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Absolutely.  So what is he intending 
Mahlangu to do away from chasing criminals.  I suppose he should 
explain. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Mr Pretorius I just want us to take five 
minutes break, we will adjourn for five minutes, and we will resume in 
five minutes, twenty five to. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   Thank you Chair. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS  
INQUIRY RESUMES  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay you may proceed Mr Pretorius. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Thank you Chair.  The counter 
investigation what was the outcome of that?  You deal with that in 
paragraph 97.   
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Ja.  So the – the state advocate in the 
matter was Advocate Mashuga who also has  some links to the North 
West team.  Their case was remanded several times for investigation.  
Until October 2007 when the…  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  2017? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  2017 my apologies.  When the accused 
made an application that the matter be struck off the role in terms of 
20 
Section 342A of The Criminal Procedure Act.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  That deals with undue delays?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Was it in fact struck off the role  
by the relevant magistrate?  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 83 of 136 
 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And apparently could only be re-
enrolled with a written instruction of the National Director of Public 
Prosecutions? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Briefly tell the court of the 
Prinsloo application.  Judge Prinsloo application or the application 
heard by Judge Prinsloo and I understand that that application 
preceded the application that you have referre d to before Judge 
Tuchten? 
10 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  I think so.  So the order by the 
magistrate to strike the case off the role was – and that the 
investigation be stopped unless there is a written instruction from the 
National Director of Public Prosecuti ons was not adhered to by the 
Mabula team.  They continued with their counter investigation.  And 
then shortly after this Brigadier Ncuba took a – another warning 
statement.  This time against Mr Mantsha Raphesu and he also 
threatened to arrest other members of the task team.  In his interview 
with Raphesu he had – he basically dropped a remark during the 
process. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  That you say in paragraph 99 
that he would arrest other members of the task team including yourself?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And what was the purpose then 
of approaching the high court?  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 84 of 136 
 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Well the high court was to…  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  This is the Judge Prinsloo 
application. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Thank you Chair.  It – it was to 
basically obtain an interdict against the Mabula team from continuing 
with the harassment and disruption of IPID’s work.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And the outcome of the – it is in 
the bundle but I want to try and avoid referring to it in any detail but we 
can refer to it? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Okay thanks.  So ultimately there was 
10 
an order of court by Judge Prinsloo which was a result of an 
undertaking that the counter investigations would not conti nue.  The 
exact provisions would be somewhere in the bundle.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  That was an application brought 
by the Helen Suzman Foundation, is that right or is that a different 
application? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  I think the application w as brought by 
IPID. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Alright we will see if we can find 
a reference to that. 
20 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  There is another judgment in the 
bundle by Judge Prinsloo which we will not deal with n ow.  If you look 
please at page 24 of your statement – of your statement?   
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Thanks Chair. 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 85 of 136 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  From page 24 to page 27 you 
deal with circumstances giving rise to and the bringing of the 
application in the North Gauteng high court which was heard by His 
Lordship Mr Justice Tuchten.  You have dealt with that.  If you could 
assist the court – or assist the Chair rather by looking at paragraphs 
101 to 118 to see if there is anything further that you want to say  in 
relation to those events about which you have testified this morning?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes a key element in the – the whole 
litigation with the Mabula team is that the then acting commissioner 
General Mothiba was willing to abide by the court’s  decision.  But 
10 
whilst he was willing to abide Mabula who had been activated by 
General Phahlane was writing affidavits opposing it and his main thrust 
of his reasoning was that IPID is investigating cold cases.  And the cold 
cases he is actually referring to here involved torture and including the 
death of one suspect.  And he refers to them flippantly as cold cases as 
if somehow because a case is cold no-one can light a fire under it.  And 
during the period we also had his – he becomes increasingly desper ate 
because he is also placed on the scene of one of the tortures and death 
of a deceased and I am here at paragraph 104 and there is a recording 
related to that.  In fact for the record this recording is made long before 
20 
I am appointed at IPID I think it is made in 2013.  That is the recording 
that initially went missing after having been given to the – prior to my 
suspension and after having been given to the Provincial Head of North 
West Province to investigate the IPID head who subsequently left the 
department and went into SAPS.  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 86 of 136 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Just before you go on it 
seems that amongst the cases that IPID was investigating against 
amongst others General Mabula in the North West.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Concerned torture and a death 
and detention? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And these are the cases that 
were described as “cold cases”?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIU S SC:  That is the one aspect.  The 
paragraph 106 and 105 you refer to an order of court by Prinsloo J, is 
that not perhaps Tuchten J that should be referred to there?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  No it is Prinsloo.  Prinsloo.  Tuchten 
comes … 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Later? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Prinsloo is in November and Tuchten is 
in June 2018. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  So… 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  So Tuchten … 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  As I understand it the – the 
undertakings not to con tinue with the investigation by those people 
were not obeyed which resulted in further application being necessary 
and that came before Prinsloo J.  Is that – am I understanding you 
correctly? 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 87 of 136 
 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  The other way around.  It started with  
Prinsloo J first as an urgent application.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  You said Prinsloo J18.  Let us 
get the sequence right.  You said 2018 for Prinsloo?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  No 2017, November 2017. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And then Tuchten? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  June 2018. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Alright that is the order. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Alright.  But the reasoning – the 
10 
reason for the second is what you have said?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRID E:  It is the same reason they just 
continued. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And they – they covered the 
same subject matter? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Alright but let us just deal with 
the sequence then in paragraph 109.  You say the – despite obtaining 
an order from Prinsloo J, what was the nature of the order obtained 
from Prinsloo J? 
20 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  It was along this similar vein that they 
would desist from carrying out certain …  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Counter investigations?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Counter investigations. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Or having certain people 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 88 of 136 
 
involved in counter investigations.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Investigations who had an 
interest in the outcome of that investigation?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct.  I think it would be 
better to have the two orders in front of us and then we can see the 
dates. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  I just tried to find the Prinsloo 
judgment I cannot. 
10 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  It relates to another matter. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  So I am not sure we have the 
correct one on file but we will attempt to do that.  But because you 
have dealt with the facts giving rise to the judgment by Tuchten J the 
same principles as I understand it are involved?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes that is right. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  You say in paragraph 109: 
“Despite obtaining an order from Prinsloo J the 
20 
Mabula 
team 
continued 
with 
their 
counter 
investigation against the IPID.”  
And you say: 
“They 
continued 
harassing 
and 
attempting 
to 
intimidate IPID members and impede the IPID 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 89 of 136 
 
investigation into Phahlane.”  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Right.  And you talk about the 
warning statements there. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes.  And I think it is important at the 
end of 109 to say that there was a fe ar in trepidation amongst the 
investigators because of what they had seen being done to O’Sullivan, 
Trent, Mahlangu and Binang.  So – so others were a bit hesitant and 
often they would request to see me to say how should we approach it?  
Investigating officers of IPID we were also not sleeping at home we 
10 
were moving around and sleeping in different places.  For example we 
became aware that there was an illegal use of tracking equipment in 
order to arrest O’Sullivan the second time which was used by Crime 
Intelligence.  We are aware that we were being tracked and monitored 
and our phones interfered with.   There is only one other time that I 
have lived like that in my life and it was during – as an activist during 
the apartheid era and my officials were – were scared a lot of the time.  
And – and it cannot be you know over estimated – over emphasised but 
in fairness to them they did decide to stand firm whilst a number of 
them were approached in effect only one turned and actively went 
20 
about sabotaging cases.  So this is not a constitutional democracy 20 
something years down the road and police are behaving like this 
against the exact body that is – has been created by the constitution to 
prevent abuses and yet this is what was happening.  As far as we are 
aware none of the abuses have stopped.  It has been passed from one 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 90 of 136 
 
commissioner to another commissioner.  It is either [indistinct] fair or 
you know look the other way allow it happen because again it is your – 
the brotherhood of the blue curtain.  It is ther e and most good – most 
of our – I must put it this way in fairness to all police officers.  Our 
information on corruption and maladministration in the police service 
comes from police officers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Mostly from good police officers who 
want to do their job and do not like what is going on.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And… 
10 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  So… 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the – there would still be many of those?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I guess that has to be acknowl edged. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, hm. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  So there are people who want to do 
work.  Our – we do not have an intelligence team or an intelligence 
budget.  We have just good citizenry especially from within the polic e 
service that help us with cases to identify cases and of course 
20 
complaints from the general public who do not like being abused.  
CHAIRPERSON:  The harassment that you have been talking about is 
primarily aimed at IPID – IPID or is – I know that maybe some of the 
Law Enforcement Agencies that may – that are supposed to fight 
corruption might not have been seen to be very effective in the past.  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 91 of 136 
 
So maybe they might not have been targeted.  But what is your 
experience?  Is it this kind of harassment from SAP S and Crime 
Intelligence being directed at just really primarily IPID?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  If I can put it this way and again we 
talking in stages and different stages.  By the time the Mabula team 
came on the scene…  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  There was nobody left within policing 
within DPCI within the Prosecuting Authority who could from my opinion 
firmly I would believe could give a good account of themselves when it 
10 
came to corruption.  So we were the last and organisation standing .  
And we are a very small nationally there is 265 investigators and the 
core group did not make up more than 20 the people dealing with 
special investigations.  And those that would – the sort of the higher up 
you went the more the resistance. We did anti cipate resistance, the 
push back but we did not think they would resort to this level that they 
would be brave enough ordacious enough to just go against everything 
that is good in the country.  So…  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Mr McBride just to deal with 
20 
page 24 to 27 of your statement in an attempt to summarise the 
evidence you have given to invite you to make any further comment.  
On your return to IPID after your suspension investigations into very 
senior police officials including acting commissioner continued.  There 
are counter investigations to which you have referred.  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 92 of 136 
 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Those counter investigations 
involve the very IPID members conducting sensitive investigations. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  On two occasions IPID finds it’s 
necessary to approach the courts for one or other form of interdict?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  These come before Judge 
Prinsloo and Judge Tuchten?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  We have referred to the Tuchten 
judgment and we will try to find the Prinsloo judgment.  I think the 
wrong one may have been filed.  Nevertheless you say notwithstanding 
the order obtained before Judge Prinsloo the investigations and as you 
talk – as you describe it harassment of the IPID investigators 
continued? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Alright. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  It still continues now. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Yes.  I would like to refer then 
20 
just before the long adjournment to paragraph 109 where you say:  
“Despite obtaining an order from Prinsloo J the 
Mabula team that is the North West team that came 
to Gauteng.” 
Is that correct? 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 93 of 136 
 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  
“Continued with their counter investigation against 
the IPID.  Mabula and his team continued harassing 
and attempting to intimidate IPID members to impede 
the IPID investigation into Phahlane.”  
Is that your evidence? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  [Indistinct] 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes that is correct. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In paragraph 110 you say: 
“As a result IPID continued to engage the SAPS, the 
Ministry as well as the office of the NDPP trying to 
ascertain whether the continuing investigation”  
That is the counter investigation I presume?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   
“Was sanctioned at a senior level.”  
What I want to ask is you in relation to your evidence on page 26 is 
whether apart from the court applications attempts were made by 
20 
approaching people in high office to try and address what was 
happening? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  If I can just go back further and it is the 
first time I mentioning this to anyone.  At a certain stage after my 
return I realised that their counter investigations and that the criminal 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 94 of 136 
 
justice system is shaking or its effectiveness if eroding.  I became 
concerned about national security.  I then approached the state security 
agency to call a meeting between all the heads of services so that we 
could get an undertaking that we will be allowed to  do our work and we 
might be either investigating each other but we will do it properly and 
we will refrain from statements in the newspapers just until we are 
allowed to do our work.  So I was concerned that the crumbling of the 
whole criminal justice sys tem was basically in effect and I went to the 
only authority who does not have investigative prosecutorial powers 
and they are seized with security of the state which were state security 
10 
agents and I went to the DG.  The DG arranged a meeting between 
heads of the department and I can just – it was at least two meetings 
perhaps three.  On – in the meetings was the NDPP Shaun Abrahams, 
Acting Commissioner Phahlane, Commissioner Moyane, myself and the 
DG SSA.  And a number of issues were discussed.  We underto ok that 
we will not discuss cases or that we will manage perhaps difference of 
opinions or different positions we find ourselves in through the work 
that we do, through our professional work.  In one of the meetings I 
think immediately after the first meeting General Phahlane went to the 
media about something and therefore the effectiveness of kind of trying 
20 
to contain fallout from investigations that we were doing and counter 
investigations and that the interest of the country must – must come 
first.  Out of that – out of that process those meetings kind of fizzled 
off.  I engaged with other police officers Mr Sesoko and Mr Khuba 
ceaselessly engaged with them that we have responsible way in which 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 95 of 136 
 
they respond to IPID.  And – so from the side of IPID we went out of 
our way to avoid litigation to at least [indistinct] people about the 
interest of the state and the constitution and rule of law.  It did not 
really work because and I think I touched on it earlier with – that 
perhaps long input I gave but it is not – the minds of the people 
involved in the corruption and the counter investigation are not 
anywhere near the issue of constitutionality and respect for rule of law.  
They are there in greed and survival.  That is where their minds are so 
it is like we are on different dimensions you are talking different 
languages two people and there are different interests.  What I can say 
10 
is that the heads of – I mean Moyane is gone, Abrahams is gone, 
Phahlane is in effect gone and last I went so the point I am saying is in 
any event those kind of meetings should have been taking place to 
maintain the security of the state and national interest.  And that well -
meant investigations are not thwarted because people have narrow 
interests.  Overall all these agencies are the re to ensure proper 
governance and to root out maladministration.  So I think it is important 
to say that generally without adding specifics which I already have that 
there was attempts by IPID at various levels including engaging and 
regularly updating the different ministers that were involved.  I mean 
20 
we even sent info notes to Nhleko even though Nhleko had said he 
does not want to engage with me anymore.  I continued giving him 
reports so that he was aware of the situation as I did right until my last 
month at IPID.  So the issue of personalities did not interfere with 
IPID’s professionalism at all here.  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 96 of 136 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Perhaps we should take the long 
adjournment now Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And when we come back Mr 
McBride we will deal with a summary of the aspect that you are dealing 
with now the counter investigation and then move onto page 27 
hopefully we can finish this afternoon.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes it is one o’clock we  will take the lunch 
adjournment and resume at two.  We adjourn.  
10 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS  
INQUIRY RESUMES  
CHAIRPERSON:  You may proceed Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  Mr  McBride 
can we go to page 26 please at p aragraph 116 of your statement?  You 
there 
deal 
with 
the 
circumstances 
of 
the 
application 
before 
Judge Tuchten? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes Chair. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  You say that in relation to that 
20 
application: 
“There were arguments for both sides and at the 
last 
minute 
Deputy 
National 
Commissioner 
General Mfazi gave a written undertaking that the 
members of the Mabula Team would no longer be 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 97 of 136 
 
involved in any revenge investigations against 
members of the IPID that were investigating them.”  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And you say in paragraph 117 
that the term “revenge investigation” was made by Judge  Tuchten in his 
judgment on 26 June 2018.  The order was in effect drafted around 
Section 25 of the IPID Act and you explain that it is that Act that 
precludes IPID members from investigating matters where there is a 
conflict of interest? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  [Intervenes] as a declaration of 
that conflict of interest? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And the Judge noted that the 
SAPS Act did not have a similar clause?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And it was advised or even 
directed that SAPS should look into that matter?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  In paragraph 119 you 
20 
deal with the search and seizure related to a vehicle investigation 
related in turn to General Phahlane.  Would you tell the court briefly 
about that? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Thanks Chair.  By the time of the 
search 
and 
seizure 
the 
investigation 
had 
expanded 
and 
the 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 98 of 136 
 
investigation 
basically 
involved 
a 
process 
of 
corrupt, 
corrupt 
relationship and. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Between whom? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Between. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Relationship between who?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Between General Phahlane and a 
number of service providers.  In this particular case a person by the 
name of Keith Keating from Foreign Data Analysts and Durand  Snyman 
and [intervenes]. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Is that the same Keating that 
10 
you referred to earlier?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  I am not sure I did refer to Keating yet.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Criminal Analytics? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  I think Criminal Analytics was another, 
another service provider.  I am not sure but there, there is a whole 
interrelationship with a lot of the service providers dealing with 
forensics.  In any event the structure, the model of the corruption 
involved these two entities in South Africa establishing Namibian 
equivalents and there are transactions between them in Namibia.  No 
transaction in South Africa and in that way money that is transferred to 
20 
one company for example Company A to a South African Company A – 
the same company – would then be made available for patronage.  In 
one of these instances it was the roundabout trip of money went to – 
from SAPS as the client paying the service provider and then land ed in 
Namibia and a transaction between then one Namibian company and 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 99 of 136 
 
the other one and then a car being made available for a, a 
corresponding amount and in terms of dates of the Namibian 
transaction. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  A car being made available in 
South Africa? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  So you say that - as I 
understand it – IPID was investigating a money laundering operation?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Which was used to facilitate the 
10 
provision of motor vehicles in South Africa but the money originated 
from SAPS itself? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  To give you another example is a 
person who was in charge of procurement did not have any transactions 
or improper relationship in South Africa with the service provider, but 
indeed did so with the same business in Namibia and in terms of the 
evidence a, a transaction for the same, same type of service took place 
in Namibia for the Namibian Police which involved a capitalisa tion of 
the Namibian equivalent of, of FDA and the policemen then 
[intervenes]. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  FDA being? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Forensic Data Analysists.  That is 
Keith Keating so – if I can put it – a twin company of Keating was set 
up in Namibia but it was owned by the police officer the general who 
had been responsible for issuing contracts or had been in an influential 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 100 of 136 
 
position to influence contracts. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Anyway as you say that these 
matters were the subject of investigation? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  [Intervenes]. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  I am using the example for the 
purposes of understanding that this was not petty corruption.  It was 
big corruption on a grand scale and i t involved billions. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Alright. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  And I will give other examples later on.  
10 
Just so that it is clear that we are not talking about one country or one, 
or one general but that we are dealing with a system of corruption that 
operates.  I will give two more examples just now.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  You say that search 
warrants were issued in relation to these investigations?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  What happened to the search 
warrants? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE: 
 
Well 
the 
search 
warrants 
were 
executed and documentation including cash money – I think it was 
20 
R800 000,00 was seized from Keith  Keating’s office for which an 
explanation is not given yet b ut which a few months after that he 
charged IPID investigators for stealing the money and an investigation 
team was rapidly set up and they were shocked when they came and 
saw the money had been bagged and tagged and was in a safe and 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 101 of 136 
 
secure place as an ex hibit because they were made to believe it was 
stolen.  The money was declared at all relevant stages.  In any event 
Keith Keating went to challenge on a technicality the validity of the 
search warrant. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Was that challenge suc cessful? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  No it was not, but just to add a search 
warrant was executed at Phahlane’s house.  It is the second search 
warrant.  He never challenged that one where stuff was seized.  So he 
is dealing with the one where nothing was sei zed where there was 
identification.  I am mentioning that so you can see the malicious and 
10 
ulterior motives in the court challenges and the litigation.  So in any 
event Keith Keating failed before Judge  Kollapen and he bizarrely 
sought to argue amongst other things that IPID Officers had no right to 
execute such warrants and that was clarified by the Judge.  He then 
applied for leave to appeal and that was refused.  Apparently he is 
approaching the SCA at the moment.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  At page 28 of your statement at 
paragraph 123 you made the general point that IPID has been under 
attack and continues to be under attack.  Is that correct?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct Chair. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Or I should qualify that.  Yo u say 
that: 
“Should these attacks continue and succeed there 
is a real risk that IPID could be marginalised and an 
important constitutional check mechanism over the 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 102 of 136 
 
police be minimised.”  
And then you proceed to give an overview of these attacks.  You speak  
firstly of the National Prosecuting Authority.  May I just perhaps caution 
at least from the legal team’s point of view you mention a series of 
names there as leadership of the NPA.  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  But if you have or if you are 
confident to make allegations we will not intervene, but just caution 
that you should be conscience of that fact.  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes.  So, thank you Chair.  In terms of 
10 
the NPA I think firstly to note that there exists within IP ID a paper trail 
of engagement.  Letters upon letters and at all given stage engaging 
with them on instances where they have dragged their feet on certain 
cases including the Panday case, including the Mabula case and yet 
there seems to be obscene haste to  deal with anti-corruption people, 
people who fight against corruption including IPID.  Those issues are 
raised and the people who are quoted there we can give – I can give 
examples now about instances there of their involvement in what I 
believe is a bias view of what they are doing and we have a record of 
that and I am not in IPID now so I do not have access to those records 
20 
and a litany of letters and the traffic of letters to Abrahams, Mzinyathi 
and Baloyi.  I can mention that there was a complaint give n against 
Baloyi by Mr Mahawka and Mr Khuba regarding the rendition matter 
because at a certain stage Khuba and Mahawka approached  Baloyi.  My 
understanding is it is at Baloyi’s insistence and they explained to 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 103 of 136 
 
Baloyi that the difficulties were prosecution .  Baloyi’s response was 
and he went to – we assume it was Mzinyathi.  He says he has to go to 
his boss and he want to him and he came back and said no IPID must 
bite the bullet.  Formal complaints were made at that stage.  When I 
approached Mr Nosana about it he indicated he does not, he does not 
deal with stories.  I must put it in writing.  The two guys then submitted 
affidavits but no action was taken against Baloyi on any aspect.  There 
is a case of the open as a complainant against the Mabula Team by 
O’Sullivan and Trent on kidnapping and torture and a number of related 
matters.  Two senior public prosecutors recommended that in the 
10 
interests of preserving human rights and having and removing any idea 
of impunity that there should be prosecutions and t hey gave a long – 
support the recommendation with case long and then it goes – the same 
case goes to Baloyi to decide.  The Baloyi in which we have complained 
against already.  Baloyi refuses to prosecute. The docket is returned.  
The investigator then goe s to the two complainants - O’Sullivan and 
Trent - and informs them that there is a decision to decline to 
prosecute against them.  Immediately Baloyi recalls the docket.  The 
docket then goes back to Baloyi.  Letters are written for a review on 
Baloyi’s decision not to prosecute and it goes to Mzinyathi.  Mzinyathi 
20 
says he agrees with Baloyi.  Abrahams says he agrees with Baloyi.  No 
reasons are given. They are not prosecuted now for amongst others 
kidnapping, defeating the ends of justice and torture.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  These are police officials that 
are not prosecuted? 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 104 of 136 
 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Ja that is right.  Then of course 
Advocate Mayema with the rendition issue was one of those who went 
ahead with the prosecution in the absence of evide nce and including 
the disclaimer with the only evidence in his hand was the Werksmans 
Report.  We have spoken to – I mean Advocate Tori Pretorius is the one 
who gave the go ahead for our warrant of arrest and for our – and the 
decision to prosecute us on the rendition matter.  Yet it is the same 
Tory Pretorius who Mayema consulted for the final decision to withdraw 
charges against us in the absence of evidence which could sustain a 
prosecution. 
 
So 
all 
of 
the 
names 
mentioned 
of 
course 
10 
Raymond Mathenjwa was in the reference group.  I am not sure whether 
he should have been in the reference group and involved in a process 
and making recommendations that ultimately led to Dramat and Sibiya 
being prosecuted without evidence to substantiate a prosecution and 
myself Khuba and Sesoko also. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [Intervenes]. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Why would he make himself available 
on a police reference group?  
CHAIRPERSON:  Reference group being a reference to what appears to 
have been an advisory kind of group of people  put together by the then 
20 
Minister Nhleko? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  So the cases I mentioned they are 
documented and there is a paper trail of all of this that is in existence 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 105 of 136 
 
but because I am not in IPID anymore I cannot access it.  
CHAIRPERSON:  You just said about a few minutes ago in relation to I 
think Mr [indistinct] he is the one who was prosecuting in your cases?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you just said that he was prosecuting on the 
basis of the Werksmans Report only, but I am – my recollection is that 
when we spoke yesterday or was it Friday that you said you never got 
to know whether there were any statements in the docket or not.  Is 
that right? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Hm. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  You asked for statements – witness statements, you 
were not give or you were refused but you never got to know whether 
they were there or they were never there.  I thought that is what you 
said. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  I think I am coming to the conclusion 
that was all the evidence he had because if any of the evidence was 
relevant and of any prosecutorial value he would he would have placed 
it before the court.  He did no such thing.  On a point that 
Mr Sandile July refused to testify the matter was withdrawn and I think 
at that stage when Mr  Sandile July did not make himself available and 
20 
was going to approach the courts so that he does not have to testify I 
actually think he did good by doing that.  One would have hoped he 
would have done good earlier on but credit to him he did not go and 
testify and he knows as a lawyer which is strange because he knew as 
a lawyer there is no evidentiary value in a hearsay statement of 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 106 of 136 
 
hearsay which he was going to testify ab out and yet he could not see 
that an opinion of an investigator is of no consequence to decide 
whether to prosecute or not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But is the difficulty not – I know that Mr Pretorius is 
on something else but is the difficulty not with saying that a bout him 
and his report that you have got to ask where was the factual basis for 
his conclusion that there should be a criminal prosecution then because 
if the factual – if there was a factual basis based on witness statements 
on the – on which his recommendations were based then at least those 
statements should have been available to the prosecution.  
10 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Absolutely Chair, absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that even if his report was taken away those 
statements should have remained there whi ch of course might go 
towards what you are saying that maybe in all probabilities that the 
report was the only thing but it would really be most surprising if both 
the police and prosecutor who would put people, comments, criminal 
proceedings against someb ody with no witness statements.  Ja, okay.  
Thanks so. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  So thanks Chair.  In the, in mentioning 
the names in 125 there are records and I give an example of the 
20 
environment and I know we are all tired and we want to get done.  On 
one occasion after Sesoko came back and after Khuba came back we 
approached the NDPP to discuss these issues which we had written 
about. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Came back to IPID? 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 107 of 136 
 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  IPID.  Yes that is correct and in one of 
the meetings he was – he had given us the floor for – to have a meeting 
and we were going to raise with him what the issues were and that is 
why Mr Sesoko and Mr Khuba were with me and were going to raise 
issues and Mr Sesoko had prepared and he even had prepare d a 
presentation what he is going to deal with.  With this very issue of 
prosecutorial bias by the Prosecution Authority and in.  
CHAIRPERSON:  I did not hear who – I am sorry.  I did not hear who it 
was that you were going to address or Sesoko and Khuba we re going to 
address. 
10 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Thanks Chair.  The National Director of 
Public Prosecutions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes.  So when we came. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who was who at the time?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  It was Mr Shaun Abrahams. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Ja and so whilst we were there 
Mr Abrahams welcomed us and he continued speaking and he was with 
all his Deputy National Directors or Acting Deputy National.  There 
20 
were a number of them there and h e started pre-empting what we had 
written to him to discuss already before we had spoken.  So he went on 
for about 20 minutes to a half an hour.  So I then asked him is IPID 
going to have a chance to speak in this meeting and so he burst out at 
me and told me to get out of his meeting and I said no but I wanted 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 108 of 136 
 
answers.  I am not leaving and he proceeded to point at all his deputies 
that not one of them must comment in a meeting.  They must all keep 
quiet.  No comments allowed in the meeting and I found it very strange 
that the prosecutorial authority is subject to such intimidation.  What is 
poor little IPID going to experience in this.  So that gave me a good 
idea what is going on.  I mean in fairness to Mr  Shaun Abrahams 
afterwards I said to him I am glad  I did not leave your meeting and in 
response he said I am glad I did not insist you leave.  So we left on a 
professional basis but it really was an eye opener to see what the 
environment was like that and later on I could then understand when 
10 
prosecutors in the NPA told us they were actually scared to act in a 
particular way because they perceived that this is the attitude of the 
NDPP and in fairness in the entire NDPP Phahlane and Keating and all 
these people no action would have been taken against them, search 
warrants, prosecutions, appearance in court if everyone was bad.  So 
there are good people there and there are good people who committed 
to fighting against corruption.  So I think it is important in fairness I 
need to mention them. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Perhaps we will refer to some 
correspondence as an example of the exchange between IPID under 
20 
your watch and the NDPP under the watch of Advocate  Abrahams but in 
your statement apart from the examples that you have given you talk of 
prosecutions that did take place and you contrast those with 
prosecutions that did not take place.  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  yes. 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 109 of 136 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  What is your comment there?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Well I think the most appropriate 
response is to and the correct one as it was for example Dramat, 
Sibiya, Sesoko, Khuba and myself they have been told the outcome of 
investigations 
indicates 
evidence 
is 
not 
there 
to 
sustain 
the 
prosecution.  Prosecutions nevertheless go ahead.  There is evidence 
because they have to postpone for delays on Mahlangu, Binang, 
O’Sullivan, Trent.  They go ahead.  The matter is struck off the roll but 
on all these other matters which is a list of them and there are about 20 
cases that have been investigated over years, no prosec utions. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
And 
the 
quality 
of 
the 
investigation and evidence in your opinion?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE: 
 
Well 
in 
the 
matters 
that 
were 
prosecuted and were later withdrawn or struck off the roll there was no 
evidence.  People were anti-corruption fighters.  In essence – and I 
have seen it with what happened in DPCI.  I have seen it with other 
people who have been fighting against corruption and the initial stages 
of and the initial stages of state capture.  Whereas in many of our 
cases as in IPID which we submitted to the NPA much of those dockets 
had gone to the NPA and the NPA said the following is missing.  We 
20 
went and gone to get it and bring it back, send it back to them.  So to 
cover each and every possible evidentiary loophole  and in some 
instances investigations we were not cautiously precisely because we 
wanted to convince ourselves first that indeed there is a case and we 
would always ask ourselves about it and we got the evidence and it was 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 110 of 136 
 
sustainable evidence and I am sur e that with the changes at the NPA 
we might see some prosecutions starting but the issue here is why was 
some prosecutions why did they not take place and we can start from 
Panday as one of the first cases that had dealt with to Phahlane to 
Mabula Team and there are a number of other corruption cases are 
starting to get – to be ventilated now in the open court and people are 
appearing in court.  So there is a change but at that time the bias we 
speak about it is indeed tangible and we can, we can back up wh at we 
are saying. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, perhaps that should be the 
10 
topic of further investigations on the part of the investigation team of 
the Commission to see if your allegations are borne out.  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  By that analysis. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Absolutely. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Is there anything else you wish 
to add then on the National Prosecuting Authority before we go to page 
30 of your statement? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  I just give an example which is one 
case which was another case of corruption.  Firstly there are all the 
20 
cases relating to Crime Intelligence but there is one that mirrors Crime 
Intelligence case is the case of – it is 31 March.  It is 2016.  It is the 
end of the 2015/2016 financial year.  Someone in SAPS decides that 
there is an emergency – urgent need for a particular set of products.  
They write a memo at 5 o’ clock in the afternoon.  The memo is 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 111 of 136 
 
approved.  So approval for the procurement.  Orders go out 
presumably.  Supplies are delivered.  In any event by 10 o’ clock that 
same evening a matter which was only generated that same day 54 
million is paid out.  The stock is supposed to have arrived from 
Australia because it must be imported from Australia.  So I am not sure 
which transport method they were using but there is no way a product 
could arrive within five hours from Australia and 54 million went out on 
the same day and that is – it was not picked up by none of the agencies 
that should deal with that.  IPID picked it up with the cooperation of 
police officials.  That is an open and shut case of fraud and corruption.  
10 
It is there.  It has not been prosecuted.  
CHAIRPERSON:  How long ago was this?  It was March, the 31 s t 2016? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  And so that is the [intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it with the NPA?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it has been there for how long?  Since when?  
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  It is part of the range of Phahlane 
cases. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  It has been there since. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  Since we became aware of it say about 
six months to a. 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 112 of 136 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  2017? 
MR ROBERT JOHN MCBRIDE:  2017, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  On page 30 you deal with the 
firm of attorneys Hogan Lovells again before you deal with it, may I just 
highlight a distinction between a firm of attorneys being used and a 
firm of attorneys deliberately being part o f the clients cause.  On the 
fact of it there’s nothing wrong with anybody using any firm of attorneys 
and you do so – Hogan Lovells allowed itself to be used so bearing that 
in mind what point do you make in paragraph 131?  
10 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  The fact that Hogan and Lovells was 
the company of choice under Nglego number one, number two they 
were involved in all disciplinaries, all labour matters, all Constitutional 
challenges related to rendition and this is the funny part, and maybe I 
should be cautious also but they used the same senior counsel each 
time so the way I understand how it works, the advocates – they get 
instructed by law companies and the same law company can instruct 
different advocates during the process and in the normal course of 
events it often happens that the same law company can even instruct 
advocates that were maybe on opposite sides of a particular case at 
20 
some stage and with the professionalism attached to the profession 
that’s all in order.  How is it possible that advocate Mo khari was 
involved at every step of the way in every disciplinary, in every Labour 
Court matter, in every Constitutional challenge, didn’t he have any 
other work? 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 113 of 136 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   Well there’s nothing wrong with 
respect to your evidence to brief counsel repeatedly, in fact, it might 
sometimes advantage a client because that person then has knowledge 
and experience and is relied upon to use that knowledge and 
experience in a clients cause, in fact it’s the duty of the legal 
profession to act in the cause of the client.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  I accept that Chair except it’s expected 
in a legal profession they will not promote anti -Constitutional 
behaviour. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   Alright is there anything else 
10 
you wish to add to paragraph 131? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  No I’m covered yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:   And then paragraph 132, you 
talk about the CATS unit, the Crimes Against The State Unit, would you 
tell the Chair about that unit please and how you regarded its 
activities? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Well Crimes Against The State Unit was 
the unit that was used against Minister Gordhan, was used against 
myself, was used to force Vlok Symington to hand over documents 
which documents concerned legal advice which would have b een 
20 
exculpatory in the matter in which they were gunning for Minister 
Gordhan.  Vlok Symington was a complainant in – to IPID about their 
behaviour because they held him against his will there was video 
evidence, there were statements and there were witnes ses.  They also 
were not prosecuted but the fact that it’s called Crimes Against The 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 114 of 136 
 
State infers that everybody there in investigating is somehow 
treasonous or anti the democratic establishment and one doesn’t see 
how charges of fraud and defeating the en ds of justice, for example, 
against Khuba, Sesoko and myself can be regarded as Crimes against 
the State – within Crimes Against The States purview. Ja so that was 
also the group that went to see Mr Khuba and offered him a job as the 
recording showed yesterday, so it’s the same group, Crimes Against 
The State.  So one needs to wonder who’s actually committing a crime 
against the State where you are prepared to attack Constitutional 
oversight bodies and even offer jobs in the process.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I thought when we were listening to the recording 
yesterday, the other person was not from IPID I thought he was from 
Crime Intelligence, I may have misunderstood.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  No the first recording, the recording 
with Mr Khuba. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:   Is there any relationship, to 
your knowledge between the Priority Crimes Litigation Unit which 
operates under the auspices of the NPA and the CATS or the Crimes 
20 
Against the State Unit which op erates under the Hawks or the DPCI?  
You deal with an issue on page 31 paragraph 134.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Ja there is a direct link between CATS 
and PCLU both have to deal with priority issues, and yet – cases are 
passed on to PCLU and my understandin g is that there has to be a 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 115 of 136 
 
particular process of involving the NDPP in PCLU matters I’m not sure 
the relevant legislation or regulations but I’m not sure whether they 
comply with this provision or not but they work hand -in-glove. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:   Alright at paragraph 135 you 
deal with Police Minister Nglego as Chief of Staff.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Tell the Chair what you wish to 
say about that please?    
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Chair...(intervention). 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   And explain, please, to the 
10 
Chair the point that you wish to make in paragraphs 135 to 136 and 137 
in fact. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  So Mr Leon Mbangwa whose real name 
is Lionel Moyo is employed by Minister Nglego as the Chi ef of Staff in 
his office, Mr Mbangwa also known as Lionel Moyo is a Zimbabwean 
citizen, that alone doesn’t disqualify him, people can get naturalised, 
he could have been a South African, but Mr Mbangwa was arrested for 
false ID in about 2000 he was convic ted and he served custodial 
sentence.  He was recently – he recently appeared in court on the 31 s t 
of March 2019 for also having false documentations or qualifications in 
20 
the KZN Court but he was hired by Minister Nglego as a Chief of Staff, 
he did not have a security clearance, in fact they applied through IPID 
as if he was going to be appointed by IPID to obtain his security 
clearance.  The State Security Agency wrote a report to IPID and 
indicated that he has a conviction and it relates to dishonesty and  that 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 116 of 136 
 
he has financial problems, they didn’t pick up he was a Zimbabwean 
and that he had not been naturalised.  This matter was also raised 
within Crime Intelligence in my engagements with them.  Now at the 
time when they applied for his security clearance , it was when we were 
on suspension, Mr Ngamanyane was the Acting Executive Director.  The 
question, Chair, the key question is why would a Minister of Police hire 
a convicted criminal whose not a South African who still is flashing his 
counterfeit identity document.  Now, again, as with other issues – I’ve 
thought about this a long time there is no reasonable explanation, why 
a Minister of Police will insist, as his Chief of Staff, in such a sensitive 
10 
place where sensitive documents move past the Minister’ s desk every 
day, he would want to employ this particular person there.  In a later 
affidavit which – in an affidavit which was made before this one, a 
statement to the Commission, I’ve traced the background and the link 
and I’m sure it would be most appropriate for me to testify about that 
link at that occasion when we’re dealing with that particular focus and 
how important it is but it’s an intelligence failure, it’s a security risk, 
how does a Commissioner of Police or Acting Commissioner of Police 
feel safe to send documentations or briefing to the Minister where the 
Minister’s Chief of Staff actually deals with them, he doesn’t have a 
20 
security clearance, he’s not a South African, he’s known for his 
dishonesties, fraud and flashing counterfeit documents.   This is what 
happened in the time in which IPID came under attack, this is what was 
taking place...(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:   You were raising, among others, this issue?  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 117 of 136 
 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  As overall to perhaps exclude any 
reasonable explanation for all that was done to IPID based on why the 
Minister appointed this person, and the Minister has prerogative to do 
that.  So the security of the State, clearly was not an important 
consideration or National interest for the Minister, there must have 
been something else, the Minister must explain it and he has never 
sought to explain it ever, and I’ve raised this openly.  We’ve also got a 
paper trail on this whole process...(intervention).  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   Alright perhaps you can go to 
Annexure X to the – to Exhibit Y at page 1765. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Exhibit Y? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   It’s Exhibit X of – well it’s 
Annexure X to Exhibit Y, let me just refer to the page Chair, page 1765.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let’s try again, Exhibit Y?  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:   Page 1765, it’s YD.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, I think your junior is laughing at you.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   Well she sent me the note, so 
she’s entirely responsible. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So, okay the page is 1765. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:   The paper trail you refer to 
20 
there, I’m not sure if you feel it necessary to show it to the Chair, the 
contents of that paper trail, I’ll leave it up to you from page 1765 
onwards it just shows that a query was raised by your acting 
predecessor. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  The issue that is – what’s (indistinct) 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 118 of 136 
 
with the prospective Chief of Staff for the Minister and if you take his 
answer to me asking for hand -over report he says, he had his 
instructions from his Minister so presumably the min ister says to him, 
can you process this through IPID as if it is IPID that wants to employ 
him.  This is a very serious matter, it doesn’t need further explanation, 
this alone should have had alarm bells ringing and...(intervention).  
CHAIRPERSON:  So the whole thing of this person’s employment 
started while you were on suspension and Mr Ngamanyana was the 
acting Executive Director?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That’s correct Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And when you arrived he was already working in the 
ministry but on the books was it reflected under IPID as an employee 
official or whatever or do you know where he was reflected as?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  He was in the ministry and apparently 
on the ministry website he is still there now listed because it hasn’t 
been updated but the point is not so much that he had a job, the issue 
is why was he processed through IPID.  So IPID became a tool for the 
Minister and – yes sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no that’s the most important question, how 
come he had anything to do i n terms of paperwork with IPID if he was 
20 
going – he was not going to be employed by IPID and if he was not 
employed by IPID and I take it that you never got any explanation from 
Mr Ngamanyana because you said he left and he never came back 
when you returned. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That’s correct Chair but also that 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 119 of 136 
 
nobody saw anything wrong with this and no -one picked it up, no-one 
was interested and why not.  So he was not given a security clearance.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:   Well perhaps we should just 
refer briefly to the correspondence at page 1765 is a letter from the 
Acting Executive Director of IPID Mr Ngamanaya dated 22 February 
2016 to a Mr Dlodlo it requests a personnel suitability check or a 
security check as you put it in relation to Leon  Mbangwa do you see 
that? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   The answer to that request for a 
10 
check appears at page 1767 and it says in summary, “no negative 
information of National security relevance was obtained with regard to 
the above candidate, the candidate is a confirmed South African 
citizen, the candidate has a criminal record, the candidate has a 
negative credit record, it should be noted that the inability of a person 
to manage his/her finances could pose a security che ck” and then you 
take up the (indistinct) on page 1770 after your return and you do so in 
a letter of 25 October 2016 where you address a letter to Mr Arthur 
Fraser of the State Security Agency, do you see that?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That’s correct Chair. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:   And you say that, “it has come 
to the attention of the Executive Director of IPID that the Chief of Staff 
of the Minister of Police is a Zimbabwean, he’s a convicted fraudster, 
he was convicted and sentenced for providing  a false ID, he continues 
to use this false ID, for some unexplained reason the request for pre -
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 120 of 136 
 
employment screening was done via IPID in my absence”, which is the 
point that you’ve emphasises, “whilst the results of the pre -employment 
screening by your domestic branch was able to detect that the subject 
had a criminal record and had financial problems, it was unable to 
detect that the ID was false and that the subject is a Zimbabwean” and 
you then attach to that letter supporting documentation.  Is that th e 
paper trail you referred to?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And nobody ever gave you an answer to the question 
from the Department of Police Ministry or anybody, you never got any 
10 
answer?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  No Chair we were attempting , even in 
preparation, for this – providing this evidence before the Commission 
and we haven’t received any explanation after my letter, but I think, 
perhaps this is a case Crimes Against the State should have been 
looking at but they didn’t look at it.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   Before we deal with your 
evidence on page 32 can we go back to paragraph 128 please.  You 
refer in that paragraph to correspondence between yourself in your 
position as Executive Director of IPID and advocate Shaun Abrahams of  
20 
the NDPP and perhaps we just ought to place that correspondence on 
record.  Annexure U to which you refer is at page 1742 of Exhibit YD.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  I have it sir. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   Now the sequence – you refer 
to U, V and W the sequence may be incorrect in the Annexures to your 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 121 of 136 
 
statement, let’s just check that. Perhaps you can explain at page 1743 
is a letter addressed to you in your capacity as Executive Director of 
IPID and its dated the 19 t h of December 2017, that’s the date  of its 
signature, do you see that, it’s marked as having been received on the 
19 t h of February 2018 and it refers to correspondence from yourself 
addressed to the NPA during 2017. How does that relate to the letter at 
1749 and at 1753, it seems that we’ve  got to begin at the end of the 
sequence of correspondence at 1754, the letter of 2 May 2017, is that 
correct? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That’s correct. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   Right would you tell the Chair 
briefly and in summary, because you’ve de alt with much of the contents 
of this in evidence what you were addressing to the NDPP and the 
purpose of your letter please?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Okay thanks – thanks Chair, so a 
number of letters which I’ve already testified about were written to the  
National Director of Public Prosecutions just querying a number of 
issues and they – from 2017 2 n d of May, August 2017, November 2017 
and the one that I wrote to him in December 2017 – let me just get it. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   Let’s start with the one of 2 May 
20 
2017, that’s the first in this chain, what was the purpose of you 
addressing Advocate Abrahams of NDPP or the NDPP rather?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Thank you Chair, the specific issue was 
dealing with the failure to re-enrol the case – the cases against the 
Mabula team for – some of the CAS numbers are from 2010 on page 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 122 of 136 
 
1755 and ...(intervention). 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   It seems that what you say to 
Advocate Abrahams is that IPID has investigated a number of cases 
against senior police officials. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That’s correct.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  That the files have been 
delivered to the NPA but there has been no action in relation to the 
matters referred to the NDPP is that correct?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Chair just a slight correction, they had 
appeared in court, they were charged at some stage, most of the team 
10 
and then the charges were withdrawn to centralise cases and was never 
re-enrolled. So from 2012 to 2017 over a five year period, charges had 
not been re-enrolled. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   Right so they had not been 
prosecuted to finality?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That’s correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   And that was your complaint?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  So you had made reports in 
accordance with your investigations and duties to the NDPP, you say 
20 
that some action was taken but they were not finalised over a long 
period of time.    
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:   The key issue was the NPA had 
decided to prosecute and decided to centralise all these cases because 
it was a series of torches and the NPA itself then did not enrol, what is 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 123 of 136 
 
the purpose of a delay of five years to re -enrol it, I mean that was the 
key issues, what is holding up the re-enrolment of the charges which 
you decided should be prosecuted?  Chair in any event this constant 
engagement (indistinct) on these particular cases resulted in two out of 
the seven being on trial at the moment now.  Why initially it was seven 
now it’s only two, we don’t know, we’ve raised it with Advocate Batohi 
the new NDPP just prior to me leaving IPID, so the matter is with the 
new NDPP. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   On page – you then in the long 
letter beginning at 1754 refer to a number of individual cases some of 
10 
which you’ve testified to now in evidence.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :   Is that correct? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That’s correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:   You reach your conclusion at 
1763, you’re free to mention, in summary, any particular case that we 
might not have dealt with in evidence but I would like you to put your 
conclusion on record at 1763 please.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Okay, so “as of 2 n d of May 2017 the 
following conclusion was pinned on the memoran dum to the National 
20 
Director of Public Prosecutions.  Having regard to the above it is clear 
that we are dealing with rogue elements within SAPS that had been 
operating with impunity over the years it is clear to IPID that they are 
assisted by some in the NPA to further their nefarious objectives.  To 
restore confidence in a criminal justice system we requested the 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 124 of 136 
 
appointed team of prosecutors who will work with Advocate van der 
Westhuizen to look at all matters involving these members as well as 
looking into all investigations initiated by them linked to the Paghlani 
investigation.  It its IPID’s firm view that senior members of the SAPS 
will not be held to account when every time they’re investigated by IPID 
they 
start 
counter 
investigations 
against 
witne sses 
and 
IPID 
investigators with the assistance of the NPA.  We would have expected, 
as a matter of good governance, the NPA takes an impartial position in 
this regard.  We believe for justice not only to be done but to be seen 
to be done it will be the in terest of justice for the NDPP to intervene to 
10 
ensure that State resources are not used to compromise legitimate 
investigations against senior members of the SAPS.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  There is an intervening letter 
from yourself again dated 23 F ebruary 2018 but before we go there we 
should have regard to the letter received by you on 19 February 2018 
addressed to you by the NDPP, Advocate Abrahams and signed by him 
on 19 December 2017.  What does he say in response to your various 
communications of which we have referred to but one?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Okay that is 1743 on page 1743?  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  That is correct. 
20 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Okay.  He ends the document with a 
comment that a MOU is important the two organisations .  But in 
essence none of our matters are dealt with some of them which I 
mentioned the Vlok Symington case.  He just says he supports the 
decisions not to – to prosecute the Cats team on the Vlok Symington 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 125 of 136 
 
matter.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And he deals with various 
investigations and matters reported by IPID to the NDPP?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Including the matter involving 
General Phahlane, the matter involving Executive Director General 
Kgamanyane, the Mabula team, Brigadier Ncuba and he says that the 
decision has been taken not to prosecute and he gives his reasons for 
that.  Do you have any comment?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  No comment but I will put it in contra- 
10 
distinction to paragraph 6.3 where in response  to myself enquiring on 
behalf of IPID the reason for swiftness for charging IPID investigations.  
He says because the matter has been handled by the organised crime 
component and they have dedicated resources so expects that they will 
act with swiftness.   
CHAIRPERSON:  So – but when it is other people those matters are not 
given to that unit? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Indeed Chair ja.  So there is no answer 
to that because he is having a go at me and it is on a professional 
matter I cannot say anything. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes I think the point you making 
is that in relation to all the matters that had been outstanding for a long 
period of time he deals with them in the way he does but in relation to 
the swiftness with which you and others were d ealt with he says well 
special resources and efficient resources were dedicated to that 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 126 of 136 
 
prosecution? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Cert – that – that answer shows clear 
bias and he justifies it by having lots of resources whereas on other 
[indistinct] he will complain he does not have resources.  But he is 
having a dig at me and good for him.  But it does show bias because 
there is other reason except the clearly sarcastic one.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Yes.  I have not referred to the 
letter addressed to Advocate Abrahams on the 23 February 2018 which 
appears at page 1749 and following.  It is marked confidential I am not 
sure that that would preclude us dealing with it unless you have any 
10 
reason not to deal with it.  But in a nutshell and I do not think th at we 
need the letter to establish that you did not accept Advocate Abrahams 
explanations, is that correct?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And you give your reasons?  
CHAIRPERSON:  That is – you did not accept that explanation and 
informed him or you did not accept and you left it at that?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  In the letter of 23 February  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  At page 149. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  You repeat some of the 
information you have already given about two people being charged in 
relation to the Mabula team torture investigation with no explanation for 
why the other accused members were not charged and other matters.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Ja we just – we just stated our 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 127 of 136 
 
disagreement and basically stating the status quo as it was then.  
There is not much more we could do with it.  We could not – we could 
not take it further than that.  But it is indeed a record of which we think 
indicates a biasness and a purposeful differing swiftness to dealing 
with different types of cases.  And there is a bias towards our biased 
against anti-corruption fighters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it is quite concerning if a matter – if matters and 
it looks like many matters  in respect of which the NPA had already 
taken a decision to prosecute wait for five years and more without 
being enrolled again.  In the meantime witnesses could disappear, 
10 
could pass on.  It is quite concerning.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  And on top of that Chair the same team 
who is under investigation is then commissioned by Acting National 
Commissioner Phahlane to investigate IPID.  So it adds insult to injury.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  On page 32 Mr McBride you deal 
with the Reference Group.  Befor e you do so I would like to just allow 
you to see and to comment on the document placed before the 
commission by Advocate Muofhe who gave evidence before the 
commission and a document which shows the terms of reference at 
least apparent terms of reference on the letterhead of the Ministry of 
20 
Police.  It is a letter addressed to Advocate Muofhe appointing him as a 
Reference Group member dated the 30 September 2014.  Before you 
give your evidence on the Reference Group I would just like to place 
this on record and before you.  We have extracted page 55 from the – I 
do not have the Exhibit letter of Advocate Muofhe’s evidence.  Yes it is 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 128 of 136 
 
Exhibit Q I am told.  Anyway Chair may I hand up a copy of Exhibit Q1?  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  It is page 55 of Exhibit Q1 for 
record purposes but for convenience…  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  I have it here.   
CHAIRPERSON:  So you saying a document that is in one of the 
exhibits that already exist?  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Exhibit Q. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Q1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Page 55.  But this is only for 
convenience sake for you Chair and for the witness.  Would you just 
have a look please at the requirements placed upon the Reference 
Group?  I am not sure whether these are officials’ terms of reference 
but it is an instruction from Minister of Police Minister Nhleko to 
Advocate Muofhe setting out the tasks that the Reference Group is 
required to execute.   
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Just look at it please and 
comment if you will?  I must confess it is not very clear in respect of 
what these activities are intended to achieve.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Chair that is all I can say also I am not 
sure what is their target investigations about to do all the things that 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 129 of 136 
 
are listed in the – at the bullet points. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Yes so for example it says 
“gather all necessary background and information and material” it does 
not say in respect of what.  It says interview persons and connection 
with specified matters.  The matters are not specified in this letter.  
Research examine analyse written material documents or media articles 
relevant to each specified matter.  But this let ter at least does not 
specify the matters to be examined.  Do you know of your own 
knowledge what those matters were?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  No I am – I am not…  
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Or what any of those matters 
were? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  I am not sure.  We were able to in 
preparing this statement and we quoted from documents which we had 
at the time of preparation which we cover in paragraph 138.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Yes perhaps you better place 
evidence on record then. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Okay.   
“In October 2014 the Minister of Police Nkosi Nathi 
Nhleko established a Reference Group and a court to 
20 
deal with issues of human resources, suspensions, 
the state of crime intelligence, administrative queries 
and perceptions of the SAPS.” 
At the time the Minister said the Ministry would use the work done by 
the Reference Group too: 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 130 of 136 
 
“Turn around the image of the police and build public 
confidence in the service.”  
Surprisingly the Reference Group was comprised of public officials and 
included state Advocate Raymond Mathenjwa from the NPA.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Was IPID one of the institutions 
to be investigated in this respect by the Reference Group?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Indeed we had the two visits by the 
Reference Group or members of the Reference Group. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Alright and you have given 
extensive evidence in relation to the independence of IPID and who 
10 
would have authority and who would not have authority.  We need not 
revisit that. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  If you could deal with paragraph 
139 please? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Mathenjwa was one of the prosecutors 
involved in untoward decisions concerning IPID cases.  Later he 
aggressively demanded the si ght of the case file into the Renditions 
investigation. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  This was whilst he was now an 
20 
advisor in the Reference Group?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  I am not sure if he was moonlighting 
also I do not know. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  But you say later in his position 
of advisor on the Reference Group reporting to the Minister.  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 131 of 136 
 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  He then aggressively demanded 
sight of the case file in …  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
ADV 
PAUL 
JOSEPH 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
Into 
the 
Renditions 
investigation.  Do you stand by that?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes that is correct yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Okay carry on please? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Further this was an undesirable 
situation as Mathenjwa was a senior prosecutor who was involved in 
10 
deciding other matters referred to the NPA by IPID.  At the time IPID 
had already referred the Rendition docket to the National Director of 
Public Prosecutions for a decisi on that neither Mathenjwa nor the 
Minister saw the clear conflict of interest which could compromise the 
IPID’s independence and suggest there was some ulterior purpose to 
the establishment of the group. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  You then deal in paragraph 140 
with your view in respect of the Portfolio Committee on Police and I 
presume you referring to the Parliamentary Portfolio Committee?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct Chair. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  You have a brief comment there 
in paragraph 140 what is that?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  During the period of my suspension 
IPID staff were under attack by Kgamanyane directed correspondence 
to the Portfolio Committee on Police reporting the wholesale transfer 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 132 of 136 
 
and new appointments in IPID.  No response was ever received.  I too 
wrote to the Chairperson of the committee alerting him to these 
concerning events.  I never received a response from him.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And you have dealt with the 
Portfolio Committee in a different context? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Mr McBride you have given 
lengthy evidence do you have any further comments to add before we 
conclude? 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  No Chair only it is the matter at the 
10 
future convenient day for the commission if I can deal with the issue of 
the – the affidavit on the 10 December 2018 and also the matters 
related to classification just to assist the commission in understanding 
how classification and the abuse of power and res ources was 
manifested especially in those two statements.  The second one I 
referred to on the classification…  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Sorry before you go on.  You 
referred earlier in your evidence to classification and refusal to 
declassify documents within Crime Intelligence. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And that this device was used 
you say improperly to impede your own investigations on serious 
matters relating to corruption?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Indeed and in the specific one it relates 
to attempted procurement purportedly of a device but with the request 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 133 of 136 
 
for cash which was to be used for other purposes which interfered with 
the democratic processes in the country.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Alright and you talking about 
surveillance equipment?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  That is correct but the issue there was 
it is not – they really did not want equipment they wanted cash.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Alright so you say you have 
further evidence to give in regard to those issues.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Is there – I was going to pose a 
10 
general request to you in relation to the analysis and addition done by 
yourself General Dramat and is it Mr Ivan Pillay which  was referred to 
in that article. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Which is now part of the bundle 
and I think you have undertaken to look at that analysis and if it is 
appropriate present it to the commission.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Definitely Chair I will assist to the best 
of my ability. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Is there anything else that you 
20 
wish to mention at this stage?  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  No Chair I am covered. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  That is the evidence thank you 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No thank you very much Mr McBride once again for 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 134 of 136 
 
coming forward to assist the commission and to assist the country.   
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am grateful that you still have more informa tion that 
you want to share with the commission that will be that you regard as 
useful and helpful for the commission’s work.  And so I – you will – we 
will be seeing you again. 
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it may be that quite apart from you coming back 
to give us more information there may well be implicated persons who 
might apply to for leave to cross -examine.  I am happy that you – you 
10 
will always be there to assist whenever you can.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much once again for coming forward 
we appreciate it and you are excused.  
MR ROBERT JOHN McBRIDE:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Chair I know it is only twenty 
past three there has been some uncertainty surrounding the timing of 
the next witness General Booysen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  
20 
Arrangements have been made however for him to commence his 
evidence tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And to continue for at least two 
hours on Thursday when we then break for the Easter break.  
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 135 of 136 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  And he will resume on 
recommencement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On the [indistinct]. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Of the commission’s hearings on 
the 2 May.  If that suits the Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja.  We – I think we will – we should resume on 
the 2 n d but I think we will announce before we break in case there 
should be a change but there should not – I do not think there should 
be a change about the 2 n d.   
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Chair the background which 
perhaps I do not need to deal with here.  There will be a change but 
that is being managed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh is there a need?  Or is there a need to hav e 
certainty now? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Yes Chair there is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay then… 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC : So if… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then 2 n d we will be here. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  2 n d we will be here Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  With your leave Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So tomorrow we can start at normal time ten o’clock?  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Yes Chair.  Ten o’clock is 
appropriate. 
16 APRIL 2019 – DAY 84 
 
Page 136 of 136 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ten o’clock ja.  Okay we will then adjourn for the day 
and tomorrow we will start at ten. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC :  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS  
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
