 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
BRAAMFONTEIN CHAMBERS 
 
 
 
10 
 
16 MARCH 2020 
 
 
 
DAY 224 
FINAL 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 2 of 210 
 
PROCEEDINGS COMMENCE ON 16 MARCH 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Soni, good morning everybody. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Morning DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It looks like …(intervenes). 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The lighting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The lighting is still quite bad but I have been told that 
they are attending to it. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To try and improve but there was some improvements 
at some stage on Friday particularly around here but I think it has gone 
10 
back to what it was at some stage.  Interestingly the areas right there 
appear to have good lighting maybe because of the lighting on the 
ceiling boards. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright let us continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson just for the sake of context you will 
recall that Mr Molefe had not finalised his evidence yesterday that will 
continue as was agreed on Wednesday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  You might have to raise your voice again. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh sorry. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I was saying Mr Chairperson just to put things in 
context and for the record Mr Molefe had not finished his evidence on 
Wednesday and we – sorry on Friday and we agreed that he will 
continue his evidence on Monday – on Wednesday on account of 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 3 of 210 
 
certain commitments he has already have.  In the meantime then we 
will ask for the evidence of Ms Onica Martha Ngoye to be tendered 
today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Ngoye is …(intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:  Ngoye. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I see it written here it is written correctly. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  They have it wrong on – if you look at the affidavit 
itself it is Ngoye Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is Ngoye. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ngoye. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja they seem to get this wrong I do not know why 
they sort off – get the people’s names wrong on the outside cover it 
was the same thing with Minister Yunus Cariem the other week.  I 
picked this up.  Okay alright.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  May the …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would you like – okay please administer the oath or 
affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
MS NGOYE:  Onica Martha Ngoye. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the prescribed oath? 
20 
MS NGOYE:  No I do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on your 
conscience? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give will be the 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 4 of 210 
 
truth; the whole truth and nothing else but the truth if so please raise 
your right hand and say, so help me God. 
MS NGOYE:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But on a lighter note Ms Ngoye do your people have 
nothing to do with the University of Zululand? 
MS NGOYE:  No Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I thought maybe they started the University. 
MS NGOYE:  No, no.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Because it is known as Ngoye. 
MS NGOYE:  Ngoye. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  The University of Zululand so I thought maybe your 
people started it.  Okay alright.  Yes.  Ms Soni – Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ms Ngoye just to place in context your evidence 
your – the affidavits you have made are contained in Bundle E and your 
affidavits is marked SS7.  Exhibit SS7. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now how many affidavits have you made in all? 
MS NGOYE:  I have made three affidavits. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay Mr Soni continue I am sorry. 
MS NGOYE:  I have made three affidavits altogether Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay.  So again just so that we can reach them 
easily Ms Ngoye if you look at the index you will see that the first 
affidavit which is dated the 16 t h of September 2019 is marked A and it 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 5 of 210 
 
appears from page 1 to page 276 together with the annexures.  Would 
that be correct? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Soni.  I think I was right.  We have not 
identified this bundle where these affidavits are, is it not?  And – so 
that when you talk about an affidavit then whoever reads knows in 
which bundle that affidavit is that you are referring to. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ms Ngoye is it correct that the three affidavits are 
in what is marked PRASA Bundle E? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chairperson. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Well when we are referring to the affidavits we will 
refer to Bundle E and the affidavit – affidavits as Exhibit SS7. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Soni is – are all the affidavits in here?  I know 
about two. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The third one has been inserted this morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Has been inserted. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The annexures – are they annexures to the first 
affidavit?  Are they annexures to the second affidavit?  Are they 
20 
annexures to the third affidavit? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  They – Chairperson you will see in the index the 
first affidavit has 15 annexures marked OMN1 to 15. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then second affidavit which is marked B in the 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 6 of 210 
 
index is from page 277 to 385 together with the annexures and that has 
10 annexures marked from OMN1 to OMN10. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then the third affidavit which is called a 
supplementary affidavit it is dated yesterday the 15 t h of March.  It has 
no annexures and it appears at page 386 to 398. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Is each affidavit a separate Exhibit? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It has not been marked as a separate Exhibit 
Chairperson.  It is all marked Exhibit SS7. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think they should be separate.  I think the one that 
10 
has got – the two that have got annexures each should be a separate 
exhibit contained in the same bundle. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then with its annexures so that there is no 
confusion. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because if you say Exhibit SS7 and you go to the first 
affidavit you will think that that is all that SS7 is. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And – so it will cause confusion.   
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think should then have SS7A, SS7B, SS7C. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Well this is what I was going to ask? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think I will then say the affidavit of Ms Onica Martha 
Ngoye deposed to on the 16 t h of September 2019 and its annexures will 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 7 of 210 
 
be marked – will be admitted and marked as Exhibit SS7A.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  SS7A. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The next one is on what page? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Page 277 Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  277? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  It is separated by the divider which is 
marked …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I have found it.  The affidavit of Ms Onica Martha 
Ngoye deposed to on the 17 t h of February 2020. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is the one Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that is the one that also has annexures hey? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And its annexure will be admitted and will be marked 
as Exhibit SS7B. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  B yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then where is the third one? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The other – the C is at 386 Chairperson of Bundle 
E. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it the one at 386? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is so Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  The affidavit of Ms Onica Martha Ngoye 
deposed to on the 15 t h of March 2020 will be admitted and marked as 
Exhibit SS7C.  Have we covered all of them? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Yes Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But your index did seem to indicate that there four 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 8 of 210 
 
affidavits if I am not mistaken.  At the end I – let me check what I saw? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry what the index seems to …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja that is what is shows. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It says there is a supplementary affidavit at page 386 
to 398 and there is a supplementary affidavit at – same – and then 
gives same pages. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that duplication? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It is yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm.  Why can people not see these things and 
eliminate them?  Ja okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As it pleases you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You can continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ms Ngoye you have read each of the affidavits 
here this morning? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And the annexures to those affidavits? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Do you confirm in respect of each of the affidavits 
20 
that is SS7A, SS7B and SS7C that what is contained in the affidavits is 
true and correct to the best of your knowledge? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chairperson I confirm that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And to the extent that you refer to affidavits – to 
annexures, the annexures you refer to are those that are annexed to 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 9 of 210 
 
the document – to your affidavit? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Now Ms Ngoye I just again for the purposes 
of putting things in context your affidavits together with the annexures 
deal with a whole range of matters? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I just want to say to you following consultations 
we have had in relation to the evidence that you will give now we have 
agreed that much of the details contained in the affidavits and the 
annexures might not be strictly relevant to the thrust of what the 
10 
Commission is investigation – investigating namely State Capture. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And therefore we will concentrate in your evidence 
on those matters directly implicated in State Capture. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now if I stray please bring me in line and if you 
stray you will forgive me if I bring you in line.  And I am sure if both of 
us stray the Chairperson is going to bring us both in line.  Okay well we 
can carry now.  Now Ms Ngoye can I just again to put things in context 
the affidavit marked SS7A is an affidavit that deals with one specific 
20 
matter namely a motley contract between PRASA and the DBSA worth 
about R4.7 billion? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And that is just one specific topic.  The second 
affidavit deals with a range of matters and I am going with the – into 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 10 of 210 
 
that in a moment but they all deal with the extent to which in your 
experience PRASA’s processes where – were followed so as to – or 
implemented so as to benefit certain beneficiaries. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And the third affidavit that is SS7C deals 
specifically with the Siyangena court papers in which you made the 
founding affidavit that is before court now? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Is it in order if we start with affidavit 77 – SS7B? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson that is SS7 page 277 – SS7B page 
277.  Now in this affidavit you sketch out in the first few paragraphs 
your position at PRASA and the type of work you do and in particular 
the extent to which you are a safeguard to ensuring that PRASA 
remains within or acts strictly within the law? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Right so let us start off with your position at 
PRASA. 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson currently I am the Group Executive for Legal 
Risk and Compliance.  So there is obviously quite a lot of work that one 
20 
does primarily advising the organisation on legal matters.  You know 
running litigations on behalf of the organisation with the attorneys, 
drafting contracts as well for the organisation, giving opinions where 
required and in certain instances we give those opinions where we 
believe they need to be given so that we can redirect the organisation 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 11 of 210 
 
to make sure that we are compliant with what we do.  So it is – and I 
am also responsible for the Risk Portfolio looking at governance related 
issues and compliance and in a nutshell you know that is basically what 
I do as a Group Executive leading a team of other lawyers in the 
organisation. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now one of the things that has come up before the 
Commission is the amount of litigation that PRASA has been involved in 
relating to different contracts that are signed.  I am sure there are 
other areas of litigation.  You are aware of that? 
MS NGOYE:  I am aware Chairperson. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Can I ask how, when you look at it now, did that 
come about? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just hang on there.  I am going to adjourn so that all 
this movements that happen here can be attended to without 
interrupting me. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us continue.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Miss Ngoye we were – I had asked you about the 
amount of litigations, especially relating to procurement matters.  You 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 12 of 210 
 
were going to explain to the Chairperson how you think this came about.   
MISS NGOYE:   Chairperson, there is a lot of litigation within PRASA and 
mainly the litigation, you know, focuses around the contracts that PRASA 
would have concluded with a whole lot of suppliers and when one looks at 
the issues at hand one finds that, you know, there is lack of compliance 
with processes within PRASA in many of these contracts and we find that, 
I mean, you know, we have to review some of the contracts and take them 
to court so that the decisions to enter into those contracts can be, you 
know, set aside.   
 
So, in terms of the number of contracts that we have, I think 
10 
PRASA is sued on, on a daily basis and there is a lot of litigation that, 
that goes on and Chairperson, perhaps it is also important for me to say 
while we deal with this litigation, you know, some, some people find that 
the assistance of the Legal Department is crucial and they welcome it and 
other regard us as a nuisance in the process.  So, you know, this is where 
we find ourselves and we have to obviously rely on the business in 
defending the matters where PRASA is concerned.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, in regard to the major litigation that we have 
led evidence on or have brought to the notice of the Chairperson, for 
example the Swifambo contract, the Siyangena contract, the Siyaya 
20 
contracts, what role did legal play in drafting the contracts advising how 
PRASA should deal with these matters? 
MISS NGOYE:   Chairperson, in respect of the Swifambo agreement that 
has been set aside by the Concort and the Supreme court of Appeal, the 
legal function was not involved at all.  This is a contract that was worth 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 13 of 210 
 
3.5 billion Rand.  The organization felt it necessary to appoint somebody 
else outside and not involve the Internal Legal Team in assisting with that 
contract.   
 
In fact, as far as Swifambo is concerned, what transpired was 
that there was a point where there was an intention to increase the value 
of the contract to 5 billion and this is where, you know, the Legal 
Department was approached and on looking at the initial contract we were 
obviously concerned as the Department because we found the number of 
provisions which were not necessarily complied with, for instance, you 
know, compliance with national Treasury requirements.   
10 
 
Some of the conditions precedent were not followed, were not 
met and when we raised these issues as far as the Swifambo contract 
was concerned, you know, we were found to be in peoples’ bad books and 
what we said as the legal function as far as that is concerned is that we 
will not participate in a contract that we believe is untoward and also, 
where we make suggestions for changes to be made those changes not 
being welcomed.  So we have made it very clear, rather do not involve the 
Legal Department because it is – it was a late stage already for our 
involvement and that is how it was.  The Siyangena contract as well, 
Chairperson.  I guess I must start by saying I had come to the Legal 
20 
Department in September 2014 so these contracts had already been 
concluded and my understanding is that even in those contracts legal – 
participation was very minimal, you know, we get called in when there is 
problems with the contract but in terms of drafting of those contracts and 
advising the organization, we have been excluded.   
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 14 of 210 
 
 
The Prodigy contract as well that, that is also, you know, being 
spoken of here, what we found is that, yes, again, we were not involved 
and when we raised issues around the amendments that were required as 
far as the contract is concerned one could say hell broke loose within the 
organization and the advice that we had given, also, at the time, 
considering the fact that processes were not followed, we looked at that 
and said, you know, obviously we cannot perpetuate this type of 
behaviour and I remember that the memo that we drafted for the Group 
CEO at the time was to say, look, this process was not necessarily 
followed properly and that we do not believe that the amendment should 
10 
be made, but, you know, that decision was seen as legal, being contrary 
to what people want to do as far as the organization was concerned and it 
really did not sit well within the organization.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   In fact, as you detail late in your affidavit, your 
refusal or reluctance to involve yourself in the Swifambo and Prodigy 
matters is what led to Mr Dingiswayo’s dismissal and in the day after, 
your dismissal.  
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chairperson.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it is going to be important to mention people’s 
names as to who did what, who ignored what so that we have a complete 
20 
picture as opposed to just generalizations. If a memo was addressed to a 
specific person saying, this is the advice and that person ignored it, let 
me know who that person is, who the memo was from, who was it to and 
what did the memo say and what was their response, okay? 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, Chairperson.   
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 15 of 210 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now we will come to those details in a moment, 
Miss Ngoye. You, in paragraph 9 of your affidavit talk about the period 
when Mr Lucky Montana was the CEO and you say that PRASA was 
wrapped with maladministration and corruption.  That is – would that be 
correct, is that what you are saying? 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, that is correct, Chairperson.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What is the position now? 
MISS NGOYE:   Chairperson, the more things change at PRASA, the more 
they stay the same.  Mr Montana left in 2015 and what we found is that 
from that period onwards, you know, things have not necessarily changed 
10 
to what we would have wanted them to be and I do reflect on that in my 
affidavit because it is very clear that issues around maladministration 
within PRASA continue.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni, I prefer that we start where we should start 
and go up to the end, for example this part obviously belongs to the end, 
so for me, it does not – I do not need it to be told about it now, only in 
general terms and later on the details.  I want to get it all in one place in 
the story so I would prefer that we start somewhere, we go up to the end 
and where we deal with an issue, I get all the details that I need to get at 
that time because otherwise when I read the transcript, I hear about these 
20 
generalities.  I want details and then I do not know that I will get the 
details later.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So I suggest we just start from beginning and we deal 
with issues as a whole and complete and then move on to the others up to 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 16 of 210 
 
the end.  So, in other words, I will want to know if there has been no 
change, but I want that at the end.  At this stage I want to talk you, to talk 
to me about 2014, 2015 bla, bla, bla okay? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, as you please, Chair.  Now, the first 
substantive matter you deal with in your affidavit, Miss Ngoye is the 
influence of Mr Roy Moodley at PRASA.   
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chairperson.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And you start that issue at paragraph 14 of your 
affidavit.   
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chairperson.   
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So, would you tell the Chairperson how it came 
about that you became aware of Mr Moodley’s influence and as the 
Chairperson has pointed out, one wants particulars about who the 
individuals were, who the entities were and to whose notice were certain 
matters brought in relation to concerns that you raise.   
MISS NGOYE:   Chairperson, my first encounter, effectively with the name 
Roy Moodley was in relation to a contract, an advertising contract, with a 
party called Strawberry Worx.  Now I had no knowledge of who Mr 
Moodley was at the time and this contract was concluded at the time that 
I was the CEO of Intersite so, in terms of PRASA’s mandate, Intersite is 
20 
responsible for leveraging on, on PRASA’s property portfolio so that it 
can support the rail business.   
 
This contract was entered into around about 2011 – 20 – yes, 
2011/2012 and the gist of the contract, really, was the provision of 
advertising for PRASA in relation to our various stations.  Now, I had 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 17 of 210 
 
come to know of Mr Moodley when I was summoned to a meeting.  What I 
understood from Mr Tiro Holele was that the group CEO at the time, Mr 
Lucky Montana had requested that Mr Holele call this meeting with the 
parties from Siyangena – I mean, Strawberry Worx so that a whole lot of 
issues can be ironed out.   
 
I welcomed the meeting because we at Intersite were running 
with the transaction and I did not see anything untoward and at the end of 
the day I think one can safely say that we did not, you know, benefit one 
supplier to the other, there were quite a number of players within the, the 
advertising portfolio.  So, for me it was, Strawberry Worx you have got 
10 
your part of the contract.  You will deal with your part of the contract and 
and obviously account accordingly where PRASA is concerned but I guess 
it was not to be because in this particular meeting where I was called, Mr 
Holele came with Mr Maharaj who, later on I do say Mr Chairperson, Mr 
Maharaj is the attorney for Strawberry Worx.  There was Mr Selvan 
Moodley who I later understood to be Mr Roy Moodley’s son and there 
was a Mr Ashveer, I just did not know how to pronounce his surname, 
Chairperson ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think it is Vally.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It is there.  If you look at paragraph 15.4, Miss 
20 
Ngoye you will see there.   
MISS NGOYE:   It is Dwarikapersadh.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
MISS NGOYE:   It is ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Dwarikapersadh. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 18 of 210 
 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that the one? 
MISS NGOYE:   That one.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Dwarikapersadh.  I could be completely 
mispronouncing it.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Dwarikapersadh.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Hey? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Dwarikapersadh.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Dwarikapersadh.  Okay.  We must try and pronounce it 
the way it should be pronounced.  Okay.   
10 
MISS NGOYE:   Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry, I just saw that we have the timelines.  You, at 
that time, were at the CEO of Intersite.  Could you tell the Chairperson 
between what period and what period you were the Chairperson of 
Intersite? 
MISS NGOYE:   Chairperson, I was the CEO of Intersite from August of 
2011 till August of 2014 so I occupied that role during that period.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And as the CEO, what would your powers and your 
duties be in relation to contracts that Intersite had concluded with 
different contracts? 
20 
MISS NGOYE:   Chair, I think at the time Intersite had the benefit of me 
being an attorney as well that I could look at the contracts that were 
entered into and advise accordingly on what needs to happen as far as 
those contracts were concerned so even though I was the CEO, you know, 
I did manage really and work together with the commercial unit within, 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 19 of 210 
 
within Intersite in making sure that, as an example, this particular 
contract is managed properly and we account properly where PRASA is 
concerned.  So over and above all the other work that I had to do from a 
strategic perspective, you know, I played a huge role as far as legal 
matters were concerned within Intersite.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just again, Intersite was one of two subsidiaries of 
PRASA. Is that right?  
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and the contract that you were talking about for 
10 
advertising was a contract between PRASA or involving PRASA or 
involving Intersite. 
MISS NGOYE:   No, Chair.  The contract was with Intersite.  What had 
transpired was that part of the mandate of Intersite coming from PRASA 
was that PRASA – Intersite would enter into certain contracts on behalf of 
PRASA and this was, you know, for revenue generation purposes where 
Intersite was concerned and also in line with the mandate that PRASA 
had given Intersite of leveraging, you know, PRASA’s Property portfolio 
and making money because at the end of the day we would account to the 
group in terms of the revenue that we were making.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I was told last week of advertising on PRASA Property.  
Is that what you are talking about? 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, in relation to the Strawberry Worx contract, it 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 20 of 210 
 
was between whom and whom?  
MISS NGOYE:   The Strawberry Worx contract, Chairperson was between 
Intersite and Strawberry Worx.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And was the contract in existence at the time you 
were appointed CEO of Intersite? 
MISS NGOYE:   No, the contract was not yet in existence.  The, in fact, 
as far as the advertising portfolio was concerned, Chairperson, we had 
the contract being awarded to a company called Umjanji Consortium and 
what had been agreed at the time was that some portions of the contract 
would be seeded to other suppliers.  So a portion of that particular 
10 
contract was then seeded to Strawberry Worx and the Strawberry Worx 
contract really was finalized around about 2012.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And you were part of that process which Strawberry 
Worx became involved in what Umjanji had seeded? 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chairperson.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And there was – from your understanding, there was 
nothing improper about that.   
MISS NGOYE:   Well, Chair, I – you know, I suppose being a legal person, 
you look at the procurement procedure, you know and you become 
concerned with when somebody speaks about sessions of a procurement 
20 
process and the concern that one had was that we could be challenged 
out there because clearly that was not the aim.  You could not just enter 
into an agreement with a party and then seed off portions of it to other 
people who had not necessarily been successful in the tender, but this is 
what transpired in this case and the decision for the session 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 21 of 210 
 
...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   The session would defeat the whole purpose for 
procurement.   
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chairperson.  So in this regard, you 
know, when the instruction came to say we need to seed this contract, the 
instruction came from the Board of Intersite at the time and the 
Chairperson of the Board of Intersite at the time was Mr Lucky Montana 
so effectively, you know, that instruction was carried through, but the 
concerns were raised around, you know, seeding contracts following a 
procurement process.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   The instruction was to do what?  To seed? 
MISS NGOYE:   To seed.  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   The, the rights to seed whose rights to whom? 
MISS NGOYE:   Well, because Umjanji, Chairperson, Consortium had 
been the successful bidder, so it was basically taken away from Umjanji 
and given to Strawberry Worx, so that had to be a consent coming from 
Umjanji to say, yes, I consent to the session of – at portion of the 
advertising portfolio to Strawberry Worx. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, there was in existence a contract between Intersite 
and Umjanji.   
20 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And that was for advertisements to be done on PRASA 
Properties.   
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And that had been in existence from when, that 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 22 of 210 
 
contract? 
MISS NGOYE:   From 2011.   
CHAIRPERSON:   From 2011.   
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And as far as you know, it too had been implemented 
over the years.   
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And then this is now 2014, 2015? 
MISS NGOYE:   This is now 2012, 2013.   
MISS NGOYE:   No, when, when the instruction comes to say there should 
10 
be a session from Umjanji to Strawberry Worx.  When is that – when was 
that instruction? 
MISS NGOYE:   It was around 2012.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Around 2012? Oh, okay.  Alright.  And basically it 
sought to – the instruction sought to make sure that whatever benefits 
would have been given to, would have been obtained by Umjanji would 
now go to Strawberry Worx.   
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So, this instruction came about a year or so after the 
contract had been concluded between Umjanji and Intersite.   
20 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay.  Alright.  Thank you.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, when the instruction came from the Intersite 
Board and you say Mr Montana was, Chairperson I do not think there was 
any dispute that the CEO of PRASA was the Chairperson of the Boards of 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 23 of 210 
 
Intersite and Autopax.  When that instruction came where any concerns 
raised by you or by your Legal Team at Intersite?  
MISS NGOYE:   Chairperson, as I indicated, the concerns were raised, I 
mean, I remember being one of the people that raised the concern of the 
session between, you know, parties in light of the procurement process 
that I understood had been, you know, undertaken so I definitely raised 
the issues around the session as a concern but, you know, I guess one is 
overruled and this is basically what happened.  The session proceeded 
and we entered into a contract with Strawberry Worx.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Now, this instruction, did it come to you in a Board 
10 
meeting of Intersite or was it given to you outside of the Board meeting, 
so when it was given for the first time? 
MISS NGOYE:   It was given by the Board.   
CHAIRPERSON:   It was given by the Board? 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, it was given by the Board because from an authority 
perspective they had to authorise me to then sign that contract so it came 
from the Board of Intersite at the time.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Now the advertisement agreement.  Did they not 
entail that whoever had a contract with Intersite in this regard would 
obtain clients who want advertisements to be placed on certain properties 
20 
of PRASA and that that entity would put those advertisements and then 
the clients would pay that entity and that entity would then pay some 
money to Intersite or PRASA.  Is that not what was involved? 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chairperson.  In fact, in terms of the 
contract, there was a 60/40 split of the revenue so where PRASA, for 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 24 of 210 
 
instance, you know, gave Capex, for instance, in relation to particular 
structures which would be used for advertising purposes, then PRASA 
would get 60% of the revenue coming back and vice versa, Chairperson, 
where for instance any of the other, you know, advertising companies 
invested their monies in respect of the advertising portfolio the reverse 
would apply where 60% of the revenue would then go to them and the 
40% would then be accounted for where Intersite was concerned.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Thank you.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now one, when you raised your concerns about the 
session I take it one of your concerns was that this could – the award 
10 
could be challenged on the basis as you said that that is not what the 
purpose of awarding a tender is.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That is correct, Chairperson.  In fact, that whole 
advertising contract was a subject of litigation.  We were challenged you 
know, primarily by Prime Media who believed that the process that was 
followed was not proper.  So, you know, it was inevitable that doing the 
session as well, you know, would compound the issues where we are 
concerned.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So is the position that, in 2011 when that contract was 
concluded between Intersite and Umjanji procurement processing had not 
20 
been complied with there as well and that when an instruction to effect a 
session was given that too, you pointed out to the Board, would defeat 
the purpose of procurement? 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 25 of 210 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, in regard to the Prime Media matter, Miss 
Ngoye, you referred to it in paragraph 15.5 of your affidavit, that is SS7B.  
Is that correct? 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chairperson.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, what was Prime Media’s, if you can recall, 
what were their main complaints when they challenged this award? 
MISS NGOYE:   Chairperson, at the time of the tender process, there was 
a company by the name of Provantage that was part of, you know, the 
companies that had bid for the advertising portfolio.  Now what transpired 
after the completion of the tender process was that Provantage then, you 
10 
know, entered into an agreement with another company and they formed 
the Consortium of Umjanji.  Now, clearly, you know, that as well, you 
know, from a procurement perspective cannot be correct because I do 
recall that when the approval was sought from the group CEO, Mr 
Montana, that Provantage was the successful winner.  He indicated that 
he is not happy about the BEE component of Provantage and then the, 
Consortium was then formed which was then called Umjanji.  Now when 
Prime Media challenges this whole tender process, it also challenges it 
on the basis that the party that had tendered was Provantage and not 
Umjanji Consortium as had been the case after the award of the contract 
20 
and so those were some of the issues that Provantage had raised as a 
concern for them to say this process was flawed because the parties that 
participated in the tender process were really at the end of the day 
disregarded if one could just simply form separate entities outside the 
procurement process.   
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 26 of 210 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now when you say that Prime Media challenged the 
award was it through a court application? 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chairperson.  In fact the matter has still 
not been finalized.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Why after so long? 
MISS NGOYE:   It is a complex issue, Chairperson, I mean it has been an 
issue where, for instance with the involvement also of Strawberry Worx 
fighting for their rights.  There were quite a number of companies in fact 
there were three companies where Umjanji had to seed their rights to.  So 
we had Umjanji, we had a company called Siyathembana and then we had 
10 
a company called Strawberry Worx so in dealing with this matter we found 
that each party then wanted to be represented, wanted to take part in the 
litigation and that is why it prolonged, but also, Chairperson, one must 
mention that we had a challenge internally with the lawyers that were 
assisting us at the time.  We had briefed Hogan Lovells, for instance, to 
assist us with this particular matter, but you know, during the running of 
the matter it was felt that Hogan Lovells was not doing its work and it was 
criticized extensively and we were instructed rather to appoint another 
law firm to deal with the matter.  So, you know, the stop and start is what 
frustrated the process.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  When you say it was felt, who felt that way? 
MISS NGOYE:   Mr Montana, for instance. I received a call from Mr 
Montana to say, hey, Martha, you need to change lawyers you know and I 
was like, but why, because the lawyers are doing what they are supposed 
to be doing.  No, no, no, no.  They are not defending the interests of 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 27 of 210 
 
PRASA properly I did not agree with it, you know, Chairperson, because I 
was instrumentally involved in the running of that matter so I knew what 
was at stake and and when that instruction came I refused to carry it out.  
I said to Mr Montana in any event the company that you want us to brief 
is not even on our Panel, you know that’s an issue for me and also 
what is going to happen to all the costs that we have already incorrect 
in the work that Hogan Lovells had done, we’re briefing a new firm, so I 
just wasn’t comfortable with doing that and I just decided not to heed 
the call and I left it at that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   If you look at paragraph 15.6 of your affidavit Ms 
10 
Ngoye you raise another matter concerning expenditure or the nature of 
the expenditure that changing lawyers would entail, the first sentence 
of paragraph 15.6 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And would you tell the Chairperson what that 
was? 
MS NGOYE:   Chairperson it was precisely around you know the 
changing of lawyers midstream and ...(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe before you proceed you should tell me 
because I see in your affidavit at paragraph 15.5, what firm Mr Montana 
20 
wanted to be instructed? 
MS NGOYE:   There was a firm called BBM Attorneys, I don’t know what 
the acronym stands for Chairperson, but they call themselves BBM 
Attorneys and we were supposed to state the matter to BBM for them to 
run with it. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 28 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And were they on PRASA’s Panel of Attorneys? 
MS NGOYE:   No Chairperson they were not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What was the position about law firms that were on 
PRASA’s Panel of Attorneys, was the position that when PRASA 
instructs attorneys it had to confine itself to those attorneys who were 
on the Panel all the time or was the position that in certain 
circumstances attorneys who were not on the Panel could be briefed by 
PRASA and if so what would be those circumstances? 
MS NGOYE:   Chairperson it was very clear within PRASA that if a law 
firm is not on the Panel it cannot be briefed, I mean this was also 
10 
making sure that you know when the AG comes, the Auditor General, 
comes and audits the organisation we can then produce a list of 
attorneys and they can obviously look at who we have briefed, so it was 
a known fact a known fact within PRASA that unless a law firm is on the 
Panel of PRASA it cannot be briefed and that was the position, you 
know the reality was that we did not want to fall foul of those processes 
as well in our policies internally when we made sure that we only spec 
with those companies that are on the Panel. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well was this position part of PRASA policy that is 
written down and existed somewhere? 
20 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chairperson 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it was clear? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes it was very clear Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright.  Yes you may continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   In fact just to move to the related but different 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 29 of 210 
 
point when Werksmans was appointed to do the investigation the AG 
raised the question that that was an irregular appointment because they 
were not on the list of PRASA’s attorneys is that not correct? 
MS NGOYE:   Well I guess the AG raised it, Werksmans was on our 
Panel, let me start by saying that, so they were on our Panel but the 
issues that the AG had raised were primarily around the type of work 
that Werksmans was undertaking for the organisation and they felt that 
at the time PRASA ought to have gone out on tender because this was 
an investigation really at the end of the day and that’s where the 
challenge was, but at the end of the day Werksmans had been on 
10 
PRASA’s Panel when the decision was taken to work with Werksmans, 
so there as different appreciation or understanding Chairperson 
between what was really required and what had been done by the Board 
in the appointment of Werksmans. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And before any law firm could be placed on PRASA’s 
Panel I take it that there was some accreditation process that would be 
undertaken by PRASA, is that correct? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chairperson, the Panel comprised of those 
firms that had participated ...(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   That meet certain criteria. 
20 
MS NGOYE:   That’s it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that right? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And they would bid to be on the Panel? 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 30 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:   Yes, yes Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now just so that we are not at cross-purposes at 
some later stage you talk about a PRASA Panel of Attorneys, you 
indicated that this was a contract the Strawberry Worx contract was 
between Intersite and Strawberry Worx. 
MS NGOYE:  H’mm.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Was the Panel that Intersite used the same as 
PRASA’s Panel? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes Chair in fact how it works within PRASA the Group is 
that the legal function is central so the legal function sits at Head 
10 
Office as a support function so all the subsidiaries of PRASA would 
then go to the legal function to ask for assistance there, the budgets of 
that work would sit in the corporate function with the Legal Department, 
so none of the subsidiaries had a budget for legal work. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Can we turn to the instruction that you must dis-
appointment Hogan Lovells and appoint BBM, what happened to that 
instruction? 
MS NGOYE:   Well Chair as I indicated I didn’t understand the rationale 
for the instruction from Mr Montana but it was a serious issue and we –
one can safely say that we were really under strain to justify why we 
20 
should not be using BBM, you know one would have thought that it is 
what it is at the end of the day when you have a law firm that is not 
even on the Panel and there’s an insistence that we give it work and at 
the end of the day we were also looking at the monies that the 
organisation had spent with Hogan Lovell so it just didn’t make sense 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 31 of 210 
 
to us that we just move this on instruction because somebody there 
says Hogan Lovell is not representing and looking out for the interests 
of PRASA accordingly so you know it was just one of those things that 
we just – we were just not comfortable doing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is Mr Montana a lawyer? 
MS NGOYE:   Not that I know of Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no your answer is either yes or no. 
MS NGOYE:   Okay he is not a lawyer Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But of course if you don’t know you can’t say he is 
10 
not. 
MS NGOYE:   Well that is the other thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If you don’t know whether he is or he is not then you 
can tell me you don’t know whether he is or not. 
MS NGOYE:   Well I don’t know if he is Chair ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, okay, alright.  Did you say to him but Mr 
Montana how can you say we must instruct a law firm that is not on our 
Panel, you know what the policy position is and if you did what did he 
say to that? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes Chair Mr Montana was aware you know that it is just 
20 
not possible, one wanted – I wanted to find out really what the rationale 
is for this request from him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What did he say? 
MS NGOYE:   And his explanation was no, Hogan & Lovell is not 
looking after the interests of PRASA, we need to move this to another 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 32 of 210 
 
law firm. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that might explain moving the work from Hogan 
Lovell but it can’t be explained why a firm that is not on the Panel 
should be the one to which the work must be moved, so did he give you 
an answer as to why a firm that is not – that was not on the Panel of 
PRASA should be used? 
MS NGOYE:   There was no explanation Chair, we were just told move, 
move it to this law firm. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS NGOYE:   And that’s it. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now with regard to Hogan Lovells with regard to 
them did he say, did he give you details as to what it is that he said 
they had not done well. 
MS NGOYE:   It was a general statement Chairperson, it was very 
general, about protecting ...(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   That they were not protecting PRASA/ 
MS NGOYE:   Ja, in the interests of PRASA they are not doing well and 
that was not sufficient. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you as the Head of the Legal Department you 
were satisfied with the work of that firm? 
20 
MS NGOYE:   Yes that is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You had no problems? 
MS NGOYE:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As it pleases.  Now eventually though what was 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 33 of 210 
 
the solution devised by Mr Montana to ensure that Hogan Lovells was 
removed?   You wouldn’t act on that instruction as I understand it 
...(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni I think you should put the question 
differently, we haven’t heard from the witness whether any scheme was 
devised.  What did Mr Montana do when you refused to remove the 
work from Hogan Lovells to BBM? 
MS NGOYE:   Well Chair I can safely say that Mr Montana was not 
happy and I spoke earlier of a meeting that I was summonsed to with 
the representatives of Strawberry Worx.  Now for me it was very clear 
10 
because really at that meeting those representatives of Strawberry 
Worx that were there had come to tell me as well to move Hogan 
Lovells as the attorneys for PRASA and in fact what I was told was that 
they would make sure that the advertising portfolio is moved from 
Intersite and is going to be run at Corporate, so you know at the end of 
the day what also transpired was that Mr Montana he had not 
communicated to me really what he was going to do but I just saw you 
know it would unfold, for instance I was you now at Intersite and the 
next thing I knew Chairperson was that Mr Montana’s special legal 
advisor, he had a special legal advisor by the name of Malini Naidoo, 
20 
came to the offices of Intersite and started removing the files. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Started? 
MS NGOYE:   Removing the files. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Removing the files. 
MS NGOYE:   The files in relation to the advertising portfolio. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 34 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS NGOYE:   Obviously I found that very strange and when I enquired 
as to you know where the instructions come from I received a very 
hostile response from Ms Naidoo who you know for instance told me 
that she was an officer of the court, she was here to remove the files, 
she was instructed by Mr Lucky Montana to do so and found it you know 
rather amazing that I was refusing to release the file and started 
accusing me of corruption, right there, you know her words were what 
is it that you are hiding, that you don’t want these files to be removed. 
 
Remember at the time there was no instructions from Mr 
10 
Montana to say look I am going to remove these files from Intersite, it 
just happened like that, that people just came in, led by Ms Malini 
Naidoo, who was Mr Montana’s special advisor, she just came and 
removed the files. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did she say she was doing so on Mr Montana’s 
instructions? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes Chair, she told me that, in fact she – her attitude was 
you can ask whoever you want, but Mr Montana is the one that said we 
must come and remove these files. 
CHAIRPERSON:   How long did – how long after your discussion with 
20 
Mr Montana did this happen? 
MS NGOYE:   It was about two/three months after Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS NGOYE:   That you know there was this rash move. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And in the interim during that three or so months you 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 35 of 210 
 
he had not come back to you to say look I heard what you said but I am 
going to instruct people to come and remove the file? 
MS NGOYE:   No he hadn’t Chair, in fact when that happened I phoned 
Mr Montana to want to know what is going on, but I didn’t find him, so I 
then phoned – we had a Lead Independent Director because Mr 
Montana was the Group CEO and Chairperson as well of Intersite and 
when I phoned Mr Bennie Butshelo and I said Mr Butshelo what is going 
on, I am not advised of this instruction, the mandate of advertising from 
the PRASA Board sits with Intersite and there is no resolution that I 
know of that removes that portfolio from Intersite back to Corporate, 
10 
what is going on and Mr Butshelo was puzzled, he didn’t know what was 
going on and he indicated to me that he will find out from Mr Montana, 
but effectively Chair that’s what transpired and when I met Mr Montana 
the following day I basically said to him but Mr Montana how can you 
send people to come and attack me, I remember that’s exactly what I 
said, to come and attack me and I report directly to you, you know in 
terms of the structure, why is it that you did not tell me that you are 
sending people to Intersite to come and remove the files.   You could 
have told me, I even said to him so I must just be aware because 
maybe people will come in and attack me and I wouldn’t know about it. 
20 
 
Mr Montana said well he didn’t know anything about it, he 
didn’t know anything about the removals of those files, he didn’t 
instruct anybody and then I requested that we then schedule a meeting 
you know with the individuals that had come and represented that he 
was the one that instructed them, but that meeting took a different form 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 36 of 210 
 
Chairperson 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well maybe you need to tell us that difference 
because that’s part of the removal of the files and what happened to 
them. 
MS NGOYE:   Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS NGOYE:   You know Chair we met in that meeting with Mr Montana, 
myself, Mr Tiro Holele, Mr Tiro Holele was the strategy officer in the 
office of the Group CEO, then we had Ms Malini Naidoo, the advisor, 
Special Advisor to Mr Montana, then we had the late ...(indistinct) 
10 
Mzinge who was responsible for the Corporate Affairs portfolio within 
the organisation.   
 
Now I went there wanting really to find out how Mr Montana 
could then have given this instruction and then come back and say he 
didn’t and I thought that you know Mr Montana would reprimand the 
people that just basically came to Intersite and removed the file.  It 
didn’t happen like that.  In fact within minutes of that meeting Mr 
Montana’s words were you see if you guys had listened to what I had 
said to you we would not be sitting here and ...(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   If you guys had listened to who? 
20 
MS NGOYE:   To what he had said to us, about the advertising portfolio 
...(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   The guys here, the reference to the guys here being 
a reference to who? 
MS NGOYE:   Mr Holele and myself. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 37 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS NGOYE:   Mr Lindikaya Zede, who was the company secretary at 
the time, also you know knew about the instruction to remove the files, 
so Mr Montana effectively said to us we wouldn’t be sitting here if you 
people, referring to the three of us, had listened to what I said and 
therefore he wants these files to be removed, so we didn’t deal in that 
meeting with the fact that he had said he didn’t authorise the removal 
of those files.   In fact there were lots of accusations that were levelled 
against me by Ms Malini Naidoo in the presence of Mr Montana you 
know accusing me of corruption, accusing me of maladministration and 
10 
you know at the end I said to Mr Montana well if that’s the case then 
suspend me, so that you can conduct your investigations but I don’t 
agree with what is being is said and the issue here was about the 
removal of the files and the instruction that you had given, so clearly 
now you are going against the word that you had told me that you had 
no knowledge of this instruction and now it appears that you are 
actually supporting what was done. 
 
You know the meeting was a horrible meeting Chairperson.  In 
fact in that meeting what Mr Montana decided was there was a Martin 
Chauke, who was responsible for running the advertising portfolio 
20 
within Intersite, an instruction was given to say call Mr Chauke and 
suspend him and tell him to bring you now PRASA’s equipment.  This 
was around 22:00 at night Chairperson and we had to do that and I was 
very clear I wasn’t going to suspend Mr Chauke because I just didn’t 
agree with how you know things were done and Ms Holtzinger together 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 38 of 210 
 
with Ms Malini Naidoo then decided to draft the letter and to suspend 
Mr Martin Chauke, so we had to call Mr Chauke into the office and he 
arrived roundabout 23:00 at night to be told that he is being suspended 
and that the portfolio in any event has moved to the Corporate function 
and I must state Chairperson that the issue around the governance 
processes of that removal were also a concern because what we had 
said is then give us then a resolution from the PRASA Board that 
directs that we need to do this.  It never came you know so that’s how 
things worked. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you didn’t get – Mr Montana didn’t say at that 
10 
meeting I never – I had not given instructions in the past that the files 
be removed as such but his utterances at the meeting suggested to you 
that he had actually given the instruction is that right? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS NGOYE:   In fact what ...(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   Certainly at the meeting he was fully in support of 
the removal of the files? 
MS NGOYE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson I see it is 11:15 and at the risk of 
...(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   There are a number of issues that arises and I 
want to just tie up things so that I could tell you in the affidavit where 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 39 of 210 
 
these matters appear. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No that’s fine let us deal with them after the tea 
break, let us take the tea break, we will resume at half past.  We 
adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, let us proceed.  Your mic and your voice. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Ms Ngoye, the evidence you have given just 
before we broke, would I be correct that it is all set out in paragraph 15 
10 
which has 17 subparagraphs to it? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  This is off your affidavit called SS7B. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now just to tie up a few small points.  Re effect of – 
what was the effect of that meeting in regard to where the portfolio – the 
advertising portfolio, concerning Strawberry Worx was? 
MS NGOYE:  It had moved to the corporate function of PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did that mean that Intersite would have nothing to do 
with it or did it mean that Intersite would still have something to do with it 
20 
but you as CEO maybe and your team at Intersite would not have 
anything to do with it? 
MS NGOYE:  No Chair, it was very clear.  It was removed all together 
form Intersite so effectively all of us at Intersite would have nothing to do 
with that portfolio. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 40 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But Intersite would remain a party to that agreement. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But the management at Intersite would have no role to 
play. 
MS NGOYE:  That is right Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Thank you.  The next question is ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Soni.  I am terribly sorry.  Did that mean 
that different people would be the people to instruct attorneys? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  In fact, that is what happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is what happened? 
MS NGOYE:  H’mm yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  At that time, you were at Intersite and not 
in the Legal Department of PRASA.  But once it was – these files were at 
corporate services, did that mean they would fall under the Legal 
Department of PRASA or not necessarily? 
MS NGOYE:  Not necessarily Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
MS NGOYE:  In fact, they were run from the office of Mr Lucky Montana 
the Group CEO. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  His special advisor Ms Malini Naidoo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 41 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  Became the person that ran with the process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  This might just be something as an aside, did you 
say Ms Naidoo was a legal advisor to Mr Montana? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson, special legal advisor. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Special legal advisor. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may or may not be able to answer this.  Would 
there have been a need for a special legal advisor to the Group CEO in – 
for PRASA in circumstances where PRASA had a Legal Department which 
was supposed to provide legal advice to PRASA?  And I would imagine 
10 
including the Group CEO. 
MS NGOYE:  Well I did not think so Chairperson because as the Group 
Executive responsible for legal one would have thought that there is no 
need for a special legal advisor for Mr Montana.  But you know these 
things I suppose ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you know whether there was provision in the 
instruments of PRASA, policies or organogram or whatever that made 
space for the appointment of a special legal advisor to the Group CEO? 
MS NGOYE:  No Chair, there was not any. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There was not any? 
20 
MS NGOYE:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now in regard to – well if I could just follow up from 
what the Chairperson has asked.  You are the Head of Legal now at 
PRASA, you have been since 2014 – August 2014. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 42 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  How many lawyers including yourself work in your 
Department? 
MS NGOYE:  Well now the number has dwindled Chairperson.  I think now 
there is four legal advisors left but we were at one point seven legal 
advisors that were part of the team. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And at the time of the – this incident when the 
portfolio was taken from you, from Intersite, how many legal advisors 
were there at PRASA head office? 
MS NGOYE:  There were roughly 5/6 Chairperson. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And in your view they had the necessary experience 
to deal with all matters concerning PRASA and perhaps CEO? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chairperson.  I believe that all of them in fact are 
admitted attorneys so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  When these files were at Intersite when you were still 
the CEO of Intersite, were they being handled with the guidance of the 
Legal Department of PRASA? 
MS NGOYE:  No Chair, they were in the office of the Group CEO Mr 
Montana and because ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  I mean before they were removed from Intersite.  That 
20 
is what I am talking about. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes, yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where – before they were removed from Intersite 
...(intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 43 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were they being handled with the guidance of the Legal 
Department of PRASA? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay but you say after they were removed from Intersite 
that changed. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes, that is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now in your affidavit SS7B at paragraph 15.4 you 
10 
refer – this is a meeting to which you referred earlier.  One of the people 
whom you name as being at the meeting is Mr Maraj.  Do you see that? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then if you look at 15.6 you say the last 
attorneys who handled the matter was Maraj Attorneys.  Is there a 
relationship between Maraj Attorneys and Mr Maraj? 
MS NGOYE:  It was one and the same person Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And besides now acting for PRASA whom were Maraj 
Attorneys acting for in the dispute with Prime Media? 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson, effectively they were acting for both PRASA 
20 
and Strawberry Worx. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So, let us get this right.  As at the time when the files 
were removed from PRASA – from Intersite the attorneys being used by 
Intersite/PRASA were Hogan Lovells. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 44 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Once the files were removed and place at corporate 
services at PRASA where the attorneys dealing with the matter on behalf 
of Intersite/PRASA changed. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair, in fact Hogan Lovells was removed from the 
brief. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And who was instructed to handle the matter on behalf 
of Intersite/PRASA? 
MS NGOYE:  Mr Maraj. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Maraj – Maraj Attorneys. 
MS NGOYE:  Maraj Attorneys, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you say Maraj Attorneys was also acting for 
Strawberry Worx. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And at the time that the matter was still being handled 
by Intersite before the removal of the files, was Maraj during that time 
acting for Strawberry Worx? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Strawberry Worx alone in this dispute but later on, he 
20 
acter for both Strawberry Worx and Intersite/PRASA? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now much earlier Ms Ngoye you said that this 
dispute is still ongoing. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 45 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  H’mm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  You recall Ms Ngoye?  
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Who acts for PRASA at present in that dispute? 
MS NGOYE:  Hogan Lovells acts for PRASA Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And for Strawberry Worx? 
MS NGOYE:  I think it is still Mr Maraj.  I could be wrong Chairperson but 
we removed the instructions from Mr Maraj because of the conflict 
obviously that was there and we took the matters back to Hogan Lovells 
and they continue to run. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  We have not gotten there.  So, at the time you are at 
Intersite, Maraj Attorneys are acting for both PRASA and Strawberry 
Worx. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  When did you put an end to Maraj Attorneys – or 
when did Maraj Attorneys instructions to appear to represent PRASA end? 
MS NGOYE:  I think it was two months within my arrival within the legal 
function where myself together with the General Manager Mr Dingiswayo 
agreed that we could not have a situation where an attorney for a supplier 
is also acting for PRASA.  And also, we were not seeing traction as far as 
20 
this matter was concerned and we believed that we needed to give them 
notice to say they accumulated – and also Chairperson I must state that 
Maraj was also not on PRASA’s Panel at the time that they were 
instructed.  So, we had to deal with all those issues just to bring some 
semblance of order within the legal function. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 46 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Just to complete that part of the picture.  As I 
understand it, when the matter was taken from Intersite Ms Malini Naidoo 
was effectively the legal advisor for PRASA in relation to that matter? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  When you got to PRASA Head Office in August 2014, 
you then removed Maraj Attorneys as PRASA’s instructed attorneys. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  At that stage where was the file – the Strawberry 
Worx file in terms of the legal part? 
10 
MS NGOYE:  The files had been at the corporate function.  The files were 
also with Mr Maraj so we naturally had to pay Mr Maraj to get our files 
back because obviously he would not release the files until his fees were 
paid.  So that is what we needed to do and that is what we did. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Is that the condition he put to returning the files to 
you? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now in regard to Mr Chauke he is suddenly 
suspended, was any reason given to him to your knowledge for why he 
was suspended? 
20 
MS NGOYE:  His letter said it was insubordination Chairperson so 
...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  What were the details of the alleged insubordination? 
MS NGOYE:  The fact ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  As you understood them. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 47 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  Yes.  The fact that he was- what Mr Martin Chauke was 
actually accused of was working with a supplier at the detriment of 
PRASA and effectively what had happened at the time Chairperson was 
that both Ms Malini Naidoo as well as the late Ms Hope Zinde had not 
understood because they had just come into that process not long.  They 
had misunderstood the communication between Mr Chauke and one of the 
service providers where he insisted that certain things was supposed to 
be done in a particular way as far as the contract was concerned because 
he was managing that contract.  So, they took that correspondence to 
mean that Mr Chauke was working against PRASA and conniving with 
10 
Prime – Provantage.   
 
So, it just did not make sense and when I in that meeting with Mr 
Montana tried to explain that, it became an issue of saying, no, well that 
is not how things work.  And because the meeting was so tense you then 
could not even find a way of saying let us step back and really 
understand what it is that we are talking about.  But they had created this 
impression that, no, Mr Martin Chauke is working with the opposition and 
therefore he must be removed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  How long was he suspended for? 
MS NGOYE:  Mr Chauke was suspended for a period of about 2 years 
20 
Chairperson without being charged. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And was he ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  That would have been from when to when in terms of 
years 2015, 2014? 
MS NGOYE:  No, it was 2014 so he came back in 2016. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 48 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  H’mm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not remember the month or when the suspension 
started? 
MS NGOYE:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was it the end of the year? 
MS NGOYE:  No, it was not the end of the year Chair.  It was around 
June, I think. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS NGOYE:  Of 2013. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh 2013? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes.  It was 2013. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS NGOYE:  When Mr Martin Chauke was asked to leave.  So, the whole 
of 2014, 2015 he was not at work.  He only came back in 2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  Ja.  So, it was over 2 years effectively. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And do you know why no charging’s were brought 
20 
for so long? 
MS NGOYE:  Well Chairperson I mean I guess for me it was very clear 
that there were no charges.  People could not put the charges together to 
– in fact he was like a forgotten soul.  He is out there and therefore it 
does not matter anymore. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 49 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  Because the expectation that one would have had is that I 
mean if you are accusing somebody of that, you would immediately 
prepare the charges but it was not done. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now at paragraph 15.17 of SSAB, that is this 
affidavit that we are dealing with, you say that what you have narrated is 
being done to show the power of mister or the influence of Mr Roy 
Moodley at PRASA. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair.  Chair you will recall I had indicated 
10 
that I did not know Mr Moodley.  So, but when I then got to understand 
what was happening within Intersite with this advertising portfolio and the 
instructions that were given, it really became clear to me that Mr Moodley 
was very powerful.  Because what I was told at the meeting was, we are 
going to remove these files, we are going to remove this portfolio from 
Intersite.  And it happened.  So, to me it was very clear that, wow, we 
have got somebody who is clearly very powerful who can give those 
instructions and they carried out. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now why do you connect Mr Moodley, Roy Moodley, 
with Strawberry Worx? 
20 
MS NGOYE:  His son Chairperson Selvan Moodley was really instrumental 
in running that portfolio.  So, he managed that portfolio and that 
relationship obviously father and son for me was very clear that even 
though Mr Moodley was not involved, the son was involved. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was Strawberry Worx Mr Roy Moodley son’s company at 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 50 of 210 
 
it were? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes.  Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And you say that on the basis of what? 
MS NGOYE:  Well Chairperson this the – I was made to understand that 
that is the case where Strawberry Worx was really – I think it was one of 
the Directors at Strawberry Worx and so it followed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And in your view ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you ever – I am sorry.  Did you ever see 
correspondence from Strawberry Worx that maybe was signed by him or 
10 
anything like that? 
MS NGOYE:  In most instances the correspondence from Strawberry Worx 
was singed by Mr Ashveer.  So, he would be the one that does a lot of the 
letters to PRASA/Intersite.  But the company document has Mr Selvan 
Moodley. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  As a Director in the company. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So, Mr Roy Moodley’s son was reflected as one of the 
Directors in the correspondence. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And just finally when on that issue.  When you were 
managing the Strawberry Worx portfolio as the CEO of Intersite, did you 
have interactions with Mr Selvan Moodley? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes, I did Chair.  It was in that meeting where I was 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 51 of 210 
 
constantly told that I do not know what I am doing and I was told that I 
needed – in fact I was given instructions of how to run the portfolio and 
obviously I was not going to take that.  And one thing I made perfectly 
clear to Mr Moodley and the team that had come to him – with him to the 
meeting with that, I do not report to you.  I report to the Board of Intersite 
so I am not sure why it is that you can have so much confidence in the 
meeting to tell me how to run the function.  I took exception to it 
Chairperson.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And what was his reaction to that? 
MS NGOYE:  Well Chairperson I guess for me the reaction was, well we 
10 
will see what will happen what will prevail.  Because immediately after 
that we left the meeting and this whole noise around Strawberry Worx and 
the lawyers intensified coming from Mr Montana.  So, for me it became 
very clear that they clearly went back to report back to Mr Montana and 
insisted on how things should be done and finally their wishes were met. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The next issues that you deal with in your affidavit 
Ms Ngoye is your interactions and perhaps relationship with Mr Lucky 
Montana and you deal with this from paragraph 16 of your affidavit.  Will 
you tell the Chairperson please what is it that is relevant to the question 
of State Capture in regard to the matters you write? 
20 
MS NGOYE:  Well Chairperson Mr Montana was the – I first encountered 
Mr Montana in fact at Intersite, he was the Chairperson of the Board of 
Intersite and he was also the Group CEO at Intersite so – I mean at 
PRASA.  So effectively I mean when I joined, I got to meet Mr Montana 
and because he was the Chairperson of the Board of Intersite as well, I 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 52 of 210 
 
interacted extensively with Mr Montana at the time.   
 
And in fact when I was asked to leave Intersite to go to PRASA, 
Mr Montana said to me, Martha we have a need for a strong Legal 
Department for PRASA so therefore because of your background I would 
like- suggest that you move – we move you External Group Executive 
position, we move you from the CEO of Intersite to go and build the legal 
function at corporate.  Which I did not see anything wrong with.  I just 
knew that as an executive you could be asked to do any work anywhere 
and it was fine with me. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  One key including issues is that you moved from 
10 
Intersite to PRASA at Mr Montana’s request. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But you had this ugly encounter with Mr Montana 
relating to Strawberry Worx.  I am just saying – explain how we sitting 
outside should understand that? 
MS NGOYE:  That is how it happened Chair.  I mean I – some of the 
things I am afraid I cannot explain but yes, the encounter with Strawberry 
Worx with Mr Montana was a very unpleasant one.  And then yes indeed 
he then asked me to go and lead the legal function, I could not refuse 
Chairperson.  So, I agreed to then go across to the Legal Department.  So 
20 
as to – I guess one also as far as Mr Montana was concerned my 
approach is, we are working together.  And I do not bare grudges and 
would not have taken that as an issue that I needed to carry with me all 
the time.  I accepted what happened and I moved on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now would this move on your part act as a request have 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 53 of 210 
 
been a promotion or not necessarily? 
MS NGOYE:  It was a lateral move. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was a lateral move. 
MS NGOYE:  It was a lateral move Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your salary and other benefits remained the same? 
MS NGOYE:  That stayed the same. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And I suppose this professional level it was within 
the field for which you had been trained and studied. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now you then go to ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it may be necessary – Mr Soni, I am sorry.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  H’mm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would it be fair to look at his request to you to move to 
Head of the Legal Department, would it be fair to look at that against the 
background of your what appears to have been a serious disagreement 
about removal of the files?  Would it be fair to look at it as two 
professionals who accepted that they did not agree on certain issue but 
otherwise their working relationship just continued on other matters? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes, correct Chair.  I just believed that we – that a lot of 
20 
instances did not agree with Mr Montana.  But at the end of the day it was 
a task – a fact that I was required to do because the Board of Intersite 
also had to agree to releasing me to go and work for PRASA’s legal 
function. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 54 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  So, it was just one of those things where you say, we are 
professionals and we just need to do what is in the best interest of the 
organisation.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And soon after you moved to the – to Head in the 
legal at PRASA Mr Montana asks you to do an important job.  Would you 
tell the Chairperson what that was? 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson in December – January – 2014 December, 2015 
January, Mr Montana took leave for two months and he then approached 
me and requested me to act in his stead during that period of two months.  
10 
So, I was then able to take over the role of the Action Group CEO whist 
he was a way and that is what happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I guess that following up on the question I asked 
earlier on, credit should be given both to you and him that at least at that 
stage whatever disagreements the two of you may have had, you were not 
– both of you were not allowing that to affect your working relationship. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because now he was asking you to stand in for him in to 
be Acting Group CEO. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  He would not – I would imagine he would not want to do 
that to with somebody that he did not trust or with somebody he did not 
think would be up to the job and so on. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 55 of 210 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ms Ngoye you might remember much earlier in your 
evidence you were talking about or you were relating your role as Head of 
Legal in contracts that PRASA concludes and what advise you were given 
and so on.  You mentioned two matters at that stage, a Swifambo matter 
and the Prodigy matter. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now how did they become relevant to what happened 
soon after you assumed duties in around May 2015? 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson as I have indicated, the issue around Swifambo 
was just not working where the legal function was concerned.  We 
10 
believed that the contract had forgone and the advises that we were given 
were not really being listened to.  When we asked the question to say we 
cannot continue with this contract if these things have not been met.  The 
conditions precedent have not been met.  Anybody would know that 
unless you meet the conditions precedent the contract does not come into 
be.  So, when we asked these questions and we interrogated the contract, 
we received a lot of push back.  We then wrote Mr Dingiswayo and myself 
then we wrote to Mr Montana effectively indicating that we will not be 
able to participate in the issue of Swifambo.   
 
When it came to Prodigy, Mr Dingiswayo is the one that dealt 
20 
with the Prodigy contract and I worked very closely with Mr Dingiswayo, 
him being my direct report and he had indicated to me that, look this is 
the scenario and this is the e-mail that I am going to send to Mr Montana 
and the team that had instructed us on the matter.  Because we did not 
agree that there was proper process that will follow so we think that – 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 56 of 210 
 
that e-mail to Mr Montana and the team that had instructed us and you 
know we thought that we would be engaged accordingly about the 
advices that we had given but we were not.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Let us just start off with the Swifambo matter. 
MS NGOYE:  H’mm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  When you become a Head of Legal at PRASA that 
is now one of the matters on your table I think. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes it came to my table.  It was the amendment – the 
intended amendment of the Swifambo contract.  Because the contract 
had already been concluded so we were looking at amending the 
10 
contract with the possibility of also increasing the value of the contract 
to R5 billion. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  When you say we who initiated that process of 
increasing the value of the contract? 
MS NGOYE:  It was a discussion that was happening within the 
organisation Chair.  I understood that the instruction was coming from 
you know Mr Lucky Montana and obviously he would need to have taken 
that instruction back to the Board.  So we understood as the legal 
function that that was the intention – that is where the organisation was 
going and the necessary approvals would be obtained to increase the 
20 
value from R3.5 billion to R5 billion.  So it is something that we 
understood. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And from the perspective of legal was that going 
to create hurdles for PRASA or problems for PRASA? 
MS NGOYE:  Well it would have Chair.  Having considered the contract 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 57 of 210 
 
and the issues that we had raised you know with the contract itself we 
were not comfortable.  I mean this – this matter was huge.  R3.5 billion 
for instance the approval of National Treasury.  We asked those 
questions.  And the fact that those things were not being attended to 
you know created a very serious problem for us you know from a 
compliance perspectives and we just did not see this contract you know 
being beneficial to PRASA.  And when we raised our concerns it was 
not received favourable. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So – but let us just have some detail.  When you 
say we raised our concerns what – who specifically and with whom and 
10 
thereafter what were the nature of the concerns you raised? 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson Mr Montana as far as this particular contract 
was concerned had sought the legal advice of a Ms Brenda Malongete 
who was a consultant at the time.  And she had been the one that had 
you know been running with the drafting of the contract.  So Mr 
Dingiswayo and myself had had a number of meetings with Ms 
Malongete who was effectively the legal advice for PRASA and when we 
raised the concerns because the issues – when we read the contract we 
wanted to know – we saw gaps in the contract as an example R3.5 
billion is above the materiality you know of PRASA and in terms of 
20 
Legislation we knew what needed to be done.  And we asked whether 
the – for instance the necessary approvals were in place she was not 
able to give us.  We asked about the necessary approvals you know in 
terms of Treasury, in terms of the DLT and we wanted to see all those 
and we also wanted to understand exactly what the Board of PRASA 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 58 of 210 
 
had approved.  Because it was not clear at the time whether the Board 
had approved the stay or the lease of the locomotives and the number 
that was you know branded at the time was between 70 and 80 so we 
needed clarity in terms of you know those issues in the contract and 
the material ones obviously being compliance. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And you have read the judgment of Justice Francis 
and then Justice Lewis in the SCA. 
MS NGOYE:  H’mm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Some of – though the issues that they decided in 
their respective judgments matters that you had raised. 
10 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair.  I mean the issues around the conditions 
precedent yes we did.  And I guess at the time Chair when we were 
instructed to assist with the Swifambo contract you know we did not 
have a lot of information.  I mean some of the work that was picked up 
through the investigation was not things that were at our disposal.  For 
instance in terms of really pulling out the fact that you know out of the 
number of guarantees that were required we did not even get all the 
number of guarantees that were there.  But we saw this at face value – 
we were just asking questions you know just to make sure that 
everything has been complied with. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then can I just say you talk about an investigation 
you must please tell the Chairperson what investigation you are talking 
about? 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson this is the forensic investigation that was 
conducted by the firm of attorneys Werksmans from the instructions of 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 59 of 210 
 
the Board.  So when they did their investigations and looked at these 
contracts they were then able to find out that a lot more had been 
amiss. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So this is after Mr Molefe’s Board had taken 
office? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And who was – what was Mr Montana’s position at 
PRASA at that time? 
MS NGOYE:  Well Mr Montana left in 2015 so the – so he was no longer 
there at the time that really this investigation process commenced. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But at the time you were raising in 2015 now you 
were raising questions the investigation had not started or had it 
started? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair it had not started. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So even before the investigations you were raising 
questions in relation to the possible extension of the contract from R3.5 
billion to R5 billion? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now the other contract that you mention in 
paragraph 19 is a contract relating to Prodigy. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now why would Prodigy be such an important 
player in PRASA? 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson we knew that – in fact it was spoken of 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 60 of 210 
 
internally that whoever touches Prodigy you know is not – will not 
receive a favourable you know response from Mr Montana.  We had 
been communicating with a lot of people internally and they had 
indicated to us that this was Mr Moodley’s contract and therefore we 
needed to do you know what we have been instructed to do. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The Mr Moodley you talking about is? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Wayne Moodley. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then you refer then to an annexure which is NN2 
at page 317 of that bundle.   
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  If you could just summarise for the Chairperson 
what the issue is that is raised near …(indistinct). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before that tell us who the e-mail came from and to 
whom it was addressed and what the subject was that it was dealing 
with and the date and then you summarise the issues that way. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry Mr Chairperson I understand my learned 
friend wants to raise a matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  Thank you Chair and my learned friend for the 
indulgence. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Chair I just want to bring to the attention of 
yourself that we have not received these annexures and this – these – 
this part of the affidavit Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh is that so. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 61 of 210 
 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   We have limited information to work with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   May I ask for a short stand down and if my 
learned friend can oblige me with a few copies we can then proceed.  It 
will be a very short.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   I cannot follow because I do not have copies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   If I am indulged with a set I could follow along. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No that is fine. 
10 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let – Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson firstly if that has happened I am 
must accept responsibility for that and I apologise.  It is as you well 
know done by a different Department.  I obviously would okay it and I 
am sorry.  But we will make available to my learned friend the relevant 
annexures that he wants now Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What should happen is before anybody sends 
anything to anybody the Evidence Leaders must okay that to say, is this 
the right thing to send?  Is everything that should be sent included? 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And so the Evidence Leaders must make sure that 
other people do not decide for them. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is to be sent?  The Evidence Leaders must 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 62 of 210 
 
identify what is to be sent and other people can then collect and bring 
to the Evidence Leaders to say these are the things we have identified.  
You check that they are fine and then they do not get sent until you say 
this is okay it can go. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay how much time should – five minutes? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  We will not need more than five minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Five minutes? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  About five minutes please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  About five minutes.  Okay we will adjourn for five 
minutes.  Adjourned. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let’s proceed.  Your mic is not on. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry Chairperson.   There has been made 
available to my learned friend the annexure in concern – in issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, okay, thank you. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ms Ngoye can you please tell the Chairperson 
what the gist of this document – well as ...(indistinct) who sent it, what 
the gist is and so on? 
MS NGOYE:   Chairperson this e-mail was from Mr Lucky Montana, it 
was addressed to Ms Nhlanhla Kondowe who was, effectively running 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 63 of 210 
 
with the prodigy contract at the time, Mr Fani Dingiswayo and Mr 
Sidney Khuzwayo who is in the SEM Portfolio, I was copied, one of the 
people that was copied on the e-mail. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And this e-mail is marked MM2, is that right? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay what was the subject of the e-mail? 
MS NGOYE:   Chair the complaint – I saw this as a complaint from Mr 
Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ah yes.   
MS NGOYE:   You know, effectively it’s about the My Station 
10 
Programme which involves Prodigy and Chair this was done, obviously, 
after as the legal function we had given that advise to say, we believe 
that this contract is irregular and should not be continued with.  He 
then writes this memo to us, effectively saying that there is nothing 
wrong with the appointment of Prodigy nor the extension of their 
contract.  You know in a nutshell, this e-mail, Chairperson effectively, 
is Mr Montana being outraged and believing that there are forces within 
PRASA that are working against him, you know when you read the e-
mail he says: 
“This is well co-ordinated strategy that started in 
20 
November 2014 when I went on leave.” 
Now this is a time when I was acting, you know at the time, so I 
effectively thought, okay this has got to do with me somehow, you 
know, in what work I did in his absence and you know, he says, the 
extent of opportunism by some of our managers really amazes me.  So 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 64 of 210 
 
you can see from the language that Mr Montana has used in the e-mail 
that he was ready to go to war with whoever was standing in his way as 
far as these matters are concerned because he raises that there’s a 
couple of contracts which are seen to be irregular and so on and I 
understood, at the time, that he was referring to the work that we had 
done around Swifambo as well as now around Prodigy that he believed 
that we were working against him …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe the e-mail might be sufficiently important just 
by reading it, just read it, before that Ms Nhlanhla Kondowe was part of 
the Legal Team or Legal Department? 
10 
MS NGOYE:   No Chair, she’s within HR and this is where the contract 
was placed within the organisation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh Alright, just read the e-mail in then you can 
comment. 
MS NGOYE:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.    
MS NGOYE:   So he says – he addresses the e-mail to Nhlanhla, he 
says: 
“There is nothing wrong with the appointment of Prodigy 
nor the extension of their contract.  I’m not surprised 
20 
because this is part of a much bigger agenda which has 
targeted certain contracts and appointments and projects 
these as being irregular.  Some of the contracts had 
already been leaked to external auditors and the media 
as part of a strategy to discredit the Group CEO and 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 65 of 210 
 
create a cloud before he steps down at the end of the 
year.” 
It then goes on to say: 
This is a well co-ordinated strategy that started in 
November 2014 when I went on leave.  I will, at the most 
appropriate time, act against all those who are involved 
in this dirty campaign.  The investigation they are 
starting is unlawful and part of a plot I am well aware of.  
The extent of opportunism by some of our managers 
really amazes me.  A manager like Sidney Khuzwayo 
10 
should start first by cleaning the many irregular 
appointments he has party to within SEM which I have 
been trying to address and even explaining some of 
these to the office of the Public Protector.  Some of the 
managers are excited by the new Board and are feeding 
all sorts of wrong information so that they could carry 
favour with the Board, they will be the biggest losers at 
the end of this process.  The decision to partner with 
Prodigy on the training of customer services remains 
sounds and the extension of the contract is still in order. 
20 
Please allow them to continue with this strategy which is 
bound to fail, kind regards, Lucky Montana.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes in the second paragraph he refers to the 
investigation that he said – that he says is unlawful, what investigation 
was he talking about there? 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 66 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:   I don’t know Chairperson, I wouldn’t be able to say 
because I’m not aware of any investigation that was …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and he says that this, well co-ordinated strategy 
started in November 2014 when he was on leave, that is when you were 
standing in for him, is that right? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay now with regard to the Prodigy contract there 
has been much evidence about it, just remind me again what it was 
about and to the extent that he talks about its extension, what actually 
the extension was? 
10 
MS NGOYE:   Chairperson the Prodigy contract was about – it is a 
training contract effectively where Prodigy would provide, you know, 
training to the customer services unit within PRASA so a number of 
employees within PRASA would be trained by Prodigy.  So the contract 
had come to an end …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  They would be trained to do what or to be what? 
MS NGOYE:   In relation to customer services whatever was, you know, 
within customer services space, I don’t have the details of the contract 
here, I just surmise to say certain things but what I know is that it was 
around training within customer services. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:   And various employees of PRASA would then be able to 
go there and then Prodigy would then be able to charge PRASA for 
services rendered in relation to that training.  So it needed to be 
amended because we were increasing scope further. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 67 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the – when you say, needed to be amended, is 
that the extension? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes, the contract itself we needed to then obviously 
include more scope of what Prodigy was supposed to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the extension that he’s talking about refers to an 
amendment of the contract to give it more a wider scope? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
MS NGOYE:   Chairperson just for your reassurance Mr Dingiswayo is 
going to be the next witness who will deal with this contract in more 
10 
detail. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no that’s fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now this is sent to you, among others you and Mr 
Dingiswayo?  
MS NGOYE: That’s correct Chairperson.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And in regard to the complaint that there’s nothing 
wrong with the contract, this is Montana’s complaint, what prompted 
him to raise that issue? 
MS NGOYE:  Well I don’t know Chair, I think for me because it was a 
known fact within the organisation that you don’t mess with the Prodigy 
20 
contract, we knew, I mean we spoke as colleagues …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  You don’t what? 
MS NGOYE:   Mess or you don’t interfere with it, you know and we 
knew of colleagues that had tried to raise their objections to the 
Prodigy contract and how they were dealt with by Mr Montana.  So, 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 68 of 210 
 
effectively, we knew that, you know, what we were doing was probably 
going to land us into trouble but it’s our job, we had to do it. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now if you look at what you say was the tail end 
of paragraph 19 you talk about the advice that Mr …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Paragraph 19 of her affidavit. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Of SS7A, 7B sorry Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja SS7B?   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes, you say that Mr Dingiswayo’s advice did not 
accord? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Just explain to the Chair what the circumstances 
were, Mr Dingiswayo will obviously come and give more details?   
MS NGOYE:   The instruction Chair, was review the contract, the 
amendment and okay it from a legal perspective because there was 
nothing wrong with it, as far as Mr Montana was concerned but because 
we went – after Mr Dingiswayo looked at the agreement and after 
discussing it with me, we both believed that we could not support the 
extension of the contract and advise accordingly.  So when one says it 
did not accord with his instructions, it clearly means that, you know, he 
was hoping that he would get the go-ahead from PRASA Legal Team 
20 
which did not happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just to go back to Mr Montana’s e-mail that we dealt 
with one minute ago, when he says in that e-mail that there was nothing 
wrong with the Prodigy contract as at that time, did you, yourself know 
what the position was and if so was it your position that there was 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 69 of 210 
 
something wrong with that contract? 
MS NGOYE:   Chairperson on reading the contract, you know – because 
this issue of Prodigy once again was not a matter that went past the 
Legal Department and these are some of the things that happened quite 
frequently within the organisation you know, some things come to us 
after they have been entered into.  So it was one of those where at the 
end of the day, when it came to us now for amendment we ask for the 
entire file, we ask for the process that was followed you know, so those 
are the things we requested Ms Nhlanhla Kondowe to give to us so that 
we can then see whether there’s regularity in the contract itself and 
10 
when those things were not forthcoming you know, we realised this 
must be a problem and we didn’t want to be party to something, 
condoning something within the organisation that did not follow 
process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So is the answer that, at the time of that e-mail, your 
attitude was that there seemed to be something wrong with it but you 
may not have been definite, you may not have been certain because 
you had not been given the contract or the whole file? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now as a result of – or after the e-mail was sent 
what dramatic event happened? 
MS NGOYE:   Chairperson the e-mail was sent on the 18 t h of May 2015, 
the – I then received a call from Mr Dingiswayo to say, look, I’ve been 
called back to the office, this is around 7 o’clock on the eve of the 18 t h 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 70 of 210 
 
– yes it was the 18 t h and when – that Mr Montana wanted to see him.  
So Mr Dingiswayo left home and went back to the office in Pretoria to 
have this meeting with Mr Montana.  What I then understood from Mr 
Dingiswayo was that when he gave me the call after the meeting, he 
said to me, listen I have been fired by Mr Lucky Montana and I found it 
very strange and I asked, what was the reason, what did he say to you 
was the reason for dismissing you and one of the allegations that Mr 
Montana had made against – this is what Mr Dingiswayo tells me and 
he’ll speak to that Chair, he said to me that Mr Montana thought that he 
was leaking information to the Board and he just didn’t understand what 
10 
that meant because if anybody could possibly leak – and I don’t know 
how you’d leak information to the Board, would have been me because I 
am the person that would then sit in some of the Board Committee 
meetings because of the role that I play within the organisation and you 
know, it was just a very quick meeting as I understand it from Mr 
Dingiswayo that Mr Montana said to him, look he’s clearly not working 
with him and he’s working against him and therefore he’s fired. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And this followed the evening after the day he 
sent the e-mail …(intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chairperson, yes. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes, when Mr Dingiswayo told you this, what did 
you do? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry Mr Soni can I take you back Ms Ngoye to 
that e-mail, what page was it again?  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Page 317 Chair. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 71 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh 317, look at the last few sentences of paragraph 
3 of that e-mail, in those sentences Mr Montana says to Ms Kondowe: 
“Some of the managers are excited by the new Board 
and are feeding all sorts of wrong information so that 
they could carry favour with the Board.  They will be the 
biggest losers at the end of this process.” 
How did you understand those two sentences?   
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson …(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   Or did they not attract your attention at the time.    
MS NGOYE:   No they did. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja how did you understand them?    
MS NGOYE:   I understood it, because, you know, when Mr Montana 
went on leave there was an issue around the Prodigy report that 
needed to have been presented to the Board, now I was acting at the 
time and obviously it would have been me who then communicated to 
the Board, to say,  we do not have this Prodigy report that Mr Montana 
had promised the Board and I think he took exception to that, I mean, 
the way I understood it was, he felt that he was the trade at the time 
but for me it was an issue of saying, you know, do we have this thing or 
do we not have it and I know definitely, I am the one that then went 
20 
back to the Board to say, we don’t have it I had enquired.  So when I 
read this statement – and also in relation to the Board, I knew very well 
that he was talking about me because there were issues that were 
raised in his absence that the Board had raised with me and that I had 
to report on which obviously, I guess, he didn’t like what I had to then 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 72 of 210 
 
tell the Board in his absence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And did you know of any other managers that you 
think he was talking about in that sentence when he said some of the 
managers are excited by the new Board and they are feeding all sorts 
of information, one, I understand you to be saying you thought you 
were one of the people he was talking about, is that right? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were there other managers that you thought he was 
talking about there? 
MS NGOYE:   I knew definitely that he was talking about Mr Dingiswayo 
10 
because …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and why did you think he was talking about Mr 
Dingiswayo? 
MS NGOYE:   Because the subject matter of this e-mail, talks to 
Prodigy and Mr Dingiswayo was the one that was dealing with the 
Prodigy matter in the organisation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS NGOYE:   So I definitely knew that somehow there was an attack on 
the legal function as far as the work we’ve been doing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you attach any meaning to the last sentence in 
20 
that paragraph: 
“They will be the biggest losers at the end of this 
process.” 
MS NGOYE:   Yes I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What did you understand that to mean? 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 73 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:   I understood either that we were going to be disciplined, 
you know, for advice that we had given but I understood it to mean that 
we were at the wrong end of the stick where Mr Montana was 
concerned and I guess Chair, within PRASA you did not want to be on 
the wrong end of the stick where Mr Montana was concerned and I 
knew we were in trouble. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What happened if you did? 
MS NGOYE:   Well he took exception to it Chairperson, I mean the 
behaviour within PRASA was that, not a lot of people would challenge 
Mr Montana on the things that he would say and if anything I think I 
10 
was probably one of those people within the organisation that would 
challenge Mr Montana if I didn’t agree with things and I found that, you 
know, for me it was a working relationship that we needed to have but 
there was a sense of fear, I mean I had some of my colleagues come to 
me to say, you have to be on the right side of Mr Montana, you mustn’t 
challenge Mr Montana in the Exco meetings that we have and I just 
thought, but why are we here, you know, because we need to do things 
that are proper and – so that culture within the organisation was there 
to say, you don’t challenge Mr Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then there was there’s the second sentence in the 
20 
second paragraph: 
“I will at the most appropriate time act against all those 
who are involved in this dirty campaign.” 
Did you have an idea of who he may have been talking about 
there? 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 74 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  I believe it was the Legal Department, I believe it was 
between Mr Dingiswayo and myself and Mr Sidney Khuzwayo within the 
procurement space. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and why did you think, even in that paragraph 
he’s still talking about you and Mr Dingiswayo? 
MS NGOYE:   Because Chairperson it was immediately after the advice 
that we had given which obviously just annoyed Mr Montana it was just 
immediately after that that he wrote this and I knew – I mean I even 
said to Mr Dingiswayo I said, you’re not going to respond to this e-mail, 
leave it because we are really being attacked here and let’s just see 
10 
what is going to happen but to me, at the time, it was very clear that 
this e-mail was intended for the Legal Department. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you, Mr Soni I interrupted you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ms Ngoye may I take up a point that – as relating 
to the e-mail, if you look at the second paragraph of that e-mail it has 
three sentences.  The Chairperson has dealt with the first two, may I 
ask you to look again at the third sentence, it says: 
 
“The investigation they are starting is unlawful.” 
 
What did you understand by that, firstly what investigation was 
he talking about? 
20 
MS NGOYE:   I – Chair I didn’t know what he was talking to because 
clearly at the end of the day I knew I wasn’t part of any investigations 
you know that was involved or investigating Mr Montana at the time.  
So I really didn’t know what he was talking about. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But as you sit there now, after the lapse of time that 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 75 of 210 
 
has happened, are you able to relate to any investigation that you later 
found out was happening at that time that he may have been talking 
about or not really? 
MS NGOYE:   Not really Chair, I couldn’t. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And at that stage, just for the sake of timelines, 
the appointment of ...(indistinct) had not come into being? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And in regard to what you earlier called the 
investigations that had been started by the new Board, those too had 
10 
not started? 
MS NGOYE:   They had not started Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then you say that – sorry we’re going back to 
now, Mr Dingiswayo being dismissed and that’s SS7B paragraph 20, 
what did you do when Mr Dingiswayo told you that he’d been 
dismissed? 
MS NGOYE:   Chairperson immediately after speaking to Mr Dingiswayo 
I phoned Mr Montana because I didn’t understand why he would – at 
least not speak to me as somebody that reports to him directly about 
somebody that reports to me.  So I phoned him, Mr Montana and I said, 
20 
look I understand that you have just fired Mr Dingiswayo, do you care 
to tell me why and his response to me was look, I can fire Mr 
Dingiswayo it’s within my powers to do that.  I said to him, look I would 
rather preferred that you speak to me about it because in any event 
whatever Mr Dingiswayo give to you from a strategic perspective would 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 76 of 210 
 
have been something that is sanctioned by me.  I did not understand 
why it is that you felt the need to fire Mr Dingiswayo.   
 
So I had that exchange with Mr Montana on the phone and one 
thing I did also say to Mr Montana is that, you know what Mr Montana, 
you’re taking me back to the times of Intersite where you basically did 
the same thing with Martin Chauke why are you doing these things, you 
know and he was rushing on the phone you know and I said to him, look 
I’m the person that reports to you why is it that you cannot tell me what 
it is that you’ve got issues with because I would have thought that I 
would have been the one that takes the rap if things go pear-shaped 
10 
within the legal function.  He wasn’t willing to have that discussion and 
he felt that I was challenging his authority and at that time, I then said 
to him, well can I have a meeting with you to discuss this thing because 
I clearly do not understand how it is that you can summarily dismiss an 
employee and a key employee at that, within the organisation and we 
agreed to a meeting for the following day. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Before you get to that meeting Ms Ngoye, may I 
ask you …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your voice has been lowered again. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I apologise Chairperson.  May I ask you this, you 
20 
received the e-mail – you and the others receive the e-mail and then 
you are told by Mr Dingiswayo, I’ve been fired, did you see a 
connection between the two? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes I definitely did Chair, I did, I saw the connection 
between that e-mail and effectively what had just happened to Mr 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 77 of 210 
 
Dingiswayo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you said, actually, Mr Dingiswayo’s dismissal was 
on the same day as the e-mail, is that right? 
MS NGOYE:   Effectively yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja but it was in the night, later in the night? 
MS NGOYE:   It was at night he had to come back from home 
Chairperson and when he asked, is it really necessary can it not wait 
for the following day, he was told no Mr Montana wants to see you now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes let’s go back, in terms of what Mr Dingiswayo 
told you as the reason that was given to him or by Mr Montana, did he 
10 
say that Mr Montana has said it was because he had leaked information 
or what reason did he say Mr Montana had given?  
MS NGOYE:   He said to me the meeting did not even last five minutes, 
he said to me the one thing that Mr Montana said was that, yes he was 
leaking information to the Board and he was puzzled you know, he 
doesn’t know how that comes about because he doesn’t even deal with 
the Board you know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:   So that’s what effectively he told me, the meeting didn’t 
last long and he just told me that I’m working against him. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And when you had that telephone conversation with 
Mr Montana, apart from saying that it was within his power to fire Mr 
Dingiswayo did he tell you the actual reason? 
MS NGOYE:   No he didn’t Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He did not at that stage but you agreed to meet the 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 78 of 210 
 
following day? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes let’s go to that meeting, what happened the 
following day? 
MS NGOYE:   Chairperson I had agreed to meet with Mr Montana early 
in the morning but the meeting only took place round about 18:00 in the 
evening, so I waited the whole day.  I must also say that our meeting 
did not even last five minutes.  As I walked in, you know, into his office 
– and in fact he was standing up at the time that he was talking to me, 
10 
he said to me in the ...(indistinct, African Language) meaning, you 
know, mother you are insolent. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You what? 
MS NGOYE:   Insolent, so – and he said that to me, he said you are 
fired.  So I then said, okay Mr Montana I then …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that – was that the first thing he basically said at 
the start of the meeting?    
MS NGOYE:   Yes Chair he didn’t even sit down, he was standing up 
and then that’s what he said to me and what I found is that perhaps he 
wanted to humiliate me also you know, at the time because he had his 
20 
PA there, his door was open and he’s legal advisor Ms Naidoo was 
hanging around there and Ms Kondowe was also there but, effectively, I 
was called in to be told that I’m insolent and I’m fired and I basically 
said, no that’s fine I’ll leave and he said to me, wait for your letter, I 
said to him, no I’m not going to wait for my letter, in fact I’ll get my 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 79 of 210 
 
letter tomorrow when I come to pick up my things and I left. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So after the telephone discussion that you had, had 
with him the previous evening when you had phoned him to ask about 
Mr Dingiswayo’s dismissal and the commencement of this meeting the 
following day at 18:00 pm had there been any discussion between the 
two of you on anything? 
MS NGOYE:   No Chairperson we hadn’t spoken that day. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the only thing that you had spoken to him about, 
the previous evening when you called about Mr Dingiswayo was why he 
had fired Mr Dingiswayo?  
10 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:    So this meeting, you say, didn’t even last five 
minutes? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now he then gave you the dismissal letter which 
you didn’t wait for but you picked up the next day, that appears as 
Annexure NN3 at page 319. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe before we get to the letter you can go to it and – 
but I want to asks you this question before you – Mr Soni, ask you the 
20 
question about the letter, but get to the letter so that you have got the 
page.   
MISS NGOYE:   Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  As at the time when Mr Montana was telling you 
that you were fired and that you were insolent, what was your 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 80 of 210 
 
understanding of why you were being fired? 
MISS NGOYE:   Chair, the fact that I questioned his decision.  The fact 
that I challenged him about a decision that he made as the group’s CEO 
which is something that, you know, was never done, really, at PRASA as I 
indicated earlier, he felt that I really undermined the position that he was 
holding and that he was not going to have it.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So that is what was in your mind in terms of why you 
were being fired? 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Continue, Mr Soni.   
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Thank you, speaker.  Chairperson, but you have 
raised something that, may I pursue that as well?  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You had spoken to him the night before after you 
had been told that Mr Dingiswayo had been fired? 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Did he at that meeting indicate that the same fate 
probably awaited you?  
MISS NGOYE:   No, he did not.  I did not know that I was going to be 
fired the following day.   
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And when you agreed or when he agreed to the 
meeting on, on that evening, what did you understand would happen at 
the meeting? 
MISS NGOYE:   Chair, I really – I thought that Mr Montana would sit and 
thrash this issue out.  I really believed that I could make some sense of 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 81 of 210 
 
what he had done.  I thought that we could sit and discuss it because my, 
my intention really at the time was to say to him, no, look.  Do not act so 
rushy because this is what Mr Dingiswayo did.  We were trying to protect 
you as the group CEO, you know and that was what was in the opinion of 
Mr Dingiswayo to say, I believe that the group CEO is misled because 
processes were not followed.  We are advising you.  We are not working 
against you.  
That was the basis on which I thought I would engage Mr, Mr 
Montana and also say to him, no, man, you know, retract this dismissal.  
It was not intended and also deal with this, the e-mail to say, what is it 
10 
that you meant.  Why did you mean these things because I believe that 
they are attributed to us.  I wanted to talk to him so that I could 
understand where his mind was but he had decided, I guess, that he was 
going to fire me.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And at the time he informed you that you had been 
dismissed, he did not give you any reason except to say you were 
insolent? 
MISS NGOYE:   Correct, Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Can we, on that note then, turn to annexure MN(3) 
SSA page 319.  Will you summarize for the Chairperson was is contained 
20 
in that letter?   
MISS NGOYE:   Chair, the letter effectively contains the telephone call – 
he refers to the telephone call that, that I made to him the previous night 
and he was saying that I insisted on speaking to him even after he had 
said to me that he was in a meeting and he said effectively in that letter 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 82 of 210 
 
that because I had dared him to fire me, I was really insolent and 
challenged his decision.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, sorry.  Is that correct? 
MISS NGOYE:   Well, I did not dare him.  I did not dare him I spoke to 
him.  I spoke to him and I said to him, I am the person that you are 
supposed to be dealing with.  Why do you not talk to me, you know, about 
resources within my area.  What is so difficult? 
You know and I guess he just did not like it.  He did not like the 
fact that I could question his, his decision.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   In the last sentence of the first page of MN3, if you 
10 
could read that into the record and then I will just raise some of the 
issues I want in relation to what he says there.  The one that is starting 
“Be that as it may.”  
MISS NGOYE:   It says: 
“Be that as it may, in light of you daring me to request you 
to fire you, I in my capacity as the group CEO of you, your 
daring as an act of repudiation of your employment which I 
elect to accept.” 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Miss sorry.  If you could stop there.  He is 
suggesting that the question of your dismissal was raised in the 
20 
conversation the night before.  Did that happen? 
MISS NGOYE:   No, it did not happen, Chairperson.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And then in the following page, he then asked you 
to put grievances in writing.  Did you raise grievances with him? 
MISS NGOYE:   No, I did not, Chairperson.  I guess for me, when I 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 83 of 210 
 
received this letter it was a day, you know, apart and if you say he said 
that I should put my grievances in writing.  He had not said that to me 
and, you know, I was just thinking, I am not sure, when I would have put 
these grievances to him so it just did not make sense to me that he put 
that in writing in his letter.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course you did say that when you spoke to him on 
the evening on which Mr Dingiswayo was fired, you did refer to what had 
happened to Mr Chauke when you were at Intersite.   
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   In the context of saying, in effect, as I understand your 
10 
evidence, Mr Montana you are now repeating what you had done before.  
Is that right? 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then he says in the second last, or the third last 
paragraph: 
“The level of insolence.” 
So that is what he had said to you at the start of the meeting? 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chair.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And then he says: 
20 
“You have repeatedly remind me to terminate your 
employment which you repeated at our brief meeting this 
evening.” 
Did that happen firstly in the conversation and then that evening? 
MISS NGOYE:   No, it did not happen, Chair.  As I say, I had sat down, he 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 84 of 210 
 
stood up and said, grand, grand.  Martha Ngoye, you are fired and that 
was it so I am not sure when I would have, you know, insisted that he 
fires me.  I could barely say two words in that meeting with him.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then he says the trust relationship has irretrievably 
broken down. 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then he says your dismissal is effective 
immediately. 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, first you went to that you were – you and Mr 
10 
Dingiswayo were dismissed on successive days.   
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, in fact we received our letters on the same day so 
Mr Dingiswayo was dismissed on the 18 t h and I was dismissed on the 
19 t h.  On the 20 t h when we came to collect our stuff, we received the 
letters which were dated the 20 t h.   
CHAIRPERSON:   That date is 20 t h May.  You know, on page 320, below 
Mr Montana’s signature, in my eyes that looks like 20/08 but it can’t be 
eight because he had left ...(intervenes). 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   By then so it is five.   
20 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes.  Yes, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   If I can just point out, Chairperson, it clearly does 
look like eight but if you look at page 319 you can see the date it is 
received.   
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 85 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Yes, yes.  Thank you.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay, so you were dismissed for what by Mr 
Montana? What happened next? 
CHAIRPERSON:   And maybe before that.  He repeatedly says here in 
this letter of your dismissal that you – he said you asked to be dismissed.   
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you not in the course of some of the organizations 
you had been in, say anything that he could have interpreted as you 
asking to be dismissed like well if you want to dismiss me, go ahead or 
something like that.   
10 
MISS NGOYE:   No, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   No.   
MISS NGOYE:   Nothing.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you sure about that? 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, I am very sure, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And again, if I may just ask for emphasis, on the 
night before you were dismissed in your telephone call, the question of 
your dismissal simply did not arise? 
MISS NGOYE:   It did not, Chair.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, you appreciate that when you say you did 
not dare him to dismiss you or anything like that as he says in this letter.  
So, effectively, you are saying, well, he is fabricating that part of the 
letter? 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chair.  He is saying that.  Ja.   
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 86 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   After, oh, sorry, again, just putting it in context, at 
this time in Mr Molefe’s Board was the accounting authority at PRASA, 
would that be right? 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What did you do to protect your interests after you 
were dismissed?  You and Mr Dingiswayo.   
MISS NGOYE:   Chairperson, the first thing that we did, we approached 
the CCMA and, you know obviously as an unfair labour practise to 
summary dismissal no process.  So we went to the CCMA to lodge a 
10 
complaint and after that we then wrote to the Board, you know and 
basically advising the Board what had transpired and putting it to the 
attention of the Board to say we do not understand the basis of which we 
could be fired and also the fact that it was summary dismissal without any 
procedure.   
And I think for me what baffled me was that we were the legal 
advisors of the organization and this is how we are dealt with, you know 
and we raised the risks that were associated with Mr Montana’s approach 
in dealing with us and we flagged it with the Board and requested the 
intervention.   
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And what happened pursuing to that? 
MISS NGOYE:   I understand Chair that Mr Montana was then advised by 
the Board.  In fact, when he was asked to explain the reasons for 
dismissing us, he said we had committed gross misconduct.  So, what I 
understood had happened was that then the Board said, no, that is fine. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 87 of 210 
 
You need to follow procedure.  If they have committed gross misconduct, 
discipline them.  We are not saying you should not, but at the end of the 
day proper processes must be followed and effectively what then 
happened was that he then retracted the dismissal letter and requested 
that we come back to work. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So, this is Mr Montana himself?  
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   How long after the dismissal did the retraction happen?  
MISS NGOYE:   It was about a week, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
10 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Before the retraction happened had you had occasion 
to write to him to deny some of the things that you say he said in his 
letter of your dismissal that were not true? 
MISS NGOYE:   No, Chair.  I did not do it.  No.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Did you refer to it in your CCMA application that 
letter in which he alleged that you had dared him to dismiss you.   
MISS NGOYE:   I think I make reference to it too.  I cannot actually recall 
if we attached it, but we did, we did say it was following.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Right, so he now – sorry, how does he communicate 
to you the retraction of your dismissal? 
MISS NGOYE:   We received a telephone call from one of the HR 
managers who then, you know, effectively said to us, look your dismissal 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 88 of 210 
 
has been retracted.  You need to come and report to work, you know and I 
guess we just did that.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now when you were told that your dismissal has 
been retracted, what did you understand would happen next?  
MISS NGOYE:   Chair, I understood that because the dismissal had been 
retracted perhaps that Mr Montana had, you know, reconsidered the 
decisions that he had made and that we would be coming back to work for 
work.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   In fact, that is what you had been told, you must 
come back to work.  What happened when you got back to work?   
10 
MISS NGOYE:   We got back to work, Chairperson and we were denied 
access to the system.  In fact, as we got back, we were told then to give 
reasons why we should not be suspended. And it was to happen within 12 
to 24 hours, you know and I then requested an extension to say, you 
know, I do not have a laptop, I will need to go and find some place to 
work for and to put this thing together because I do not have access to 
my equipment.   
It is rejected, so effectively we sat down and it was 
Mr Dingiswayo and I, he did his letter, I did mine and I guess the 
approach that he took at the time was that Mr Montana did not have 
20 
authority to suspend us because he was frivolous you know and we said 
you cannot, this is the same issue, you know, you have withdrawn the 
dismissal and now you want to suspend us and we said, you are 
...(indistinct) and he took exception to that.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, I see it is 13:00 o’clock, but I have 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 89 of 210 
 
one more question, if I can, just related to this now ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The question that you – sorry, Mr Montana says to 
you the dismissals are – you are told your dismissals are retracted.  Then 
you are saying Mr Montana suspended you.  Why do you say it was he, 
how did that – how was that communication made to you?   
MISS NGOYE:   Again, he used a – he sent a manager within HR to come 
and give us the letters that said to us we must give reasons why we 
should not be suspended and he advised that that instruction comes from 
Mr Montana. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And who signed those letters?   
MISS NGOYE:   Mr Montana signed the letters.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, would this be an appropriate lunch?   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  We will take the lunch adjournment.  We 
will resume at 14:00 o’clock.  We adjourn.  
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us continue.  Switch on your mic. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ms Ngoye we broke at the stage where you were 
20 
saying you had now been suspended and the recalled.  What happened – 
sorry, you have been dismissed and recalled.  Then you were suspended? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And how long did that suspension last? 
MS NGOYE:  The suspension lasted for 3 months. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 90 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you – what were you told was the reason for your 
suspension? 
MS NGOYE:  The reason for the suspension was the insolence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The same ...(intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Issue. 
MS NGOYE:  As the letter, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that was stated in the letter of suspension? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, it was stated in the letter so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And in – how is it that you came back to work? 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson, Mr Montana left in July right at the end of July 
so we came back at about – in about August where the Board had 
appointed an Acting CEO Mr Nathi Khena.  What I understand transpired 
was the Board had instructed Mr Nathi Khena to look into the matters that 
Mr Montana had been dealing with especially around the suspensions and 
to make sure that he deals with all those and finalises the suspensions.  
 
 What then transpired where I am concerned is that I received a 
call from Mr Nathi Khena wanting to talk to me about the issues that had 
been raised relating to my suspension.  But what was interesting 
20 
Chairperson, in my case, was that after Mr Montana had left there were 
charges that were brought forward against me.  Those charges included 
me having authorised two contracts effectively during the tenure of my 
CEO role of about 10 million Rand in one respect and the other one was 
50/58/59 million Rand.  So as part of the investigations that Mr Khena 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 91 of 210 
 
was inclusive of that.  And I understood from him that when he sought 
evidence from the colleagues internally including people from HR, the 
CEO of PRASA Rail at the time because those contracts were impacting 
that business.  They indicated to him that they were not sure of what Mr 
Montana had alluded to in the charges.  So, I mean nobody could give 
evidence to the – what is the word I am looking for – the charges that was 
laid against me.   
 
And after that Mr Nathi Khena questioned me around those 
particular contracts and obviously – the one I did not even know, the 10 
million, I did not even know that I had even dealt with a 10 million and the 
10 
other one I had an explanation to give to him as to what had transpired.  
It was not an authority that was given by me, it belonged to another 
business unit.  So, on that basis he then decided to say, look I do not – I 
cannot 
find 
evidence 
that 
pinpoint 
to 
you 
having 
done 
any 
maladministration or wrong things as far as those contracts are 
concerned and he asked me to come back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Montana left on the 15 t h of July. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before he left you were already on suspension. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  But had you been told before he left what charges you 
were going to face or were being – were to be brought against you? 
MS NGOYE:  I was not told Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There have been no communication at all since your 
suspension other than the letter telling you about your suspension. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 92 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  There had been none. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There had been nothing. 
MS NGOYE:  H’mm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And nobody had phoned you to speak to you and tell 
you what was going on in terms of the – an investigation about your 
suspension? 
MS NGOYE:  Nothing Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And the issue of the two contracts, you only 
became aware of it when? 
MS NGOYE:  When I saw the draft charges that were sent to me. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were you ever given draft charges or were – did you 
simply see them when the Acting GCEO, is it Mr Khena? 
MS NGOYE:  Mr Khena, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Khena was talking to you investigating what 
happened. 
MS NGOYE:  Just before Mr Khena had been requested to act, I think it is 
a day or two before that, I then received these charges and he obviously 
did not know about them and that is why he needed to investigate those 
charges.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Who had sighed the charges? 
20 
MS NGOYE:  They were not signed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were they in final form?  Were they draft charges? 
MS NGOYE:  They looked final. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What were their status? 
MS NGOYE:  They looked final but they were not signed.   
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 93 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who gave them to you?  How did they reach you? 
MS NGOYE:  An ER manager within PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what is an ER manager? 
MS NGOYE:  An Employee Relations manager. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  Within HR, his name is Mr Sello Maluleke. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  He gave them to you. 
MS NGOYE:  He gave them to me.  In fact, he sent them via my e-mail 
address. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And did he say anything about them to you? 
10 
MS NGOYE:  No, nothing was communicated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He just sent them to you? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it did not indicate for what purpose they were being 
sent to you? 
MS NGOYE:  No, I just received them in my e-mail box. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Did they indicate a date by when – a date for the 
disciplinary hearing? 
MS NGOYE:  No, they had not.  They had not indicated a date. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And after receiving them, did you speak to 
20 
anybody about them or to the one who sent them to you? 
MS NGOYE:  The one thing that I said to Mr Maluleke is that I think I 
believe I will engage the services of an attorney of an external attorney 
should this matter proceed.   
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 94 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  That is all I said. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now did the charges relate only to the two contracts 
you are talking about or did they include the allegations of insolence? 
MS NGOYE:  No, they were only in respect of the two contracts.  So, my 
suspension letter did not accord the charges that were levelled against 
me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  So, when I looked at the two I thought but this is not what I 
was suspended for if anything. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Just to complete the picture, what happened to Mr 
Dingiswayo? 
MS NGOYE:  As far as Mr Dingiswayo was concerned because Mr 
Dingiswayo reports to me, what Mr Khena said to me is that, you are 
going to have to deal with these allegations that were levelled against Mr 
Dingiswayo.  And Mr Dingiswayo’s return to work was subject to him not 
being found wanting as far as the allegations is concerned.  What Mr 
Khena also did is that he requested the- our internal auditor Mr Rashik 
Zhamad to look into the issues that were raised in Mr Dingiswayo’s letters 
and to advise accordingly.   
20 
 
And Mr Zhamad could not find anything untoward that Mr 
Dingiswayo had done because also Mr Dingiswayo’s letter was very vague 
in terms of the issues that were raised there.  That he is busy talking to 
the Board and leaking information to the Board.  He did not know 
specificities of those issues so I guess it became very difficult to pinpoint 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 95 of 210 
 
what exactly he was accused of. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Well it indeed would be strange and I am making a 
comment that if somebody passes information to the Board of Control of 
an Organ of State that person would be charged with misconduct.   
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair.  I mean it was something we did not 
understand and we did not understand how you leak information to the 
Board.  It just did not make sense. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And about when did he return to work? 
MS NGOYE:  Mr Dingiswayo returned at the same time that I did, which 
10 
was August. 
CHAIRPERSON:  When was it? 
MS NGOYE:  In August 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  You remember the date by any chance? 
MS NGOYE:  I think roundabout the 15 t h of August 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now you will recall that Mr Dingiswayo’s dismissal 
and then your dismissal on the following day followed the e-mail at SS7B 
page 317.  That is the e-mail you read into the record.  You recall that? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And that you say that e-mail was prompted by advice 
you and Mr Dingiswayo had given in regard to the Swifambo and the 
Prodigy contracts. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now just in relation to those contracts in this part of 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 96 of 210 
 
your evidence, what is the status of those? 
MS NGOYE:  We are still in litigation with Prodigy Chairperson and 
Swifambo I guess has been dealt with by the courts and it has been 
finalised.  But the Prodigy matter is still in litigation, it has not been 
finalised. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is your evidence that Mr Montana rejected your advice 
that the two contracts were problematic? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  Chair, I started by saying there are some areas within the 
10 
organisation that appreciated the work that the legal function was doing.  
But obviously those that were not interested in complying with the laws 
and so saw us as a nuisance to the organisation and to be treated as 
such. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who are some of the people that you believed treated 
the Legal Department it was a nuisance? 
MS NGOYE:  Chair, Mr Montana obviously being one and I am talking 
about people in authority here.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  And I remember also during Dr Popo Molefe’s tenure there 
20 
was a Chairperson of the Audit Committee for instance – I forget her 
name now, who had also taken issue with the fact that we had challenged 
her decision to incorporate.  In fact, she wanted to incorporate another 
party into a contract and we found it not to be proper.  And when we 
raised the objections, they took serious issue toward us.   
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 97 of 210 
 
 
So, that is quite a number of people even after Mr Montana had 
left that you found that the people in authority did not appreciate the 
advice that we gave.  Some old Chairperson they did not to the last 
Chairperson – to the last Board that was at PRASA, we gave merited 
advice and I they just did not like the advice that we were giving. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There people that you are talking about that you put 
under this category of people who thought the – who acted in a manner 
that made you think that they thought the Legal Department was a 
nuisance.  Obviously, you do not think that where they disagreed with the 
Legal Department’s views or suggestions, you do not think that they were 
10 
acting in good faith?  Or were they acting in good faith but just did not 
agree with you? 
MS NGOYE:  Now the good faith was not their Chairperson.  For me it is 
one thing to disagree with somebody and form an opinion perspective we 
can disagree about what the outcome of the opinion is.  But in most 
instances really, we found that there was no – there was malfide in fact 
where we gave advice and they just did not like the advice that we would 
have given. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  And in fact, in many instances we were ostracised as the 
20 
Legal Department and not engaged when we ought to be engaged.  So, 
the people really internally that appreciated us were our colleagues in the 
business that would know, we need the Legal Team to assist us with 
certain matters and so on.  But what we found is that the authorities in 
the organisation did not like it if we told them things that they did not 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 98 of 210 
 
like. 
CHAIRPERSON:  A Department such as a Legal Department is supposed 
to be a helpful Department. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To give advice and guidance to everybody to make sure 
that things are done legally. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why would this category of people not have appreciated 
this important role of the Legal Department? 
MS NGOYE:  I do not know Chair and it was very frustrating to us 
10 
because I think what we were trying to do as the Legal Department and 
what we continue to do as the Legal Department is to look out for the 
interest of PRASA.  All we do is that and if there is a way of achieving a 
particular end, we advise the organisation accordingly.   So, we do not 
just say, this cannot be done and that is it.  We then advice of a manner 
in which we can achieve the same results.  But we found at various 
instances, the Legal Department, would just be excluded because we 
complicate things.  They would say we complicate things. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  Ja. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  When it was excluded was there an alternative base to 
which people went to get legal advice instead of the Legal Department of 
PRASA? 
MS NGOYE:  Well yes Chair, I can think of instances where in one of the 
instances where we were dealing with Chairperson Makubela.  She was 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 99 of 210 
 
going to another law firm which was also not on our Panel and got advice 
there to the exclusion of legal function.  So, I guess they would do it as 
they pleased. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is you answer that sometimes they did sometimes they 
did not ...(intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They would go elsewhere? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Just on the question of good faith and 
10 
disagreements or the difference between those two.  In the Swifambo 
matter in which there were investigations done before the matter was 
taken to court.  What was the position in regard to documents that were 
desist and determining what had happened and the validity of the 
different steps taken? 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson the issue around information at PRASA is a 
minefield.  Effectively there is not proper record keeping where PRASA’s 
document management process are concerned.  We do not have a 
document management system so effectively at the time that the 
investigations were being conducted it was a real tall order to find 
20 
information from people.   
 
And I guess people were scared I guess for lack of a better word 
as to what would be found where they are concerned.  Such that the part 
of the investigation process was to take all our computers and image the 
computer so that information can be retrieved in that manner.  But 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 100 of 210 
 
however, if one went out to ask for documents from a particular area 
within the organisation that you would have expected to be retaining that 
documentation, it was really difficult to find information. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And when for example in the Swifambo matter and 
we will come to that in regard to the Siyangena matter.  Were you able to 
piece together what had happened, what decisions were taken, what they 
were based on, on the basis of proper records? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair, eventually we were able to get information that 
allowed us as part of the investigation process as well because the legal 
function was instrumental in trying to assist the investigators in getting 
10 
information so we were able to then understand what had transpired and 
look for the documents in the right areas.  Because before everything was 
everywhere and we did not know where to find them so. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is in regard to Swifambo? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And with regard to Siyangena which we will get to in 
a moment. 
MS NGOYE:  Siyangena was very difficult.  It was very difficult till the 
last affidavits that we had to do.  People did not want – employees within 
PRASA really did not want to be associated with assisting the 
20 
organisation in dealing with the issues pertaining to Siyangena.  In fact, 
there were very few of our colleagues that agreed to participate in giving 
affidavits and confirming what had transpired in relation to these 
contracts when they were involved.  But it was really difficult.  People I 
guess were just not wanting to assist and it has been difficult really. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 101 of 210 
 
   
And I think it continued to be difficult right until the last 
affidavits that we had to file.  So, I guess Chairperson what I am trying to 
also say is that because these investigations had identified a lot of 
people in terms of maladministration and irregularity, people just did not 
want to participate at all. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:    So, we will come back to the Siyangena matter 
which you deal with in you third affidavit which is SS7C. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   In the meantime, right can we return to the affidavit 
that is SS7B and turn to the next topic you deal with and that is Mr 
10 
Mabunda and the S or Siyaya Group of companies. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Firstly, could you tell the Chairperson very briefly 
why Mr Mabunda turns out to be such a significant figure in PRASA 
operations? 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson Mr Mabunda had – there were a lot of contracts 
I must say that he managed wo be involved in were PRASA was 
concerned especially in the engineering Department of PRASA.  I mean 
he as far as I can remember there is a signal in contracts of PRASA the 
dead pool design, issues of PRASA and all those critical contracts Mr 
20 
Mabunda was the company that was involved.  In fact, in this particular 
instance what one found is that when they sued us they sued us for six 
contracts separate where they had been doing different types of work 
within PRASA.   
 
So, it is somebody that you knew at PRASA to have a lot of 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 102 of 210 
 
attention actually where he – when he comes to PRASA.  And he was very 
also influential at PRASA whenever he came people would talk about him 
that, that is Mr Mabunda, there he is coming.  And he would be given the 
attention that he needed.  So, it is somebody that we knew was obviously 
an important person within the organisation that was treated with that 
kind of respect. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Had you known of him even before you headed the 
Legal Department? 
MS NGOYE:  No, I did not know of him Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, you only got to know him when you got to the Legal 
10 
Department? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes, that is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  You say he had a lot of contracts. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You want to give me an idea of more or less what – how 
many contracts even if you are not able to specify, give them names. 
MS NGOYE:  If I can say Chair it is more than 7 contracts and major 
contracts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  That Mr Mabunda had.  In fact, the investigations revealed 
20 
that the amount of money that have been paid by PRASA to the S Group 
of companies where Mr Mabunda was concerned is close to a billion Rand 
at a particular point.  So, there was a lot of work that he was doing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And do you know whether he played any role in the 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 103 of 210 
 
Swifambo contract? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes.  Yes, Chairperson in fact he did play a huge role in the 
Swifambo contract because what we understood was the company, he was 
a Director of the company, Swifambo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes.  So that too was one of the big contracts that he was 
involved in and we knew that even though at the end of the day Ms 
Mashaba, Oswald Mashaba, appears to be the person that was 
instrumental.  But from the structure of the company Mr Mabunda was the 
person that was the owner of Swifambo. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now you say that in all the S Group of companies 
were paid nearly a billion Rand by PRASA. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  For different contracts. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But there is one small group of – or well there is one 
group of contracts that was the subject of litigation between PRASA and 
the S Group. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  What was the nature of the dispute? 
20 
MS NGOYE:  The dispute revolved around work done and not paid for.  So 
naturally the contract, the scope would be setup to say this is the scope 
of the contract and this is what you are limited to.  But what we then 
found because remember as the Legal Department Chairperson, we get 
information for the business.  What we had found is that the business was 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 104 of 210 
 
saying the work that was done by the S Group of companies was not 
promised.   
 
And in certain instances, part of the litigation that the cases that 
they were suing us for was there was a dispute as to the amounts that 
they were paid.  So, there were various elements of these various 
contracts.  And immediately after Mr Montana left the 6 summonses came 
from Siyaya in relation to these various contracts that they had been 
doing for PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  I did not hear.  The what came? 
MS NGOYE:  I beg your pardon Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I did not hear the first part of your last sentence.  You 
said as soon as Mr Montana had left, what happened? 
MS NGOYE:  The litigation, so the summoned us.  We just received a 
barrage of summonses. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  After that and it was all coming from Siyaya. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  H’mm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why had the summons not been issued while Mr 
Montana was there? 
20 
MS NGOYE:  We do not know Chair because these issues obviously had 
existed at the time that Mr Montana was there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  But immediately after he had left 6 summonses arrived at 
PRASA. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 105 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But who was going to issue instructions as to the 
issuing of the summons?  Was it – did it have to be the GCEO? 
MS NGOYE:  Remember they are coming from Siyaya’s side so Siyaya 
sued us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So they were coming to ...(intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:  That is it, to PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They were against PRASA. 
MS NGOYE:  That is it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MS NGOYE:  So Siyaya was suing us for payment of services they said 
10 
they rendered and so on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now prior to the issue of these summonses on 
PRASA, had there been any legal disputes between Siyaya and – or any 
disputes that ended up in courts between Siyaya and PRASA? 
MS NGOYE:  There had not been any Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now what did the amounts involved in respectively of 
these 6 summonses? 
MS NGOYE:  It was various amounts Chair.  The total I can – I mean I do 
not have specific details.  The total would amount to about 56 million that 
20 
Siyaya was suing us for. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now if I ask you to look at NN4 which you referred to 
in …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that at page 322? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please Chairperson.   
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 106 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  You refer to that at paragraph 35 of this affidavit 
SS7B. 
MS NGOYE:  Paragraph 35? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  You have read those documents? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes, I have Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Is that clearly summarized what the nature of the 
disputes between the Siyaya Group in respect of each of the contracts 
10 
was and PRASA? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, let us get more details about M and O.  If it is a 
letter, from whom it was to whom was it addressed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What was the date?  What was the subject matter? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:    Yes, as you please sir.   
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm.  So we leave it. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  What is NN4 Ms Ngoye? 
MS NGOYE:  Chair NN4 is the letter that we had received from our 
attorneys who were acting for PRASA in relation to all those contracts.  
DL Mogaswa Attorneys, we have the attorneys on a brief that had assisted 
PRASA in relation to all those contracts. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 107 of 210 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  DL – I am sorry.  DL …(intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:  Mogaswa. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mogaswa, was that PRASA’s attorneys? 
MS NGOYE:  It was PRASA’s attorneys. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MS NGOYE:  So, when they prepared this document, they had prepared 
the document on the request of the Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  Who wanted to know what had transpired in these matters. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  So, this was the summary to the Chairperson to say this is 
where the matters are and this is what possibly these are the chances of 
our success. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what date is the letter 
MS NGOYE:  The letter is dated 21 November 2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  It is addressed to PRASA House and an e-mail 
Fani Dingiswayo, is that right? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair.  It is addressed to …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, for the attention of Mr Fani Dingiswayo and  
20 
MS NGOYE:  Shumi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Shumi Magodi. 
MS NGOYE:  Magodi.  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And the subject is; Report on Progress on Siyaya 
file.  Is that right? 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 108 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And in instance the attorneys summarized what the 
nature of the disputes is in respect of each of the cases that were now 
before court. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And may I ask you were the matters to be eventually 
the matter is to be resolved by the courts or were they to be resolved by 
some other tribunal? 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson, the parties agreed between us and Siyaya we 
10 
agreed to refer the matters to arbitration and that was one process that 
we had agreed to because after the summonses we came together and 
agreed that we rather deal with these matters through an arbitration 
process.  The agreements provide for that dispute resolution mechanism 
and in the matter were then referred to arbitration.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now in regard to for example the Swifambo matter. 
MS NGOYE:  H’mm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  PRASA had challenged the validity of the contract 
and therefore asked the court to review and set aside the contract? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  In regard to the Siyaya disputes was it simply a 
matter of disputing the amounts claimed or did it go to the heart of the 
contracts? 
MS NGOYE:  Well it was just around the monies claimed and the 
services rendered Chair. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 109 of 210 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And that is why it was possible or it was 
acceptable that the dispute – the arbitration? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The dispute about the amount claimed was PRASA’s 
contention that there was not work that had been done which justified 
that claim? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes in some of the cases Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In some of the cases. 
MS NGOYE:  The instruction that we received was that no these monies 
have been paid. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS NGOYE:  You know we do not owe …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS NGOYE:  Siyaya any. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  And in others that we were told that no they did work that 
they were not authorised to do and obviously the colleagues were 
feeling that it was – because it was beyond and there was no 
variations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
20 
MS NGOYE:  To the contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  They just felt that it was not proper to just you know pay 
Siyaya in relation to those matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 110 of 210 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The dispute with Siyaya started while Mr Molefe’s 
Board was still in office. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And at the time of this letter a NN4 the 21 
November what was the status of Mr Molefe’s Board? 
MS NGOYE:  Mr Molefe had left the Board of Mr Molefe had you know 
finished their term and so there was a new Board that was present at 
that time.  So it was – this matter was – this letter was effectively to 
deal with the enquiry that was coming from the Chairperson of the new 
Board, Ms Makubela. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now you deal with that at paragraph 32 of SS7B 
and you set out the date of the new Board and so on.  Are those all 
correct? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Now after this dispute it came around to 
what – soon after she was appointed to the Board what was the 
interaction between you and Ms Makubela? 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson my first interaction with Ms Makubela was 
around you know my Portfolio as legal and it was also around 
understanding what had transpired in relation to the Werksmans 
20 
contract who had appointed Werksmans and how it was appointed and 
so on because what she indicated to us what that she was required and 
also in relation to Parliament to have to go and explain to Parliament 
how Werksmans was appointed at PRASA.  So that was the first really 
meeting that I had where I explained to her the structure of the legal 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 111 of 210 
 
function and I advised her that we are not acting at the time and so you 
know that really it was a short meeting with Ms Makubela. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And in relation to the Siyaya contracts? 
MS NGOYE:  Well in relation to the Siyaya contracts Chairperson I was 
called in again by the Chairperson and because I operate at a strategic 
level I then called Mr Dingiswayo who would have more detail on the 
matters to come with me to the meeting so that we can explain these 
contracts accordingly to the Chairperson and you know what became 
alarming for me in that meeting was you know when the Chairperson 
said, at this time perhaps I must say Chairperson the Siyaya contracts 
10 
they had applied for liquidation.  Right and the liquidation process was 
– it was voluntary liquidation of this Siyaya Consulting Engineering 
Company which was one of the companies that had sued us.  So she 
said that she had received information from a colleague of hers Ms 
…(indistinct) and that you know you have PRASA had made 
concessions in the liquidation proceedings that warranted Siyaya to be 
paid and she said she had a particular report as well that was talking to 
that fact.  So when we asked for the report she did not share it you 
know with us.  She said no she was not supposed to share that report 
with us it was for her information and so therefore she wanted to see 
20 
how she could best deal with these matters. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now what was your reaction I mean here is the 
Chairperson of the Board dealing with legal matters?  How did you 
react to that and what was perception of her receiving information from 
outside sources? 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 112 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson it is obviously – it is unheard of.  You know 
for me it really was unheard of and I would have thought my first 
impression was you know try and understand exactly what is happening 
with the organisation.  A Chairperson can ask questions and can ask for 
you know explanations that was not a problem.  But to have already 
made a decision that says yes I have got this report and PRASA people 
had conceded in the litigation – in the liquidation proceedings and 
therefore we need to see how we settle these matters.  That for me was 
a concern.  You know because I thought I am not sure how far this goes 
because as far as I am concerned these matters were matters that as 
10 
PRASA we knew we had defences.  And so I do not quite understand 
why it is now that we would be now put into a position to settle these 
matters and this was driven by the Chairperson.  So it took me – you 
know it took me back and I thought to myself okay we will have to see 
how this thing pans out.  Because I had thought also that the 
Chairperson would work with us as the Legal Department to make sure 
that we are all alike.  That that not – that was not to be Chairperson 
because she excluded us altogether from the deliberations of this 
matter.  In fact she preferred to deal with the external attorneys of 
PRASA in this matter and not the legal – the internal legal function 
20 
within PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would this have been 2016? 
MS NGOYE:  2017 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  2017. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 113 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now the – she will say and there is an issue that 
comes up.  Mr Montana as understand it did not have legal 
qualifications but Ms Makubela? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes.  I understood Ms Makubela to be SC – senior 
counsel and ja.  So she definitely had the legal background.  And in 
fact we were quite excited that we have got a Chairperson who is a 
lawyer you know and would help us deal with all these matters. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And so when she asked – sorry – we dealt with 
NN4 and you will see that that is dated the 21 s t of November 2017.  
10 
That is the report back which the attorneys had given.  Am I correct? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And which you said clearly reflected what the 
nature of the disputes were and what PRASA’s defences were to each 
of the cases? 
MS NGOYE:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  What happened next in relation to that dispute? 
MS NGOYE:  Well Chair as I eluded you know the Chairperson decided 
to deal with our attorneys, the external attorneys as well as the 
attorneys of Siyaya and a form of a settlement agreement you know 
20 
was entered into.  I am summarising Chairperson.  At the end of the 
day what we understood was that you know she had given instructions 
as to how the matters must be settled.  You know and those instructions 
now needed to be effected and the next thing we knew as the Legal 
Department was that there was going to be an application to make that 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 114 of 210 
 
the settlement agreements you know an order of court so that PRASA 
can pay.  But before that Chair what transpired is that we then engaged 
our attorneys, the external attorneys that we had briefed and we said, 
look you said …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  And who were these attorneys? 
MS NGOYE:  Diale Mogale. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh same as …(intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:  Mogashoa yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MS NGOYE:  We said – because our – all our attorneys know 
10 
Chairperson that we do not deal with the business without the legal 
function being present and we stressed that upon all our attorneys.  So 
you know we expressed that concern with the attorneys and the 
response we got was something else.  And the attorney Mr Diale – 
Mogashoa said to us that he was barred by the Chairperson of the 
Board from speaking to the Legal Department. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the Chairperson of the Board at that time was Ms 
Makubela. 
MS NGOYE:  Ms Makubela yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
MS NGOYE:  So we left it at that.  So we said okay that is fine but 
already one could see that there is something amiss with what was 
happening and we were very concerned about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ms Ngoye before you go on after she received or 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 115 of 210 
 
PRASA received NN4 if you look at your affidavit you refer to a 
document prepared by the Chairperson. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And you will find that at paragraph 35 and the 
document you talk about …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  What page? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh sorry Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What page? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  At page 294 of the affidavit at paragraph 35 and 
the annexure is at page …(intervenes). 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on one second.  235? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is right Chair.  Sorry 294. 
MS NGOYE:  294. 
CHAIRPERSON:  294. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes paragraph 35? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is so Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then you refer to NN5 which Chairperson 
appears at page 338 of SS7. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  338? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  338 Chairperson yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now did you regard this as an important document 
relating to …(intervenes). 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 116 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just identify it once again in what document it is, 
from whom it was? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As it pleases Chairperson yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To whom it was sent and what was the subject 
matter? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Well first of all who is the document addressed to? 
MS NGOYE:  The document is addressed to Mr Zede, Mr Lindikaya 
Zede who was the acting Chief Executive Officer at the time. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And from whom is it? 
MS NGOYE:  It is from the Chairperson of the PRASA Board at the time 
10 
Advocate Tan Makubela SC.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And what is the date of the document? 
MS NGOYE:  The date is 28 November 2017. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And what is the subject matter of this document? 
MS NGOYE:  Siyaya Consulting Engineers PTY LTD in liquidation.  
Enquiry in terms of Section 417(1) and 418(2) of The Companies Act 61 
of 1973. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Right.  Now in paragraph 36 you refer to a number 
of concerns that that document prompted. 
MS NGOYE:  H’mm. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Could you …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I am sorry.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before we go to what it prompted let us have the gist 
of what the ...(intervenes). 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 117 of 210 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Letter says. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As it pleases Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja what was the gist of what that letter was talking 
about? 
MS NGOYE:  The gist Chairperson was around the settlement of the 
Siyaya contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MS NGOYE:  I think what the Chairperson in this memorandum advises 
is that you know she had been in contact with the liquidators of Siyaya 
who gave her a report you know that was subject to the liquidation 
proceedings.  And also in the memorandum you know she then 
indicates that she is not sure why our attorneys say that they did not 
have that report because as far as she was concerned the report was 
available.  So – and also in terms of the memorandum she speaks to 
the letter that Diale Mogashoa had made available to her.  Because 
remember she asked for information.  We gave her information 
requesting Diale Mogashoa to summarise the matters.  So she refers to 
20 
that report and refers to the subpoenas that our colleagues had 
received in relation to the litigation.  In fact it speaks to the liquidation 
processes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  And then she talks to the report you know the interim 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 118 of 210 
 
report of the Commissioner that the witnesses that testified in this – in 
the hearing and the inquiry you know acknowledged that PRASA owed 
Siyaya money. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  So this is in a nutshell what she talks to.  She talks to 
that report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  She said witnesses made major concessions in regards to 
the liability of PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
10 
MS NGOYE:  So she writes this because she said she needed to have 
this report ready for the Board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  And also she was preparing also to go to the Portfolio 
Committee 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Before we go on can I just ask you to look at 
paragraph 5 of NN5 which appears at page 339 and will you read into 
the record what she says that the circumstances in which she acquired 
this liquidation report? 
20 
MS NGOYE:  She says: 
“You are aware that attorneys acting for Siyaya 
Consulting Engineers in liquidation approached on or 
about 14 November and that they provided me with a 
copy of an interim report of the inquiry into the 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 119 of 210 
 
Companies Act that was prepared by the Commissioner 
and dated 15 September 2017.  They also attached 
copies of e-mail communications between Mr Madimpe 
Mogashoa and Mogashoa Diale and Advocate Francois 
Botes SC.  The e-mail communication is also attached in 
Mogashoa Diale Attorneys Report.” 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now who is Advocate Francois Botes? 
MS NGOYE:  Advocate Botes was acting for the – was in the liquidation 
proceedings.  So she – he was the one that got ...(intervenes). 
ADV VAS SONI SC:    For whom was a he acting for? 
10 
MS NGOYE:  He was acting for Siyaya. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So in relation to how Ms Makubela says she got 
the information what was your understanding? 
MS NGOYE:  Chair I was taken aback because I – the little I 
understand at least about liquidation proceedings is this – things like 
this do not – you do not just give reports out without necessarily 
following procedure.  But also when she said at the time she said 
because of collegiality you know I was able to get – they gave me this 
report.  So from that onwards I knew that this was obviously not 
something that was done properly.  Especially after enquiring from our 
20 
attorneys in clauses that they did not have the report.  So you know it 
became surprising how she could then have that report and as our 
attorneys could not have it. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But in terms of communications between her in 
looking at what she says and the fact that she refers to the report from 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 120 of 210 
 
whom did she get the report? 
MS NGOYE:  Sorry Chair which report are we …(intervenes). 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The report she was talking about.  The interim 
report of the liquidator at paragraph 5. 
MS NGOYE:  Well to me she said it was collegiality.  You know a 
colleague of hers who seems to be with a – deals with this type of 
matters in the Pretoria Bar that had been the person that had given her 
the report.  I did not quite ask you know who that was but she referred 
to collegiality and I just accepted it for what it is. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Well if you look at paragraph 5 it seems that 
10 
between the word approached and on in the second line the word me 
appears to be missing if one wants to read things into that? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes.  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So where would – I mean based on what she is 
saying in paragraph 5 where would she have got the report from? 
MS NGOYE:  She would have gotten it from the attorneys acting for 
Siyaya Consulting Engineers.  Perhaps may I also say she is writing to 
the Group CEO at the time …(indistinct) and perhaps she had had this 
discussion with Mr Zede and that is why she is saying you are aware 
because it if referencing you know her discussions perhaps with Mr 
20 
Zede.  That when I engaged with her you know she did not tell me she 
just said collegiality.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Well if you look at paragraph 36 you suggest 
something else. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is going back to her affidavit. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 121 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  Oh sorry Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  To her affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  At page 294 Ms Ngoye. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  You are saying exactly what that letter says that 
she was approached by the attorneys. 
MS NGOYE:  Well yes Chair.  That – because that was what was 
startling for me you know as I indicate in the paragraph.  That she had 
10 
been approached by the attorneys of Siyangena.  That I get from 
obviously the memorandum that she had prepared. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  And what after that approach what had they 
done? 
MS NGOYE:  They gave her this interim report. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Right. 
MS NGOYE:  Of the insolvency enquiry. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And what did she say about PRASA’s attorneys in 
the memorandum which you summarise. 
MS NGOYE:  Let me just …(intervenes). 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Summarise at paragraph 36. 
MS NGOYE:  36.  Oh she says that she was – she did not necessarily 
believe that the PRASA attorneys would not have the report.  You know 
some of the things that she alleges in that memorandum. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  And then she made the point that she had 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 122 of 210 
 
made previously that she was told that PRASA employees had made 
major concessions. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now what was your reaction to the communication 
between her as Chairperson and the opposing attorney? 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson it is unheard of.  You know I mean I for as 
long as I think I have been an attorney one knows what the boundaries 
are.  You know when you have attorneys on Board each side the 
attorneys are the ones that speak on behalf of their clients.  You know 
you do not do it like that.  So for me it was alarming you know that here 
10 
we have a Chairperson of the Board who is a senior counsel for that 
matter you know who would conduct herself in that manner.  You know 
it was just something that we frowned upon.  But we left it Chairperson 
because we were not wanted in that whole sphere but we recognised 
what was happening. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry did you say you were? 
CHAIRPERSON:  When you say you recognised what was happening 
what was happening? 
MS NGOYE:  Well the fact that now she is communicating directly to 
attorneys of the other side.  You know to the exclusion of the Legal 
20 
Department. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  She was running with the matter herself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  You know and for us in the Legal Department that is not – 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 123 of 210 
 
the Chairperson does not have that authority. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  First and foremost you know.  And if anything we would 
have thought that she would rely on the internal team to advise us to 
what is happening.  But she ran with the matter herself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now did you protest you or the Legal Department? 
MS NGOYE:  Protest we did Chairperson but we did not protest to her 
because we did not have access to her.  
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
10 
MS NGOYE:  We went to the acting Group CEO at the time Mr 
Lindikaya Zede and we said to him, what is this that is happening as far 
as this matter is concerned?  That the Chairperson is now engaging the 
other side and as a legal function we are excluded from the matter.  We 
even said to Mr Zede.  We said but you know how it works within the 
organisation why is it that you are not advising the Chairperson 
accordingly?  And his response was simple you know the Chairperson is 
doing what he wants – she wants and wanting to approach this matter 
in this way.  So we left it Chair.  And I think we got to a point within 
PRASA where we understood that in this case we were a nuisance and 
20 
therefore we needed to be side-lined. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now there are a few developments and we can 
either go into them or Mr Chairperson the submission I make is they 
just deal with the same matter.  It simply is a continuation of that 
process which leads to what I want to raise with the witness.  I do not 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 124 of 210 
 
know if you want me to deal with annexure NN6 and NN7?  My 
submission is they are not required. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No just go ahead as you see fit. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think it is fine ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now in regard to the communication with your 
Department and the Board or the Chairperson of the Board what was 
the nature of the communication in relation to Siyaya? 
MS NGOYE:  We advised the Chairperson about the matters and how 
we believed that PRASA had you know high prospects of succeeding in 
10 
the matters.  And we basically told her what Diale Mogashoa had also 
indicated and it was basically to say well we do not believe that these 
matters should be settled because we can win them.  And that was in a 
nutshell effectively what our report was saying and also she had 
wanted to know who we had advised and so on.  So we gave her that 
feedback. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now the next development is that you find out that 
you have been excluded and when I say you the Department, the Legal 
Department has been excluded from the litigation process. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now did that come about? 
MS NGOYE:  Well you know I think Chair when you were – the 
environment we knew what we were rather as the Legal Department 
that matters would eventually come to us.  So when the settlement 
agreement was going to be made at order of court we knew that the 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 125 of 210 
 
papers would have to be served on us as the legal function. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry to interrupt you.  Let us go back a little bit.  
There was a time when your felt the need to go to the acting Group 
CEO Mr Zede. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you raised your concerns with regard to the role 
that was being played by the then Chairperson Ms Makubela? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now you recall more or less when that was when you 
went to raise this issue with the acting Group CEO or are you not able 
10 
to remember? 
MS NGOYE:  It was around you know November.  It was at the time that 
…(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  That the Chairperson was making inquiries. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  You know into this matter.  And – because there were a 
number of meetings that were held in fact. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  Diale Mogashoa. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  We bumped into him in the corridors of PRASA and we 
would ask him, what are you doing here? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  You know and it would be the number of meetings that he 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 126 of 210 
 
was holding with the Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  So it was around that time Chair November/December. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As I recall what is in the documentation the 
Chairperson had just been appointed is it not? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At that time. 
MS NGOYE:  She was appointed I think in October. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  Ja.  So this was the first matter that she dealt with. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  At the time you went to speak to the acting 
Group CEO had you come to the conclusion that you – the Legal 
Department was being excluded from any dealings with this matter or 
not yet? 
MS NGOYE:  No Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not yet. 
MS NGOYE:  Everything was fine before the intervention of the 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Everything was still fine? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes.  The Legal Department was left to run with the 
20 
matters and to report accordingly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Then continue and tell me at what stage you 
felt that the Legal Department was being excluded? 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 127 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  At the time – sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or did you speak at cross purposes? 
MS NGOYE:  No, no we did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Let me ask again.  Or Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  May I beg – because there is an issue that does 
arise relating to that issue Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Another question of your feeling what happened 
on the 15 t h of December if you look at paragraph 40 of your affidavit? 
MS NGOYE:  On the 15 t h Chair Mr Dingiswayo phoned. I was with Mr 
10 
Dingiswayo because we were concerned about the dealings of Diale 
Mogashoa with the Chairperson and them not coming to talk to us.  
Because the least we expected was that even after they engaged with 
the Chairperson they would say, look this is where we are with this 
matter, this is what we have discussed with the Chairperson.  And when 
we realised that that was not happening we then suggested to call – 
this is Mr Dingiswayo and myself – to call Mr Diale – I mean Mogashoa 
and he frankly said to us, look I had been barred from speaking to the 
Legal Department by the Chairperson of the Board.  And we left it at 
that because we did not want to put him in trouble. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  So we just said okay and we left it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But was that not I mean really well I mean from 
your point of view how would PRASA benefit if the Legal Department 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 128 of 210 
 
would be excluded in this fashion? 
MS NGOYE:  It just complicates things Chairperson.  I think as an 
internal legal function we have a role to play as well and you know in 
terms of briefing attorneys as well.  We understand the business and 
we would know what is happening better than the attorneys themselves.  
So you know it was obviously unadvisable that we would be left out and 
our attorneys proceed with the matters.  In fact they took instructions 
from us you know for them to be able to deal with the mattes on behalf 
of PRASA as the legal function.  And we obviously having you know 
being in the field we understood what issues were important and what 
10 
not.  So when that did not happen it was a concern for us. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then on the 15 t h of December a letter was written 
to Ms Mogashoa? 
MS NGOYE:  No. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  What was that letter but if you look at paragraph 
42 of your affidavit. 
MS NGOYE:  Ja.  This letter Chairperson effectively was a letter 
advising Mr Mogashoa about the settlement – what you call it 
agreement that would have to be made in relation to each case. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do we have this letter somewhere, because if it is 
20 
there let’s go to it. 
MS NGOYE:   I don’t have the letter. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It isn’t in the documents 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is not in the document, is there no access to it, so 
that we have some complete picture? 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 129 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:   I can find the letter Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You can find a copy? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes I can find the letter and make it available. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja okay, okay but tell me what the letter was saying 
and who it was from, who it was to. 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson Mr Zede was advised, obviously Mr Zede was 
the Acting CEO at the time and he had been very close to the 
Chairperson.  So Mr Zede was advising Diale Mogashoa, our attorneys 
on the instructions of the Chairperson, how the Chairperson would have 
wanted these matters to be settled in respect of each case.  So – and 
10 
basically speaks to Ms Makubela’s instructions where she then lists the 
respective cases and the amounts that the cases need to be settled for.  
So she deals with all those in that letter. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ja are those details in paragraph 42? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair.  So you can see there Chairperson, 
at the top of page 21 the matter was to be settled for the amount of 
…(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   At page? 
MS NGOYE:   297 the matter is to be claimed for – settled for an 
amount of R7 million the other one – so these were the instructions that 
20 
were coming from the Chairperson in relation to all those matters that 
…(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes do you want to just read that into the record, 
those amounts how they were to be settled and the case numbers? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 130 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well if that’s the previous – ja the letter goes on to 
confirm, I think start from there and read up to the end of the 
paragraph. 
MS NGOYE:   The letter goes on to confirm Ms Makubela’s instructions 
as follows:   
“Case 74281/2015 was to be pended until further 
instructions.  In respect of case DB2 the matter was to 
be 
settled 
for 
the 
amount 
claimed, 
namely 
R7 098 481.66.  Case DD1 the matter was to be settled 
for the amount claimed, namely R8 095 950.00.  case 
10 
DB3, the matter was to be settled for the amount 
claimed, R50 371 739.87, the Siyaya case the amount 
claimed was R21 million but it was to be settled at 
R19 583 778.42 in respect of interest this should be 
reckoned from the date of the summons.  The letter 
concluded as follows, DM Attorneys were to make the 
following offers to pay the liquidators of CIA Rail 
R30 566 171.53 plus interest and to pay the attorneys 
representing CIA Rail R90 583 788.42 plus interest.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now the – what you have read there, according to 
20 
your affidavit, was how Ms Makubela had said, according to the letter 
the various claims by CI against PRASA should be settled, is that 
correct?  
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay am I right to say that those that she said 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 131 of 210 
 
should be settled actually, it wasn’t a matter of them being settled, it 
was a matter of the instructions to pay whatever amount was claimed, 
that seems to be what it says, is that correct? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was not a compromise or a settlement agreement, 
it was, pay the amount demanded? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In respect of all those where she said, settle the 
amount as claimed. 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then the last sentence of paragraph 42 of your 
affidavit says: 
“The letter concluded as follows, DM Attorneys were to 
make the following offers, that is now PRASA’s attorneys 
were being instructed.” 
MS NGOYE:   That’s right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   “To offer to pay the liquidators of Siyaya 
R30 566 171.53 plus interest.” 
Do you know whether that amount – where that amount came 
from? 
20 
MS NGOYE:   I think it was part of …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it – maybe let’s start with this, what was the 
total of the amounts – the total amount that she was saying PRASA’s 
lawyers should agree to pay in regard to all the claims mentioned 
there? 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 132 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:   It was over – just over R56 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just over R56 million? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Okay 
and 
then 
there 
is 
that 
amount 
of 
R30 566 171.53 in respect of what was that do you know, because your 
paragraph here doesn’t say what that was for. 
MS NGOYE:   I guess it was the amount that was claimed also by 
Siyaya so she wanted us to pay the liquidators that amount of money to 
settle that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but weren’t all these claims were – the claimant 
10 
was Siyaya isn’t it? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So why would some amount be paid to the liquidators 
and not the whole amount? 
MS NGOYE:   Chair this is what was confusing, you know, with this 
whole matter …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because if a company is in liquidation then whatever 
the company was owed must be paid to the liquidators. 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes is this one of the things that puzzled you? 
20 
MS NGOYE:   It did Chair, because I mean, Chair, liquidation we 
understand that the liquidator is the one that takes over and you deal 
with the liquidator and not the party itself but in this particular case, 
you know, that was not the case. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now – so this R30 million in the last sentence of 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 133 of 210 
 
your paragraph, you say was part of the R56 million or so? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the total amount was just over R56 million. 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And out of that R56 million plus she was saying R30 
million must be paid to the liquidators. 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then to pay the attorneys representing Siyaya, 
10 
one would have thought that such attorneys as they would have been to 
pursue these claims would be attorneys of the liquidators. 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And not Siyaya. 
MS NGOYE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so do you know whether, as at this time there 
were attorneys instructed by the liquidators and there were attorneys 
who had previously been instructed by Siyaya or was it the same 
attorneys? 
MS NGOYE:   It was not the same attorneys Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was not the same attorneys? 
MS NGOYE:   No it was not the same attorneys, the liquidator had its 
own attorneys and Siyaya had its own but in this case we were not 
dealing with the liquidators’ attorneys we were dealing with Siyaya’s 
attorneys. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 134 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   By this time, how long had Siyaya been under 
liquidation, do you remember? 
MS NGOYE:   They actually applied for their liquidation in 2016 so the 
process, I think, had started at that time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But is the position that through the Chairperson of 
the Board of PRASA, PRASA was effectively dealing with the attorneys 
– the previous attorneys of Siyaya, I’m saying previous because I don’t 
think they should have been representing Siyaya once they were 
liquidators, is that the position? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes, I mean, so effectively what we understood was then, 
10 
because the interactions were with the attorneys of Siyaya, you know, 
the issues around liquidation were basically you know, put aside in 
terms of having to comply with the manner in which you would run this 
type of case where a liquidator is involved.  So she calls the attorneys 
of Siyaya and started talking to them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you remember whether at the time that she and 
her 
Board 
were 
appointed 
the 
liquidators 
attorneys 
were 
in 
correspondence with PRASA or PRASA’s attorneys? 
MS NGOYE:   They were Chair 
CHAIRPERSON:   They were. 
20 
MS NGOYE:   So the liquidators would speak to Diale Mogashoa. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, do you know whether, prior to her appointment 
and the appointment of her Board, the so-called Siyaya’s attorneys 
were continuing to be in correspondence with PRASA? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes Chair, in terms of the Arbitration proceedings, yes we 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 135 of 210 
 
were in communications. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, in respect of that. 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but why was that necessary once Siyaya was in 
liquidation because I would have imagined even with regard to that, 
that should have been under the liquidators’ control. 
MS NGOYE:   In terms of the Siyaya S Group had a number of 
companies so Engineering – Consulting Engineering is what they had 
put under liquidation and the others remained as part of that group. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the arbitration related to other entities. 
10 
MS NGOYE:   The other as part of the S Group yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not the one under liquidation? 
MS NGOYE:  That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So is it possible, therefore, that some of these 
amounts that she was giving instructions on did not relate to the entity 
that was under liquidation? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s to the ones that were in arbitration with us, that’s 
correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s correct? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   So in that case, then except for the fact that she 
being Chairperson of the Board was getting involved in these matters, 
there would be no problem with dealing with Siyaya, Siyaya’s attorneys 
insofar as they represented entities that were not under liquidation? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 136 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so do you know whether the amount that she 
said should be paid to Siyaya’s liquidators whether that would have 
related to the only claim or claims that related to the entity that was 
under liquidation? 
MS NGOYE:   It would have been to the claim that related to the 
company that was in liquidation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay so insofar as she talks about amounts that 
related to entities that were not under liquidation, somebody at PRASA 
would have been entitled to deal with those attorneys? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Insofar as she talks about amounts that related to 
the entity that was under liquidation, somebody at PRASA would have 
been entitled to speak to the liquidators’ attorneys? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Chairperson, if I could be helpful in regard to 
the figure of R30 566 171.53, you’ll see Mr Chairperson that, that is the 
sum total of the first three amounts reflected on page 297. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then you add R7 million, R8 million and R15 
20 
million, you’ll get the R30.56 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And then of course the R19 million is the one that 
was the fourth figure, that’s how it’s divided. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 137 of 210 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, the Chairperson instructs – give instructions 
of how the matters are to be settled but what happens next and you 
deal with that at paragraph 43 of your affidavit Mr Ngoye? 
MS NGOYE:   In paragraph 43 I talk about a letter that Siyaya’s 
attorneys wrote to our attorney. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MS NGOYE:   Right, in fact in that letter Chairperson Siyaya’s 
attorneys complained about the proposal that was made by our 
attorneys reflecting, effectively that that’s not what they understood to 
be the instruction coming from the Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay I’m sorry I’m just going to ask you to start 
afresh on that. 
MS NGOYE:   No problem Chair, this letter that Siyaya’s attorneys 
wrote to our attorneys, right, they complained about the fact that what 
our attorneys had represented as an offer of settlement was not a true 
reflection of what they understood to be the case. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay now we skipped something.  Did DM Attorneys 
carry out these instructions as per the instructions given in that letter? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes Chair they did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They did in accordance with the amounts given 
20 
there? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay and then what happened?   Siyaya’s Attorneys 
came back ...(intervenes).  
MS NGOYE:   Came back and complained that no, these amounts that 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 138 of 210 
 
you are reflecting as settlement amounts are not what we understood to 
be the offer coming from PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and have we got that letter here? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   We don’t Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS NGOYE:   We will provide the letter Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, it should be provided.  Yes and what 
happened then? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry Mr Chairperson maybe just – in fact they  
don’t say it is in terms of the offer but if you read what they’re saying 
10 
and if you put that in inverted commas. 
MS NGOYE:   The attorneys complained that the tender made did not 
correspond with ...(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry where are you reading from? 
MS NGOYE:   Paragraph 43 Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Paragraph 43. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Paragraph 43? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes, on page 296. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS NGOYE:   It says after the tender was made: 
20 
“Siyaya Attorneys complained that the tender made did 
not correspond with PRASA specific and express 
instructions.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you have quoted specific and express 
instruction, that was in their letter? 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 139 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, which you saw? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And what is your comment about that – the fact 
that they knew what the specific and express instruction was? 
MS NGOYE:   A bit odd Chairperson that the attorneys of the other side 
would have been advised you know by somebody in PRASA of what the 
specific instructions were.  We found that improper in fact to say how is 
that they seem to know, our lawyers in any event had written what they 
10 
thought they understood to be the case but in this regard Siyaya’s 
Attorneys come back and say no those are not the express instructions, 
so in our mind it was very clear that they were communicating you know 
with the Chairperson around these matters and that’s why ...(indistinct) 
it is not what was offered. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright, as a consequence then forgetting all of 
these concerns that you raise and I am not saying they are not 
important, but just to take the process forward, what happened next 
insofar as having the matter settled at the arbitration proceedings? 
MS NGOYE:   The offer – our attorneys then revised the offers to 
20 
accord with what Siyaya’s Attorneys had communicated to them and 
that is what was then sent to the arbitrators to be made ...(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   We are skipping. 
MS NGOYE:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, it seems natural that the attorneys for Siyaya 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 140 of 210 
 
would have been asked by your attorneys where are you getting this 
from, didn’t they ask this? 
MS NGOYE:   I don’t know Chair one would have expected that but as 
to whether it happened I can’t. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I would have expected you to ask DM, I know that 
they had said that you – they were barred from talking to you so maybe 
that is the reason why. 
MS NGOYE:   Ja, we ...(indistinct) Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but internally within PRASA did anybody ask 
who knows anything about what these attorneys are talking about, did 
10 
anybody ask? 
MS NGOYE:   Well we knew that Mr Zede who was close to the process 
would know what was involved. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:   So you know – and ...(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   But you left it. 
MS NGOYE:   Now we left it at that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In a role. 
MS NGOYE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay and you have now talked about PRASA’s 
20 
attorneys sending a revised offer and – but you are skipping, somebody 
within PRASA must have given them instructions, that advice to offer, 
how did that come about? 
MS NGOYE:   They were speaking to Mr Lindikaya Zede at the time who 
was the acting ...(intervenes).  
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 141 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Group CEO. 
MS NGOYE:   Group CEO, there was a point where Mr Zede became 
the acting – no the Company Secretary.   His official position in the 
organisation was Company Secretary. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS NGOYE:   But at this time when these negotiations started he was 
the Acting ...(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   Acting CEO. 
MS NGOYE:   That’s right and then later on I think he was removed 
roundabout December, but he was the one that had engaged quite 
10 
extensively in the meetings that the Chairperson had with our attorneys 
...(indistinct), so he would have known and he would be the one that we 
understood that he was the one that then communicated to our 
attorneys to say fix the offer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you know whether he would have been part of 
whatever meeting the Chairperson had with whoever in this regard to 
these matters? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes he was Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was? 
MS NGOYE:   We took issue with him to say you know how we work. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS NGOYE:   Why are you not advising accordingly you know so he 
did, he was basically, even when he became Company Secretary I 
suppose from a Board relationship he continued to be part of those 
meetings. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 142 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’mm, okay, alright.  So he instructed PRASA’s 
attorneys to send a revised offer? 
MS NGOYE:   To revise the offer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you able to indicate how the revised offer looked 
like or not really? 
MS NGOYE:   Well I guess Chairperson the revised offer would be in 
accordance with the letter that Advocate Makubela ...(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   Just on the – what room there was to revise the 
offers when the amounts that the attorneys – PRASA’s attorneys had 
been instructed to offer were the amounts claimed? 
10 
MS NGOYE:   Ja, I think it was around the interest, when interest will 
be calculated, you know Chair because you will recall in the letter that 
the Chairperson writes ...(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   It does state from the date of summons. 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So they wanted it earlier than that? 
MS NGOYE:   Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then the instructions were given to say they 
must make it earlier than that? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s it. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh and do you know whether by chance do you know 
whether in the summonses they claimed interest from a date earlier 
than the summonses? 
MS NGOYE:   No Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It would have been from the date of the summons? 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 143 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, is that something that you are sure about 
because you had a look or ...(intervenes).  
MS NGOYE:   Yes I am sure Chair, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so to the extent that they may have wanted 
interest to ...(intervenes).  
MS NGOYE:   From the beginning. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To run from dates earlier than the dates of summons 
they were claiming something that they were not entitled to. 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   For litigation. 
MS NGOYE:   Which is something we would have opposed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which you would have opposed. 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now the revised offer is made and was that 
revised offer accepted? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair, it was accepted. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And first you went to that settlement in respect of 
the arbitration how was that brought to – or purportedly brought to an 
20 
end? 
MS NGOYE:   Well in terms of – on the 7 t h of February Advocate Botes 
and Mr Mogashoa approached ...(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   Don’t step away from the mic. 
MS NGOYE:   Sorry, sorry. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 144 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, look at me. 
MS NGOYE:   I forgot for a minute there Chair.  The attorneys for 
Siyaya as well as our attorneys then approached Judge Brandt who was 
dealing with the arbitration process, requesting ...(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   He was the arbitrator? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS NGOYE:   And to make the terms of the agreement you know to 
award a settlement agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was there a written settlement agreement that had 
10 
been concluded? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair there was. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so they – the parties agreed that the settlement 
agreement should be made an arbitration award by consent? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct.   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now just for the record Ms Ngoye when we’re 
talking about Judge Brandt we are talking about the retired Judge of 
the Supreme court of Appeal? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sitting with the hat of arbitrator? 
MS NGOYE:   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Wasn’t he the – on the arbitrator or there were two or 
three arbitrators? 
MS NGOYE:   In the Siyaya matter he was the arbitrator Chair. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 145 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS NGOYE:   It is in the Siyangena matter where we had two judges. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then what is the next development following the 
order being made – I mean an award being made in terms of the 
settlement agreement? 
MS NGOYE:   Chairperson Siyaya’s attorneys then brought an 
application to have that award made an order of court, so that you know 
it would be easy to pay once it’s a court order. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And when was that? 
10 
MS NGOYE:   It was in March 2018 Chairperson, we actually didn’t 
know as the legal function that this was happening, in fact somebody 
from outside advised us of that fact and we were able to then you know 
intercept that process of making the order ...(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   Making the settlement an order of court. 
MS NGOYE:   The settlement an order of court. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Actually it was to make the award an order of court, 
because it was now an award. 
MS NGOYE:   Yes it was an award now Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now Ms Ngoye you knew that the award had been 
made in terms of what Ms Makubela had said ...(indistinct) that now is 
– an attempt is made to make that into an order of the court, on what 
basis could you – or what authority would you have to oppose that 
application to make the award an order of the court? 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 146 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:   Chairperson as the Head of the Legal Function and also 
in terms of the delegations of authority that have been given to me by 
the Board you know in terms of these type of matters I knew also in 
terms of the delegations of authority who has authority to do what and 
in relation to this settlement, which was negotiated by the Chairperson 
for me it was clear that the Chairperson did not have authority to be 
negotiating settlements with parties, also to the exclusion of the legal 
function.   In fact the delegations of authority do not provide for that.  
So – and also knowing very well that there is no ways that PRASA 
could have settled these matters, because we know our prospects of 
10 
success was quite high and also taking into consideration the fact that 
you know our attorneys told us that you are barred from being part of 
this thing, so you know you put all those issues together and you 
realise that you know clearly this thing was not done properly, it was 
outside of the authorities and we could not as a legal function allow it 
to proceed. 
 
So we then you know engaged another set of attorneys to the 
exclusion of ...(indistinct) to go and defend this matter for us and 
oppose it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said this was around what time and which year? 
20 
MS NGOYE:   This was 2018. 
CHAIRPERSON:   2018 when? 
MS NGOYE:   March. 
CHAIRPERSON:   March? 
MS NGOYE:   March yes, 2018, 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 147 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was Mr Makubela still the Chairperson? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes he was. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, but you decided to intervene nevertheless? 
MS NGOYE:   Yes I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson just for you I want to ask Ms Ngoye 
to look at something on page 298 in that unnumbered paragraph on the 
second line there’s a date and that date is the 9 t h of May 2018, what is 
the correct date? 
MS NGOYE:   No the settlements were made in March Chairperson, this 
10 
was the date for the hearing of the award being made an order of court.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So ...(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well it looks like ...(intervenes).  
MS NGOYE:   The application was set down for the 9 t h of May. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It looks like you may have skipped something 
important in the preceding paragraph, 45 on page 298.  You said you 
instructed a different firm of attorneys, you didn’t tell me which firm and 
so on. 
MS NGOYE:   The firm of attorneys we instructed was Bowman Gilfillan 
Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, continue Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And the reason you appointed a different firm of 
attorneys was that related to the fact that DM Attorneys had played a 
role in having the agreement made an award. 
MS NGOYE:   Yes Chair, we found that D L Magasha was conflicted in 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 148 of 210 
 
this regard. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:   And we decided that we are not going to continue with 
them, because they were party to the process. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:   And so we went with a different law firm and we chose 
Bowman Gilfillan to oppose the application. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But you say – because this date is going to be 
important Ms Ngoye, I am going to ask you now to look at paragraph 46 
and you say there at the hearing on the 9 t h of March but you then say 
10 
earlier in the second line on that page it was set down for the 9 t h of 
May.  Surely both dates can’t be right. 
MS NGOYE:   No that’s correct Chair there must be a typo, I think it’s 
...(intervenes).  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So what is the correct date? 
MS NGOYE:   It is – let me just go back, the matter was set down in 
May so it would be the 9 t h of May.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No it was set down for March. 
MS NGOYE:   Let me just remember Chairperson.  In March 20 we 
became aware that Siyaya had brought an application, so that is when we 
20 
became aware  
CHAIRPERSON:   In March? 
MISS NGOYE:   In March 2018 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes 
MISS NGOYE:   Right,  
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 149 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja you do say in paragraph 45 it was set down for 9t h 
May? 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, it was set down for 9 t h May. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Second sentence, second sentence on page 298? 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct Chair 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but there is something that is important that I want 
you to deal with about the power of attorney and Siyaya’s attendance 
challenging Bowman’s, Bowman  difference authority, tell me about that? 
MISS NGOYE:   Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   After you had instructed Bowman’s Gilfillan then what 
10 
happened? 
MISS NGOYE:   We were advised if fact by the attorneys on the other 
side that the Chairperson had written to them advising them that we did 
not have authority to appoint lawyers and therefore Bowman Gilfillan was 
not authorised, you know to act on behalf of PRASA .  In terms of the 
delegations of authority Chairperson, the authority to appoint attorneys is 
given to the Head of the Legal Function which is myself.   
 
And so when a Rule 7 Notice was issued requesting authority I 
then prepared the Power of Attorney to Bowman you know inflicting that 
they were authorised to act and they also attached the delegations of 
20 
authority to show that you know I was able to do that.   
 
But you know, the Chairperson had advised the opposition that 
we did not have authority to act and we therefore did not have authority 
to appoint Bowman Gilfillan.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Now you say you go to hear this from Siyaya’s 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 150 of 210 
 
attorneys, is that right? 
MISS NGOYE:   No, the issue of  yes in terms of …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   The challenge. 
MISS NGOYE:   That is it …(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   The challenge to Bowman Gilfillan’s authority and your 
authority to appoint them. 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now was that in a letter that Siyaya’s attorneys sent to 
Bowman? 
MISS NGOYE:   It was an in a telephone message. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   A message sent to you? 
MISS NGOYE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They sent to you? 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, we saw the message their attorneys in fact sent us 
an excerpt of that communication that they had with the …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja that is now the attorney from Bowman’s. 
MISS NGOYE:   The attorneys from Bowman’s were given this excerpt by 
the attorneys Siyaya so they sent it to us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes and what did the text message actually say 
just repeat that.  Did it say that Bowman’s had no authority to represent 
20 
PRASA? 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, something to that affect Chair.  I cannot paraphrase 
it properly – effectively it said …(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but effectively that –ja.  No that is fine and what 
did you do after learning about this challenge? 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 151 of 210 
 
MISS NGOYE:   No we said to Bowman’s they must continue, they must 
continue to go to court because we did not agree with what the 
Chairperson had informed them and we thought based on you know the 
documentations that we had given in support of the authority and the 
power to act that it would be sufficient o the court to show that no we do 
have the necessary authority. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And did you report this to anybody else and what did or 
this whole issue? 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, we did Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who did you report to? 
10 
MISS NGOYE:   In fact when all this was happening we wrote to the Board 
Mr Dingiswayo wrote to the Board to say we are – are you aware of this 
and has the Board authorised the Chairperson to be conducting and 
concluding settlement agreements but we got no response from the Board 
you know and what we also did …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before that when you say you wrote to the Board did 
you write to every Member of the Board? 
MISS NGOYE:   Every Member of the Board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And not a single one responded? 
MISS NGOYE:   Not a single one responded Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not a single one of them called you in response to that 
letter? 
MISS NGOYE:   Not a single one Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They said nothing. 
MISS NGOYE:   They said nothing. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 152 of 210 
 
MISS NGOYE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay and who else if there is anybody else you did you 
report this to? 
MISS NGOYE:   At the same time Chairperson, so when one letter was 
going to the Board, I wrote a letter to the Minister as well …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   And who was the Minister at the time? 
MISS NGOYE:   Mr Blade Nzimande. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MISS NGOYE:   At the time he was. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was Minister of Transport. 
10 
MISS NGOYE:   That is it, he had just come into office.  So, I wrote to the 
Minister explaining to the Minster that we are sadden with this issue and 
need intervention.  We also wrote to the Portfolio Committee of Transport 
to say look help us, we got the situation within PRASA and we do not 
know where to go.  So those letters were sent to the various people that 
we thought we could escalate the matter to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you find any joy with both parties namely the 
Minister and the Portfolio Committee. 
MISS NGOYE:   Well, the Minister came back to us Chairperson.  In fact 
the Minister really came forward and called a meeting that perhaps I may 
20 
say Chairperson when we were in court the court – the Judge you know 
upheld the fact we did not have authority to act so granted default 
judgment against us.  So we were all saying to the Ministers give us 
authority to apply for rescission of this matter because the – was still 
there and she was not actually interested in us applying for rescission, so 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 153 of 210 
 
we needed some form of authority.   
 
So when we raised that Mr Minister Blade Maimane he called a 
meeting immediately after he had received the letter to engage both 
parties and we had …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Both parties being? 
MISS NGOYE:   Being the Chairperson of the Board, in fact it was the 
Chairperson of the Board and the legal function of PRASA together with 
the acting CEO at the time Mr Pomet Molepo and the company secretary 
was there as well, so the Minister wanted us to you know obviously speak 
to him about this matter and advise what had transpired cause clearly you 
10 
had conflicting you know views from the same entity around a matter that 
required PRASA to pay monies to a supplier. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you may as well for the completeness tell us the 
meeting took place …(intervenes). 
MISS NGOYE:   Well the meeting took place Chairperson it was very clear 
in the meeting that the Chairperson was offended. …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Offended by what? 
MISS NGOYE:   By the Minister having asked her to come to a meeting 
with managers of PRASA without the Minister having engaged with her 
first because that was the first encounter that the Chairperson had and in 
20 
that meeting Chairperson the Minster after then hearing both sides you 
know from the Chairperson and from myself you know the Chairperson felt 
that she did not want to go into the merit of the matter.  She was not 
there for that and she did not want me to go into the merit of the matter 
as well as she would rather have reports drafted so the Minister then 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 154 of 210 
 
requested. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She would rather have what? 
MISS NGOYE:   Reports. 
CHAIRPERSON:   A reporter? 
MISS NGOYE:   A report drafted to the Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay. 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, so the Minister then said okay I will then need a 
report that comes from PRASA on this and I said to the Minister you know 
with the greatest respect I do not think I can do a report with the 
Chairperson, I rather suggest that the Chairperson does her own report 
10 
and we as the legal function do our own report and the main issue for us 
is for you also to give us authority to apply for rescission of the matter 
and you know we left the meeting on the basis each party given a specific 
date would then go then and prepare the report.   
So, we as the legal function myself and Dingiswayo put a report 
together for the Minster and we submitted the report the Chairperson did 
not produce the report at all.  In fact and we then got a letter from the 
Minister an instruction from the Minister to say defend PRASA’s interest 
accordingly in this and that is when we rushed to interdict the Sheriff from 
paying the monies that the Sheriff had already attached so effectively 
20 
immediately after the summary judgment was given the Sherriff went and 
attached our bank account and would only release the monies within 30 
days of that.  So, we were hoping we would receive instruction from the 
Minister and we did and so we were able to then challenge the release of 
the monies by the Sherriff and we were successful in that respect. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 155 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I needed to just hear the whole part. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Absolutely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay you may continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I just want to place so that when you look at the 
document Chairperson displayed on record if you look at page 298 that is 
the unnumbered paragraph of your affidavit you will see there that there 
is a reference to annexure NM8 Is that your letter to the Minister in which 
you ask for the meeting and ask him to intervene. 
10 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And you have already indicated he did intervene.  
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   In your letter you then say to him and your letter is 
dated the 16 t h of March and you say to him that the application brought 
by Siyaya was granted and the arbitration award was made in order of 
court? 
MISS NGOYE:   So, you are referring to the date of March Chairperson I 
may be getting my dates mixed up Chair I must concede. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well if the letter is here let us go to it. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What page is it? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Page 263 Chairperson.  
CHAIRPERSON:   263? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry page 364. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 156 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   364? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   At 363 sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I see the letter is written by two people yourself and 
Mr Dingiswayo. 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it is addressed to the Minister of Transport, 
Mr Bongisi Nzimande.  Yes.  
MISS NGOYE:   It is March. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   In essence what did you say to the Minister in this 
letter? 
MISS NGOYE:   We basically complained to the Minister of Transport you 
know stating the fact that the Chairperson of the Board you know 
exceeded her authority effectively in settling these matters and that the 
rescission we would request the Minster to approve that we apply for the 
rescission for the judgment that was taken against us.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I just want you to look at paragraph two.  Sorry 
MISS NGOYE.  Just read that into the record please. 
20 
MISS NGOYE:   “The Chairperson of the interim Board is correct 
to say that the matter in question is by all accounts a 
small matter in the context of PRASA.” 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now we dealt with the amounts and we know 
whatever it is.  It is in the region of 50 to 60 million Rand. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 157 of 210 
 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And would you regard it as a small matter? 
MISS NGOYE:   Well in the bigger scheme of things Chairperson I mean I 
guess 56 million Rands when we deal with billions at PRASA is a very 
small amount you know and I think what concerned one was one 
…(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is a lot of money to the taxpayer. 
MISS NGOYE:   It is a lot of money to the taxpayer Chairperson in terms 
of you know dealing with matters that would concern the Chairperson you 
know obviously from a focus perspective this is what one was referring to 
10 
because if you look at the delegation of the Group CEO at the time.  His 
delegation was one 100 million so 58 million really would not be 
something 
that 
the 
Board 
would 
really 
saddle 
themselves 
with 
…(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   We would need to go to the Board. 
MISS NGOYE:   That is it, that is it.  That is the context within which we 
sort that, indeed you know it is a small amount of money where things are 
concerned within PRASA and therefore we did not understand why she 
had placed so much emphasis and importance of the matter. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But is not that really the issue that on the one hand 
20 
she says it is a small amount and that is what is reflected in the letter but 
on the other hand she spent so much of time getting information from 
people, giving these instructions, revising the instruction and why would a 
Chairperson of a Board do that? 
MISS NGOYE:   Well Chair I mean it was a question that we had as well 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 158 of 210 
 
and it was suspicious at the end of the day to say how is it that so much 
time by the Chairperson of the Board and it is the port of call really where 
the Chairperson was concerned to then deal with this matter and to then 
deal with it in the manner that she had dealt with it you know for herself 
to concede that it was a small amount we agreed.  You then do not 
concern yourselves with matters of this nature and in any event as a 
…(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:   You do not have authority to settle agreements on 
behalf PRASA and that comes from the delegation of authority.  That is 
prepared by the Board itself. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you ever get to know and maybe Mr Soni wants to – 
going to ask you about this whether the Board has authorised that these 
claims be “settled” and in the manner she had said the attorneys for 
PRASA should be instructed to settled that. 
MISS NGOYE:   No Chair, we actually inquired and as I said there was no 
response from the Board and one of the Board Members Mr Xholile 
George we engaged with him because he was a long standing Member of 
the Board and we went to him, we said but what is happening, have you 
as the Board given authority to the Chairperson to deal with this matter 
and he said no.  So, we know Chairperson that this was something that 
20 
the was running herself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And as you sit there you know that definitely there were 
no such resolutions.   
MISS NGOYE:   There was none, Chairperson.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And it was not even mentioned according to the 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 159 of 210 
 
person you spoke to it was not even mentioned at the Board meeting.   
MISS NGOYE:   No, Chair.  No and then the letter that the Chairperson 
writes, was to brief the Board, but as to whether, you know, it happened 
is another question, but what we knew, because that was one of the 
issues that we had requested from Mr Zede as the company secretary at 
that time to say, give us the resolution of the Board that authorizes the 
Chairperson to enter into the settlement agreement having regard to the 
delegations of authority. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What had Mr Zede’s response been to it? 
MISS NGOYE:   He said there was not any.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you ever – you said earlier on that Mr Zede was 
close to the Chairperson, is that right? 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And I think you have suggested that he also would have 
been with the Chairperson in whatever meetings the Chairperson may 
have had with various parties relating to this case.   
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you ever ask him, why are you getting involved in 
these matters in this way when you know it is not right? 
MISS NGOYE:   We did, Chair.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And what was his response? 
MISS NGOYE:   We asked him and his response really was along the lines 
that you know the Chairperson wants to deal with these matters in this 
way.  We really took serious issue with Mr Zede, Chairperson.  He was a 
colleague.   
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 160 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
MISS NGOYE:   We had worked with him and we had a particular way of 
working and we told him, we said to him, it is interesting that you spend 
so much time with the Chairperson and you are busy instructing lawyers 
on the instructions of the Chairperson.  You are not even coming to us.  
We are in the same corridor with you.  Why are you not speaking to us? 
So we took issue with Mr Zede on this thing and we said to him, we are 
not happy and we are noting what is happening within the organization as 
far as these issues concerned. Mr Zede was before me a legal advisor for 
PRASA before he came, became the company’s secretary so he is a 
10 
lawyer.  He understands the issues as well and we really did tell him that 
we are not happy with how he as well was conducting himself where the 
Chairperson was concerned.   
CHAIRPERSON:   As you sit there are you quite clear in your own mind 
that Mr Zede knew that what was happening was wrong?   
MISS NGOYE:   I am sure.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And he continued to participate?   
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, Chair.  Sure.  Sure, he knew.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you already please, Chairperson, may I just ask 
20 
the issue of – sorry the matter comes in court.  What happens in court in 
relation to the point taken about PRASA’s lack of authority?   
MISS NGOYE:   Well the – when we went to court to oppose the 
application that they had made, the judge obviously, you know, 
recognized that the instruction coming from the Chairperson of the Board 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 161 of 210 
 
weighs more than just what the Power of Attorney was saying and 
therefore, you know, he decided the matter in favour of Siyaya and 
against PRASA and we were obviously, you know, saddled with having to 
now apply for the rescission and taking the matter forward, Chairperson.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But Miss Ngoye is there not a problem with the way 
the matter was dealt with which ever fault it is it does not matter.  On 
your version and I am not saying it is wrong, the Chairperson had no 
authority to conclude the agreement or to agree to the agreement.   
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Secondly, the Chairperson had no authority to 
10 
contract lawyers on behalf of PRASA.  That was your function, that is in 
terms of the delegation.   
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Was that pointed out to the judge?   
MISS NGOYE:   Well, I guess Chair our attorneys, you know, found 
themselves in the back foot.  Remember we came to hear about this 
matter just before it was going to court so we needed to act speedily and 
brief the lawyer speedily so we did not have enough time, I guess, to talk 
to our attorneys properly around the issues of authority and so on 
because naturally with the Rule 7 Notice, you know, once the Power of 
20 
Attorney has been granted it suffices and that is what we thought would 
help us deal with the matter as far as authority was concerned, but that 
note coming from the Chairperson weighed against PRASA and I guess 
the judge looked at it on the basis that she is the Chairperson of PRASA 
and therefore it must be that these people do not have authority.   
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 162 of 210 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It is an acting judge, though.   
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The arbitration award is then made an order of 
court.   
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Where – what happened here from Siyaya’s point of 
view once it had got an order of court.   
MISS NGOYE:   Chairperson, the sheriff was then instructed by Siyaya in 
fact, immediately to go and attach one of the bank accounts of PRASA.  If 
I recall I think it was an ABSA bank account that was attached and 
10 
obviously with a court order, you know, the sheriff could do so.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, in the meantime, all of this is happening, you 
are acting in the best interests of PRASA given the delegations and so 
on.  The Chairperson has obviously communicated to the other side even 
that you do not have or purportedly do not have authority.  Was there any 
communication between you and the Chairperson in relation to how this 
matter on the 9 t h of March is dealt with in court?   
MISS NGOYE:   No, Chair, there was not.  In fact, I think the relationship 
was strained at that time.  In fact, what I then understood from the group 
CEO at the time was that we as the legal function were not authorized to 
20 
go and defend that matter.  In fact, that was the instruction that I 
received from the group CEO and I was very clear, you know, I said to the 
group CEO, look, Mr Cromet Molepo at the time at Exco, I said, I do not 
take on unlawful instructions.  Not from anybody and I am going to defend 
this money of PRASA because we do not owe Siyaya this amount of 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 163 of 210 
 
money’ and it was during that day that, Chairperson that all these 
communications were happening between the Chairperson and the other 
side and I raised that with Members of Exco.   
I even said to the executives that were responsible for the 
contract on which Siyaya had sued us to say, are you aware that this is 
happening, are you aware that the contracts are now being settled? So 
they themselves did not know that there was a settlement process that 
was happening. So, the relationship between me and the judge was 
strained, I mean and the Chairperson, was strained at the time and in 
fact, what the Chairperson had then said is that I should be disciplined.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   You should be disciplined? 
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct.   
CHAIRPERSON:   For what?   
MISS NGOYE:   For having acted without her consent in terms of briefing 
the attorneys and also the fact that I knew that she was saddled with 
dealing with this matter.   
CHAIRPERSON:   But your and what – she did not say this to you, she 
said it to somebody else and you heard from somebody else?   
MISS NGOYE:   This was to the group CEO who then advised me.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
20 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, that the Chairperson wants me to, you know, 
...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   To be disciplined.   
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  What was your reaction to this news?   
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 164 of 210 
 
MISS NGOYE:   I was fine, Chair.  I said, fine and then we will have to 
deal with the disciplinary action as and when it comes.  I even said to 
him, look, it is not the first time that I would be disciplined for doing the 
right thing within PRASA.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So, you had from what you had told me you had been 
subjected to dismissals and suspensions or a dismissal and a suspension 
during Mr Montana’s time that was coming from the group CEO.  Now you 
– there was a threat of this reaction emanating from the Chairperson of 
the Board.   
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chair.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Against you. 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So and on both occasions you, well certainly in regard 
to the first one, you ultimately, nothing was shown to have justified the 
suspension and dismissal as far as you are concerned.   
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And in regard to this new threat as far as you were 
concerned you were just doing your job.   
MISS NGOYE:   I was just doing my job, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   You were acting on the basis of a delegated authority 
20 
that had been issued by the Board and it had not been revoked.   
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
MISS NGOYE:   All we were doing was protecting PRASA.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And you were protecting.   
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 165 of 210 
 
MISS NGOYE:   The interests of PRASA.   
CHAIRPERSON:   PRASA’s interests. That is what I was going to say.  
And your point was either all or some of these things from Siyaya that the 
CHAIRPERSON had said should be paid and were not owned at all.   
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And that was your position.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Of course, you were saying we cannot settle this 
matter given what we know about the matter and what our lawyers have 
told us.   
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chair.   
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now the sheriff then attaches 59 million Rand of 
PRASA’s money, which the Chairperson did not think was a large sum of 
money and I am just saying it because I am still surprised that 59 million 
Rand in an Organ of State is not regarded as a large sum of money and I 
wonder what the auditor general’s view of that statement would be, but 
that is a different point.  What happened next in the protection of 
PRASA’s interests?   
MISS NGOYE:   Chair, so the sheriff attaches, right and we then allege 
the Minister.  That was the time that we had requested the Minister to 
come to our aid, so we waited, you know, for the Minister to say yes, 
20 
please rescind the matter for PRASA and also at the time that we got the 
go ahead from the Minister to defend PRASA and defend the interests of 
PRASA, we had really run out of time.   
I think it was about a day or two before the sheriff was 
authorized to release the monies to the other side so we had to rush and 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 166 of 210 
 
to bring the application on an urgency basis, you know, to say we want 
this to not proceed. 
And obviously we knew that we were going to be challenged 
around issues of urgency because it could be argued that the urgency is 
brought on by ourselves and therefore the matter was not urgent, but you 
know, we were then able to really convince the court based on the papers 
that we put forward that there was something untoward with the manner in 
which the settlement agreement was awarded and that we would want the 
sheriff to be interdicted from paying out the matter so that we can deal 
with the rescission of the matter following that process.   
10 
So their idea was to get back the money for PRASA and make 
sure that it does not go because we knew the minute it leaves the Sheriff 
we would never see it.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The – you effectively took two steps.  The first was 
to secure an interdict restraining the sheriff from transferring the money 
to Siyaya.   
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And the next was to bring a rescission application.   
MISS NGOYE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Was the interdict application granted? 
20 
MISS NGOYE:   The interdict application was granted, Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And the rescission application? 
MISS NGOYE:   The rescission application was also granted in favour of 
PRASA.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And at the time of the granting of the interdict and the 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 167 of 210 
 
– well, the granting of the interdict, what kind of time in 2018 were we 
talking about?  Around March, April?  
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, it was around.   
CHAIRPERSON:   May?   
MISS NGOYE:    I am getting my dates wrong, mixed up, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   But somewhere around March, April? 
MISS NGOYE:   That is it.  That is it.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And the rescission happened.   
MISS NGOYE:   It happened later.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Much later?   
10 
MISS NGOYE:   Yes, because we dealt first with the interdict.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay..   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   When did Miss Makubela leave the Board of 
PRASA? 
MISS NGOYE:   I think it was around about June, Chairperson.  Let me 
just get my facts, I know I stated ...(intervenes). 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Was it not the 17 t h of or the 27 t h of March?   
MISS NGOYE:   Let 
me 
just 
see. 
 
What 
I 
know, 
Chairperson. 
...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think it must have been around either March or April.   
20 
MISS NGOYE:   March/April.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I think I have seen something like that based by May or 
June she was no longer there.   
MISS NGOYE:   It was after March, Chairperson because the 25 t h of April 
we held a meeting with the Department of Transport.  No, no, no I am 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 168 of 210 
 
looking.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You will find it at page 299 paragraph 51 of the 
affidavit.   
MISS NGOYE:   Sorry, I was looking at the wrong – yes, on the 23r d of 
March the resignation from the Board was announced on the 23 r d of 
March.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But with effect from when? 
MS NGOYE:  With effect from the 16 t h of March 2018. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With effect from? 
MS NGOYE:  The 16 t h of March 2018. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was it kind of backdated? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is interesting.  Yes.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson, I see it is 16:00 o’clock.  There is still 
a big bit on this to be dealt with.  I do not know whether you want to 
continue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I expect there is still a lot to be dealt with. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  By this witness, is that right? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because we have not – she has not given evidence 
relating to the two other affidavits. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Affidavits, yes.  But this fortunately, this affidavit is 
nearly done Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  This one is nearly done 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 169 of 210 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If – how long do you think it would take us to finish this 
one? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson it raises a number of issues for 
example, what Ms Makubela’s role is.  Not only this but how she got 
appointed then what should have happened in between.  And I suspect it 
will take at least 45 minutes to an hour to deal with that as a whole 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So and that would then be the end of this 
affidavit? 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It would be the end this affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And these other ones, the rest of her evidence 
might need how much time? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson, the next affidavit I deal with which is 
the one that Ms Ngoye made yesterday, is really summarising for you the 
main aspects in the Siyangena matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The papers are before you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  She just highlights. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So that I suspect will be quite expeditious 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And then the DBSA matter we are going to cut it 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 170 of 210 
 
down to the finest details revolving and discuss that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now I do not think Ms Ngoye will be more than about 
2 and a half hours now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  That is once we start with the other 
...(intervenes). 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Affidavits. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, all together. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Excluding finishing on this one? 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Excluding finishing on this one? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  I am trying to see whether- and then Mr 
Dingiswayo you said he is coming tomorrow. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  He – Ms Ngoye has dealt with many of the matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So, it will be to some extend confirmatory. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  He will just deal in a little more detail with the 
20 
Prodigy matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Because he dealt with the contract itself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But that would be the main crust of his affidavit. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 171 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  He deals quite a bit with the Siyaya settlement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Or purported settlement and so in a sense we can 
just get him to confirm it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is your estimate of how much time mister – we 
might need for Mr Dingiswayo? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I do not think more than 2 and a half hours at 
maximum. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So, we should be able to finish both of them tomorrow? 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then you have Mr Popo Molefe and Ms Kweyama. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is so Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Popo Molefe will be about what 2 hours? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  About 2 hours Chairperson, yes, 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then Ms Kweyama would be your last witness for now 
this session. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Well and then we have got Mr Achmat Zakia. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, we have got Mr Achmat.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Can I in relations to Mr Achmat Mr Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It is to a large extend – his affidavit replicates to a 
large extend what he said to the Portfolio Committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And so, in that sense it is not details of first-hand 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 172 of 210 
 
knowledge. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It is the sort of thing one can say, well we know you 
have said this, you have said this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And what influences can be drawn from it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is already there. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So, there is no need to be long with him. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I do not think so Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  I was wondering whether we should stop for the day 
now or whether we should take maybe like another 30 minutes or so and 
see if we – if you can finish with her on this affidavit or whether we 
should just adjourn.  What do you say? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson I know the witness has had a long day 
because a number of matters that she was not expecting to be probed, we 
probed.  I am just assessing from my – what I am seeing from the 
witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I do not know whether ...(intervenes). 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Ngoye, how do you feel about – do you feel you can 
still go on, if I say let us go on?  Or you feel exhausted now? 
MS NGOYE:  I can go on Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You can go on. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 173 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Maybe let us take a 5 minutes break. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then let us see whether we might be able – you 
might be able to finish her evidence in relation to this affidavit.  And then 
we proceed.  Is that fine with you, I forgot to check with you.  That is 
fine, okay.  Let us take a 5 minutes adjournment. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
10 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, let us proceed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now in relation to the rescission application that was 
granted, what did you use as the basis on which you persuaded the court 
to rescind the order granted by the acting judge? 
MS NGOYE:  We obviously put the affidavits together Chairperson that 
spells out the conduct also of the Chairperson during the process and 
also reflecting the issues around lack of authority of the Chairperson to 
having concluded the settlement agreement on behalf of PRASA.  And the 
manner in which the Chairperson had also engaged with the other side’s 
20 
attorneys to the detriment of PRASA where it should have not been.  So 
those were some of the arguments that we put together in our case. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And you ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  As be prior to this stage, the stage where 
you applied for an interdict and you applied for the rescission of the 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 174 of 210 
 
argument.  And particularly as the events were unfolding at PRASA and 
as far as you were concerned the Legal Department was excluded from 
the Siyaya meetings by the Chairperson.  Do you know whether the 
Chairperson was aware that you were saying the delegated authority or 
instructing attorneys was with you and not with the Chairperson of the 
Board? 
MS NGOYE:  Chair in fact as far as that is concerned, I mean where I was 
sitting, I would have expected the Board at least the Board Chairperson 
to have familiarised herself with what was contained in the delegations of 
authority. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  Now one of the issues that came up at the time was for me 
to be challenged about this particular delegation of authority that I have.   
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  So, it was raised vehemently by her together with the Group 
CEO at the time Mr Cromet Molepo saying I did not have authority and I 
my response was, this is a document that comes from the Board that 
indicates the authorities.  It is not my document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  But because that particular document was last approved 
20 
during the tenure of Dr Popo Molefo’s Board.  This particular Board I 
guess had not necessarily familiarise themselves with the delegations of 
authority. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  That is why I think the Chairperson did not have an 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 175 of 210 
 
appreciation of the fact that she did not have that authority to enter into 
the contracts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But my question is whether you are aware whether she 
knew that actually there was an existence that delegated authority from 
the Board in favour of the Head of the Legal Department? 
MS NGOYE:  She knew Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  She knew. 
MS NGOYE:  She did know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And ...(intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:  Because she engaged with the documents absolutely, yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  She engaged with the documents. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At what stage was that? 
MS NGOYE:  It was during this process Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But prior to ...(intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:  So the matters is, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Interdict and so. 
MS NGOYE:  That is it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And is that because you were in a discussion with her 
that is how you know she knew of the document?  Or is that because you 
20 
were in discussion with somebody else who was in discussion with her 
and based on that you know that she knew about the document? 
MS NGOYE:  It was Chair the – I think the query was raised by the Group 
CEO with me to say the Chairperson wants to know where it is that you 
believe you get this delegation of authority from.  So, I knew at the time 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 176 of 210 
 
that they were discussing the issues around the delegations of authority 
and I – for me I took it that the interpretation perhaps is not understood 
in the manner that I had understood the delegations of authority.  And so, 
I knew that she had wanted clarity around it and requested the Group 
CEO at the time Mr Cromet Molepo to request me to explain why I believe 
I have got authority. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you had explained where you believed you got the 
authority from? 
MS NGOYE:  From the delegations of authority, yes.  And what I indicated 
Chairperson was this was a Board document. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  It was not my document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That’s that, ja. 
MS NGOYE:  And also, what I had indicated is that it is very easy should 
the Board take away that delegation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS NGOYE:  It is still their ambit to do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  But for as long as it existed, then it meant that I was the 
person that was authorised. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So, your response to the Group CEO was I have 
got delegated authority. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes, in terms of the Board of – in terms of the delegation of 
authority document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 177 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  And I pointed out ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  And he knew what you were talking about? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And did you subsequently have any discussion with him 
that suggested that he had conveyed this through the Chairperson you 
have said. 
MS NGOYE:  I had – well we did not have a discussion as such 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  But I have written to him. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yeah, you have written to him, oh ...(intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:  Yes, with the hope that we would transfer it to the 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So, this was in an e-mail? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is the e-mail here ...(intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:  I can also retrieve that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please get it.  Had he written to you and you are 
responding or have you just spoken to him? 
MS NGOYE:  He had written to me Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So please get all of that. 
MS NGOYE:  Okay, I will. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  So, but you would have expected him to then have 
either passed on your response to the Chairperson. 
MS NGOYE:  That is right. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 178 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or should have told the Chairperson of the gist of your 
response. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And so, after that the chair – but after that still the 
Chairperson continued to deal with the matter on the basis that she was 
one who had authority. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that you did not have authority. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you never got to know what the basis was for that 
10 
view? 
MS NGOYE:  No, I did not.  I mean there was a point where I had 
requested to have a meeting with the Chairperson herself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  And she just refused. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay, thank you.  So in other words – I am sorry 
Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, it is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you able to say as you sit there that as far as you 
are concerned there is no way the Chairperson could say she was not 
20 
aware of the delegation of authority in your favour. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  She might have some other contention but not 
that. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 179 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ms Ngoye you may have said this and I am just 
trying to determine when you talked to mister – is it Malogi? 
MS NGOYE:  Molepo.  Mr Cromet Molepo. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  If it was he who was coming to you to say the 
Chairperson wants to know. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now ...(intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:  In fact, if I may Chairperson.  Mr Molepo came to me and 
said the Chairperson was upset with the fact that we had interfered in a 
10 
matter that she was dealing with.  So, she raised that annoyance with Mr 
Molepo and Mr Molepo communicated that to me.  And requested that I 
then explain myself as to what the basis of my involvement was in the 
matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you by any chance attach to your response a copy 
of the delegation? 
MS NGOYE:  I did Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It was going to be my question Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So, let us get that tomorrow.  The complete stuff 
that you sent to the Group CEO. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now there is a matter that I should have taken up.  
You indicated that the Chairperson that told the CEO that you must be 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 180 of 210 
 
disciplined. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And what were you going to be disciplined for? 
MS NGOYE:  Well I do not know Chair.  I was waiting to see what I will be 
disciplined for.  Maybe it was for not taking instructions as I was told not 
to defend the matter on behalf of PRASA.  I do not know.  Because one 
thing that I was certain of is that what I did was in the best interest of the 
organization and I would have done it again faced with the same 
circumstances so. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Were it through circumstance or subsequent 
10 
circumstances or for other reasons, you were not disciplined. 
MS NGOYE:  No, I was not disciplined Chairperson.  I think when the 
Chairperson then resigned the matter fizzled away and it is what it was. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now let us just take the Chairperson.  She is 
appointed on the 17 t h of October. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  At that time, she was a senior council. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now in terms of what I was out in the public space, 
what was going to happen to her practice from what was in the public 
20 
space in October? 
MS NGOYE:  Well in the public space in October Chair we knew that she 
had been appointed as a judge to act as a judge – I mean to become a 
judge not act as well.  So, it was something that was spoken of and we 
were looking – in fact we asked ourselves questions around how possible 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 181 of 210 
 
is it that she could take on the Chairmanship of the PRASA Board when 
she was going to be a judge.  So that was in the public domain at the 
time. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The announcement – well I think it is common 
knowledge the process that is followed is before a judge is appointed 
there are hearings before the JSC.  The JSC make recommendations and 
then a member the President then appoints. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  At the time Ms Makubela was appointed to the 
Board, had any of those processes taken place? 
10 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson I think she had gone through the interviewing 
process and identified as a candidate.  I think the last leg of it was where 
the President would that confer the judgeship onto her. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  She then – well before then what was the feeling in 
PRASA about a person who has been nominated by the JSC to be 
appointed as a judge to take up a position of the Chairperson of a 
statutory body effectively an executive position. 
MS NGOYE:  We did not understand it Chairperson because we saw a bit 
of a conflict really in that respect to say, she is going to be the 
Chairperson of PRASA and she is going to become a judge.  How is it 
20 
going to look because the appointment had already happened and when I 
am talking about the appointment before the President confers it on her.  
It was common knowledge that …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  The recommendation. 
MS NGOYE:  The recommendation. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 182 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  It might be important that we get this right. 
MS NGOYE:  The terms. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I see even in other sources it is misunderstood. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The Judicial Service Commission interviews candidates 
and then in the case of appointments to high courts it advises the 
President who to appoint.  That is the correct terminology. 
MS NGOYE:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It advises the President who to appoint.  And then there 
is usually a period between the time the JSC advises the President and 
10 
the announcement by the President that he has appointed.  So, when the 
JSC advises the President, the candidate is not yet a judge. 
MS NGOYE:  Okay Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And when the President appoints the person as a judge 
…(intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:  It is only then. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If the appointment is with affect from the 8t h of letter of 
the President, then the appointment is with immediate effect.  If the – but 
usually the letter of the President will indicate with effect from when the 
appointment is so you could have an announcement by the Presidency 
20 
that so and so is appointed as a judge but with affect from a month from 
now or something like that.  So, there is that process. 
MS NGOYE:  Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So and the person cannot start performing the duties of 
a judge, cannot assume the job until when the appointment says this is 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 183 of 210 
 
the day from when they do that.  Okay. 
MS NGOYE:  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As it pleases Chairperson.  Ms Ngoye can I ask you 
to please look at paragraph 51 because all these small issues – well 
seemingly small issues are quite important.  So, I am going to ask you 
questions relating to the process that the Chairperson has outlined.  And 
you – where did you get this information in respect of paragraph 15 – 51 
from? 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson as I indicated …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  What paragraph? 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh, sorry Chairperson.  Paragraph 51 page 299. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Of SS7B. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson it was – I think for me it was communicated.  
We got to hear about it in the media and I remember there was a time 
when UniteBehind as well had captured this and had started questioning 
the Chairpersonship of Ms Makubela.  So, it was something that was in 
the media that was communicated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well first tell me what it is that you say in 51? 
20 
MS NGOYE:  Oh, in paragraph 51 Chair I just basically mention when the 
Chairperson was nominated to be a judge which was in July 2017 
…(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  That was before she was appointed to chair the PRASA 
Board? 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 184 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chairperson so in July already the 
nominations had happened.  And then she takes up the chairmanship in 
the Board in October …(intervenes). 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, no. 
MS NGOYE:  In …(intervenes). 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry Ms Ngoye.  Sorry, can I just do it in sequence? 
MS NGOYE:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So we have the correct order. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  She is nominated in July. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  When is she recommended for appointment by the 
judicial services commission. 
MS NGOYE:  It is on the 4 t h of October. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Then when is she appointed as Chairperson of 
the Board? 
MS NGOYE:  On the 19t h of October. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now a few things would have happened in regard to 
that appointment.  The first is the Minister would have had to make the 
20 
appointment.  Would that be correct? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And he would have known that she is already 
nominated. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 185 of 210 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Well one would assume he would know. 
MS NGOYE:  One would assume Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And she would have had to accept the appointment 
as Chairperson of the Board. 
MS NGOYE:  Well I guess so Chair.  I mean I am taking it from the fact 
that she – the nominations had already happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  And that – and then she gets appointed as the Chairperson 
of the Board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MS NGOYE:  I do not know what her frame of mind was …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS NGOYE:  At the time to accept the chairmanship when the process of 
becoming a judge was in place. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But I am just putting it as a matter of common sense.  
I am nominated for a position by a Minister and I say to the Minister that I 
have a difficulty.  I cannot accept this nomination because I am likely to 
be a judge in January.  So, in order for me to accept the appointment I 
would have to indicate to the Minister that there are no obstacles to my 
20 
being appointed as a Chairperson of the Board. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct chair.  One would expect that that happens. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Anyway, she is nominated or appointed on the 19t h. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  You say thereafter she accepted the appointment. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 186 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And actually, she is appointed as – the last appointment 
you were talking to is appointment to the Board or as a judge? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh, sorry Chairperson …(intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:  There are two appointments so we need to clarify which one 
we are talking about. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes absolutely.  She is appointed as Chairperson of 
the interim Board on the 19 t h of October. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And when you make a point about her accepting the 
10 
appointment, yes. 
MS NGOYE:  As the Chairperson? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes, as the Chairperson, yes? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes, she accepted that appointment because she came and 
became the Chairperson of PRASA. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay.  And you say that surprised you. 
MS NGOYE:  Well after a while when you start understanding Chairperson 
what is involved one would not have thought that somebody who is really 
going to be appointed at the bench would want to still be involved in 
running a State-Owned Enterprise.  It is just for me it is just common 
20 
sense but I guess we do not look at things the same way. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well we will hear.  She will come and she will put her 
side of the story. 
MS NGOYE:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it does look quite strange. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 187 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That after she had been to the interview and she must 
have known soon after the interviews that the JSC was going to advise 
the President to appoint her.  So, if the JSC interviews were around 
beginning of October 2017 and she accepts an appointment as 
Chairperson of the Board on 19 October 2017 or thereabout she would 
have known that her appointment was imminent. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I think it is – many people would know that I have 
been a judge for many years.  I have been to the JSC many times and I 
10 
have no recollection of any President in the last 20 years or so who have 
rejected advise from the JSC to say so and so should be appointed as a 
judge.  It normally just happens if the JSC advises the President, we 
found so and so suitable, appoint, we advise you to appoint.  The 
President would just appoint.   
 
So, it is something that one would look forward to.  How she 
deals with it because if the interviews were in October also it must have 
been that whatever appointment as a judge would happen would likely to 
take place to be with effect from early in the following year if not before 
the end of that year.  So, acceptance of the Chairmanship at that stage 
20 
under those circumstances is rather strange. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Indeed.  Now you then say that there was a 
particular date on which the Presidency announced that Ms Makubela had 
been appointed as a judge. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 188 of 210 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now what was that date? 
MS NGOYE:  It was the 2 n d of November 2017. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And when was her appointment as a judge to take 
effect? 
MS NGOYE:  The appointment was to be effective from the 1s t of January 
2018. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now you then record that she differed the 
appointment. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Until when? 
10 
MS NGOYE:  Until the 1 s t of April 2018. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  2018. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Is there any reason that you know of that she 
differed the appointment? 
MS NGOYE:  Chair, I am surmising, and I think for me really in my- 
having seen what transpired during that period.  In my mind I believe that 
the Chairperson wanted to see this particular matter through before she 
went to the bench.  So it – that is my explanation of it that she needed 
to finalise this matter and before it was finalised she was not able to 
20 
leave.  That is why for me I think I think that is why the resignation 
came in March you know after the Sheriff had attached and removed 
and so – and this is what I believe that I guess maybe that she thought 
that her task was done and therefore she can move on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But your – what you think in this regard would not be 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 189 of 210 
 
consistent would it be with this matter involving a small amount? 
MS NGOYE:  Well Chair I do not know.  Look Chair I think at the end of 
the day I mean one thing that I also – we battled – you know this matter 
involved Mr Mabunda.  You know and Mr Mabunda was somebody who 
was you know known at PRASA and influential at PRASA.  So when you 
try and put the pieces together you then say this is yet again one of 
those matters where you know we have this particular person who 
knows exactly what is supposed to happen but who is now going to be 
assisted you know again.  And that was taboo for us you know to say, 
can the Chairperson really come to PRASA only to have this matter 
10 
settled because of whatever relationships that she had. We spoke 
about it Chair and that is how we saw it because it was too obvious for 
us.  To say you do not come into an organisation in the circumstances 
where you have been appointed as a Judge – as a Chairperson of the 
Board and pick this particular matter up and run with it to its conclusion 
and then resign when you think that it is over.  So for us it was just 
something that was obvious. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I know Mr Soni I think you said you will deal with 
this I am quite interested in it as well. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  The question of what other business of PRASA the 
Chairperson during her tenure was interested in what other tasks or 
whatever?  What other issues were dealt with by the Chairperson of her 
Board during her tenure? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I will deal with that right now Chairperson.  One of 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 190 of 210 
 
the questions you have raised is that in her short stay of five months as 
you say at the end of paragraph 51 this is the one matter that you dealt 
with? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Are there any other matters, disputes between 
contractors and PRASA that she involved herself? 
MS NGOYE:  No Chair this was the only one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How many meetings did her Board have during her 
tenure are you able to remember? 
MS NGOYE:  I do not remember the exact number Chair but there was 
10 
quite a number of meetings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  That the Board was having. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  In fact the Chairperson also spent a lot of time at PRASA 
using the office at PRASA you know on a daily basis.  So the meetings 
were not quarterly you know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  As one would have thought in relation to Board matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
20 
MS NGOYE:  You know they would call special meetings.  But as to the 
number Chair I would not be able to say. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well she was appointed as Chairperson of the Board 
in October 2017 is that right? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 191 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And she resigned. 
MS NGOYE:  In March. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In March about twenty something but with effect from 
the 16 t h, is that right? 
MS NGOYE:  The 23 r d of March. 
CHAIRPERSON:  23 r d of March.  So that would be about what four 
months? 
MS NGOYE:  Five months. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Five months? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Five months.  Normally in a five month period in your 
experience the Boards at PRASA would have met how often? 
MS NGOYE:  Well Chair normally the first port of call would also be the 
induction. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS NGOYE:  For the Board and that you do not regard as a Board 
Meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja it is the new Board. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes.  And one of the meetings at least that she had was 
with the entire staff.  But this was her not the Board. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm.  Ja. 
MS NGOYE:  You know as far as the Board was concerned I guess they 
would not necessarily limit it to the quarterly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  They would want to try and understand you know the 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 192 of 210 
 
business of PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  Before the first quarter is over.  So invariably they would 
call meetings Chair at least in my experience you know not long after 
the appointment and call a Board Meeting to try and understand and 
have executives explain to them what it is that they are doing in their 
respective roles that each one you know would be involved in.  So it 
would not necessarily be a Board Meeting as such but it would be the 
Board trying to understand the business of the organisation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
10 
MS NGOYE:  So I guess it was not something that was surprising to 
see the Board engaging you know often. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  At the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now you have said as far as you know she dealt with 
this – the Siyaya matter or matters. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And nothing else or not much else, is that right? 
MS NGOYE:  No Chair.  This was the only litigation or disputed matter 
within PRASA. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  That she had an interest in. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you did say that she spent a lot of time in 
PRASA? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 193 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And one would expect that she would be doing 
something at PRASA. 
MS NGOYE:  Well that is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But when I asked you whether she concerned 
herself about any other matters I was not talking it was simply about 
litigation matters. 
MS NGOYE:  Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am talking about other issues that might have 
needed the attention of the Board and her attention as far as you 
know? 
10 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair there were a couple of matters yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There were other matters?   
MS NGOYE:  That she dealt with yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes that she dealt with. 
MS NGOYE:  That is it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the Board? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But in terms of litigations. 
MS NGOYE:  This was the only one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But were there other litigation matters other than this 
20 
one that were in existence during her tenure? 
MS NGOYE:  Many Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There were many? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did she show any interest in the other ones? 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 194 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  No Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  When you say namely can you help give me some 
idea 10 others, 20 others? 
MS NGOYE:  Chairperson as we sit currently PRASA has got litigations 
more than 100 cases. 
CHAIRPERSON:  More than 100 cases. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes that it is dealing with.  It is either suing or it is being 
sued. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes or being sued. 
MS NGOYE:  Reviewing contracts. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  And so there is a lot of work that gets done within the 
litigation space at PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was that more or less the number even at that time or 
would you say it might not have been hundred but certainly not less 
than fifty or? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So …(intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:  There was not less than 50. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So there were tens of other matters. 
20 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which were pending in courts. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And this Siyaya matters were the only matters where 
she was – in which she was interested? 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 195 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ms Ngoye if the …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  I am sorry Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, no Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just to tie – to complete this.  In regard to – was the 
position that in regard to all the other matters she did not challenge 
your authority to represent PRASA and to instruct attorneys? 
MS NGOYE:  She did not Chair.  In fact if anything after I had deposed 
to the Siyangena affidavit some of my colleagues Mr Chris Mbatha as 
10 
well as Mr …(indistinct) Hube wrote to her complaining about you know 
the allegations that were contained in the Siyaya contract – I mean 
Siyaya affidavit.  She once again you know wanted me to explain 
myself as far as deposition of that affidavit was concerned. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm.  But never in regard to all the other matters? 
MS NGOYE:  No Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And she was aware you would be dealing with them is 
that correct? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MS NGOYE:  Because also we – whenever we sat with the Board we 
would report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  On legal matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 196 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  That the company was involved in. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that would be in her presence? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And in terms of amounts that the other matters may 
have involved were they much more less than the R56 million or so 
involved here? 
MS NGOYE:  They differed Chair.  Some amounts are small. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  You know some amounts are big. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MS NGOYE:  We have got like the R2 billion that we talk about.  R4 
billion.  It was this hundreds of thousands, others is millions.  So they 
would vary. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But are you able to say – are you able to remember 
whether among the matters that you say she did not show any interest 
there may have been matters with much more. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Amounts than R56 million? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And is there a figure that comes to mind? 
20 
MS NGOYE:  About – you know from about R100 million to up. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh upwards? 
MS NGOYE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But there was no interest? 
MS NGOYE:  No there was no interest Chair. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 197 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now in regard to the Siyaya matters she kept your 
section, legal section, out of the picture? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  If she had done that in regard to any other matter 
would you have been aware of it? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes we would.  We would Chair because we – when we 
deal with legal matters we obviously are the custodians of all the 
cases.  So invariably anybody that asks anything would have to come to 
us first to say you know what is happening in this matter and we would 
10 
have to advise?  So if any other matter – but also the way we worked 
within the organisation Chair was that everybody understood the role of 
legal within the organisation.  So if anybody would ask about a legal 
matter that was dealt with at a particular business unit the person 
responsible for briefing legal at the time would then come to us and 
say, look these are the questions that I have had to deal with coming 
from whoever it is?  For instance in this particular of Siyaya when the 
colleagues that had given evidence at the liquidation proceedings were 
asked to put their statements together.  The Chairperson they came to 
us and they said, why have we been asked to do this?  Why are you 
20 
guys now all of a sudden you know asking that we put this together for 
the Chairperson?  So they were concerned because that request was a 
request that was made obviously via the Chairperson directly to those 
people. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now when the Chairperson was appointed the 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 198 of 210 
 
litigation between PRASA and Siyaya had been going on for some time, 
is that correct? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair.  In fact it started in 2015 so we 
were sitting two years. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You said going on for about two years. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And during that time your Legal Department had been 
handling it through the attorneys? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  When she then came and then showed interest in it 
10 
and started playing the role that she played and you say that you – 
your Department was excluded did she ever complain that maybe the 
Legal Department had failed to handle it properly as far as you know? 
MS NGOYE:  She did allude to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  She did allude to the fact that she did not think that we 
had handled this matter properly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  She said that she believed that the matter could have 
been settled long ago. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  You know but obviously where we were sitting there was 
no need to settle because we did not believe that we owed Siyaya. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  And Chair I must say that as a legal function we do not 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 199 of 210 
 
defend all matters that come our way we weigh what the facts are and 
whether the company has got a you know a good case. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Defence or case ja. 
MS NGOYE:  To defend. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  We take them on that basis. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  And the instructions that we had received from the 
business units was solid you know as far as those issues were 
concerned. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  But did she say in what respect she thought you had 
– your Department had failed to handle this matter properly in her 
view? 
MS NGOYE:  She linked it to the liquidation process Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  And she said because our people – our colleagues had 
conceded in the liquidation process that we owed Siyaya.  She believed 
that we had not handled this matter properly.  But when we engaged 
with the colleagues Vincent Gabue for instance Mr Vincent Gabue and 
asked what had transpired.  But also Diale Mogashoa was representing 
20 
us at the time Chairperson and even though they were not allowed to 
participate in the liquidation proceedings they were there and they 
could themselves come back to us and tell us how you know what 
transpired at the sessions.  So you know when she came with that 
report saying a colleague of hers you know gave her this report and we 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 200 of 210 
 
made concessions we disagreed with her.  But she proceeded with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But as a matter of fact were there any concessions 
that are relevant to settling these particular claims that had been made 
by your colleagues at the inquiry? 
MS NGOYE:  No Chair.  No Chair.  They wrote. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that you know that as a fact? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes they wrote Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS NGOYE:  Because they had to write to her. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MS NGOYE:  And explain. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  And in their explanations they do say. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  That they do not concede. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And do you know whether once they had written she 
accepted that they had not made any such concessions? 
MS NGOYE:  No Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not know? 
MS NGOYE:  Ja Chair I think the way things happened. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS NGOYE:  Is that even though they wrote I guess she did not like 
what they wrote and wanted to proceed with settling the matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We have here in the bundle of copies of e-mails or 
whatever statements that they wrote to her? 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 201 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  I can attach them Chair.  I have not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You can get them for us? 
MS NGOYE:  Ja there is quite of information we removed from them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.  So she had complained that she did 
not think that the Legal Department had handled the matter properly. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But as far as you understood her point it was about 
the – it was because she said the matter should have been settled? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And – should have been settled because of alleged 
10 
confessions that she said …(intervenes). 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  She had been been made. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now with regard to the cases Chairperson we 
asked how long they have been …(indistinct).  Chairperson if you look 
at DN4 and I am not giving evidence – NN4 at page 3 – it starts at page 
322 you will see that the cases are from 2015 and 2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MS NGOYE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That would give an indication of when the 
litigation had started. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 202 of 210 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now as – when Ms Makubela resigned what 
happened to the rest of the Board Members? 
MS NGOYE:  If I recall Chair they – you know some of them stayed and 
there was no Chairperson so it was an anomaly that existed at PRASA 
at the time.  And I think for me what I had understood from the Minister 
at the time, Minister Blade Nzimande was that you know he was going 
to make his own appointment of an interim Board again.  So the rest – 
the Board Members I think if it was – it I recall one of the Board 
Members was then playing the role of the Chairperson and I think it was 
Doctor Scheepers at the time who was a Board Member who just took 
10 
on that role.  But at the time again Chairperson if you look at the 
composition of the Board it was not compliant because you know there 
were other Members that are required in terms of statute that were not 
in the Board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But had that been the position even during her 
tenure? 
MS NGOYE:  It was the case Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS NGOYE:  So I mean and there was a lot of attack coming from the 
likes of UniteBehind on the Board that had been appointed by Minister 
20 
Masangwana to say it is not compliant with the Legal Succession Act. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I just – before Mr Soni proceeds I just want us 
to deal with this.  You told me that the Chairperson did say that she did 
not think that the Legal Department had handled the Siyaya matter 
properly.  What is your response to that criticism of the – of your 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 203 of 210 
 
Department? 
MS NGOYE:  I did not agree with the Chairperson Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS NGOYE:  I really did not agree with her and I made it known to her 
that I do not agree with her.  Because in my view and what had been 
reported to me was that we have good prospects of success. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  So when she said that I was taken aback and I was not 
sure how it is that she could come in and within such a short space of 
time be able to make that assessment without necessarily engaging 
10 
fully with the matters.  So I just thought now I do not know what the 
Chairperson is talking about but I just did not agree with her. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Can I ask you this – sorry Ms Makubela left in 
March 2018 and the Rescission Judgment was granted soon thereafter 
would I be correct? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  In regard to that arbitration where is the matter 
sitting at the moment? 
MS NGOYE:  Well I need to remind myself Chair.  So we were 
20 
successful with the interdict and we were successful with the 
arbitration, the rescission of the matter.  I think that was the end of the 
matter Chair if I recall properly. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But the – all that was rescinded was the 
agreement. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 204 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Or the award that was issued. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But the dispute as I understand it would continue 
to exist. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The merits of the case. 
MS NGOYE:  The merits of the matter yes we proceeded with that 
Chairperson and …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  In arbitration? 
MS NGOYE:  Yes.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  No in court. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm.  Did it move from arbitration to court? 
MS NGOYE:  So remember we had Part A and Part B Chairperson of 
when we brought the application. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS NGOYE:  For the interdict as well as the rescission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh ja. 
MS NGOYE:  And then it also had to do with the facts surrounding you 
know the conduct of the Chairperson and how it got to us having had to 
20 
approach the court. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Part A was the interdict? 
MS NGOYE:  Part A was the interdict. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What was Part B? 
MS NGOYE:  Part B was the rescission. 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 205 of 210 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Rescission. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but what Counsel is asking is a rescission once 
granted all it would have meant is that the order of the court making 
the arbitration award an order of court would rescinded. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That would mean the arbitration award remains. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Technically. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  As an arbitration award as no longer as an order of 
court. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So in other words the arbitration award is its status 
as an order of court is taken away. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So it remains simply as an arbitration award. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now the question he is asking is what happened after 
that?  Was the award itself set aside and if it was, was the claim – 
20 
original claims that had been pursued by Siyaya not pursued anymore? 
MS NGOYE:  Well they have not pursued the claims Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They did not pursue it? 
MS NGOYE:  They did not pursue the claims. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But what – do you remember whether the actual 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 206 of 210 
 
award was also set aside? 
MS NGOYE:  I cannot remember if that award was set aside. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or you only remember the order? 
MS NGOYE:  Ja but the – I cannot remember if that one was set aside. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but that never pursued? 
MS NGOYE:  That they did not pursue the matters Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Is it two years since the – at least two years since 
the court order was rescinded? 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And that if I may point out will go to whether the 
defence was a good defence or not a good defence. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Having pursued it. 
MS NGOYE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now you finalise this part of your affidavit in 
relation to the Siyaya matters by pointing out that …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before that …(intervenes). 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That in fact – sorry …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe before that Mr Soni.  Was the Rescission 
20 
Judgment by Judge Tuchten? 
MS NGOYE:  Tuchten yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm. 
MS NGOYE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that the one for rescissions? 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 207 of 210 
 
MS NGOYE:  I did not get the …(indistinct) that is one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson we can make it available this as 
part of the …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  It should be part of also of the papers. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  What in relation to now Judge Makubela what has 
happened as a result of all these developments that you have 
summarised in your evidence this afternoon? 
MS NGOYE:  Well Chair I am aware that you know a complaint was 
lodged with the JSC on the conduct of Judge Makubela and I think for 
10 
me also coming from the decision of Jude Tuchten which was scathing 
really on Judge Makubela she obviously took exception to that and was 
challenging that at that judgment and – so where one is sitting now I 
am aware that it has been referred to the Judicial Services Commission 
and this was referred by UniteBehind – #UniteBehind again you know 
and so I am not sure where the process is right now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’mm.   
MS NGOYE:  But I know there is a challenge. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson may I just make this point for 
20 
completeness sake so when eventually you are looking at everything 
you would know what the various developments are.  Following Judge 
Tuchten’s judgment in which she set aside the judgment granting 
effectively unopposed – granting the application unopposed Ms 
Makubela complained to the JSC that Judge Tuchten had raised matters 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 208 of 210 
 
in his judgment that ought not to have been raised.  That matter was 
considered by the JSC and there is a decision of the JSC.  So we have 
all of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And we will make that all available to you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That will just give you a complete picture. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Of what has happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But of course as pointed out here it is Ms – it is 
the complaint that UniteBehind brought against Judge Makubela that is 
now before the JSC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine.  The – I think it would be a judgment 
or decision of the Judicial Conduct Committee. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which I think can be said to be a baby of the JSC. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Albeit sorry, sorry, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes the JSC Judicial Conduct Committee ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Is that where …(intervenes). 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  This is where we end. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we done with this part? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  For this part. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Yes.  Okay we are going to adjourn then for 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 209 of 210 
 
today.  We will resume tomorrow at 10:00. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Thank you Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We will resume at 10:00 so we will then continue.  We 
adjourn. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As it pleases. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 17 MARCH 2020 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
16 MARCH 2020 – DAY 224 
 
Page 210 of 210 
 
TRANSCRIBER’S CERTIFICATE FOR COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE 
CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
BRAAMFONTEIN CHAMBERS 
 
 
DATE HELD 
 
 
:  2020-03-16 
DAY: 
 
 
 
:  224 
TRANSCRIBERS 
 
 
:  B KLINE; M NETTA; D STANIFORTH;  
          B DODD; D BONTHUYS 
 
 
 
 
Audio’s are typed verbatim, as far as audible/possible 
                    
 
