 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
17 JULY 2019 
 
 
 
DAY 135 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 2 of 102 
 
PROCEEDINGS COMMENCE ON 17 JULY 2019 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Pretorius, good morning Mr Zuma, 
good morning everybody.  Are you ready Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Morning Chair thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Mr Zuma I would like to go back 
please just to two brief matters dealing with evidence yesterday.  In 
relation to Mr Maseko as the CEO of GCIS I understand from your 
evidence and I understand it to be correct that that post is the 
equivalent of a head of a department post. 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And that certain provisions of 
the relevant legislation would apply.  I do not intend to debate those 
provisions with you but I need in fairness to ask certain questions 
about the process leading up to the termination of Mr Maseko’s 
employment as head of GCIS and the transfer to the Department of 
Public Service and Administration.  And as I understand your evidence 
you made no decision… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Pretorius I think Mr Sikhakhane 
indicates he wishes to say something.  Let us allow him. 
20 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Chair as I said I am sorry to break what I 
promised. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  I do think this is problematic.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 3 of 102 
 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  We get a list of names of people that are 
going to be – well whose evidence is going to be dealt with, right? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Andy my client has to deal with Mr Maseko 
and it moves to Barbara Hogan.  And when we dealing with Barbara 
Hogan my learned friend goes back to – I think it is a problem.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Why is it a problem? 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Because I think – I think we need to have a 
structure about what we doing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  It is quite difficult because we think we 
done with a name and it is back.  I just – it is a – I think it is a 
procedure [indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I would – I would agree that preferably when we 
are done with questioning the witness or Mr Zuma about the evidence 
of a particular witness then we are done.   
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I do not think there would be anything 
fundamentally wrong if one realises after that witness has been – the 
evidence of that witness has been done that maybe there was some 
20 
questions that were overlooked that are important provided Mr Zuma is 
able to deal with them.  The timing if need be one can look at that.  I 
certainly also may have something in regard to Mr Maseko that I might 
wish to say but it is important that – preferably it should be structured 
in a way as you say that when we are done with one the evidence of 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 4 of 102 
 
one witness that should be so but we all know sometimes that later on 
one might think something and then say you know there may be 
unfairness if we do not deal with this.  So my prima facie view is that 
as long as Mr Zuma is able to deal with it I mean from my point of view 
even if it was to be said well maybe it is not the best time to deal with 
it when we have started with Ms Hogan. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And have not finished with her maybe we must finish 
with her and then before we go to the next witness… 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Yes Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then – that for me is fine as well. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  We may have made a mistake Chair 
because we saw a list.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  We were quite keen to move to Minister 
Gordhan. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Quite quickly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  But – and the name was shifted. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  But it is fine we – I think the Chair is 
making a reasonable… 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I must also say I was going to raise with Mr – part 
of what you say I was also going to raise with Mr Pretorius.  On my 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 5 of 102 
 
bundle. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  After we had dealt with Mr Maseko’s evidence and Ms 
Mentor’s evidence my bundle suggested the next witness was to be 
Minister – Mr Nene. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That – that is in terms of mine.  I am assuming that 
his is the same and yours is the same.  So I was wondering why he 
moved to Ms Hogan before going to dealing with Mr Nene’s one.  But – 
but I will hear what he says but the principle of an issue a question 
10 
being raised after we think that we are done with one witness I think 
there is no problem with it.  But it may be that – there may be nothing 
wrong to say let us finish with the one we have already started but 
maybe before we go to the next one then let us cover whatever may 
have been forgotten. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Yes [indistinct] [mumbling] structure there is 
nothing but I will take what the Chair suggests. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes, yes okay thank you very much.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  May I just say Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In answer to that.  Very often 
when one considers overnight the evidence given, the questions asked 
and the answers given one understands that it may be appropriate to 
put certain issues to the witness concerned in this case the former 
President.  Not only in order to ensure that the questioning has been 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 6 of 102 
 
full and proper and in accordance with the mandate of investigation 
that the commission holds but also in order to be fair to the witness.  
Because from the evidence certain conclusions may be drawn 
particularly in relation to the evidence of the former President in 
relation to the transfer of Mr Maseko which requires in fairness 
confirmation of certain facts or certain facts to be put to him so that 
when later it is sought to draw conclusions from that evidence the 
witness has had an opportunity to comment on those possible 
conclusions.  So there can be no unfairness that happens regularly in 
proceedings particularly of this nature where there are vast amount of 
10 
issues to examine.  And I also have a question in relation to Ms Mentor.  
I am not sure that it is not appropriate now at the beginning of the day 
to deal with it but if you say I must wait until Ms Hogan is – matters are 
finished… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  I am happy to do that it is not a 
problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I would not want to fix a hard and fast rule but even 
for the transcript it may be that it is convenient if once we have started 
with the evidence or questions relating to the evidence of a particular 
20 
witness we finish that – the questions relating to that witness and then 
before we go into the next one if there is anything to catch up with 
regard to previous witnesses we do that.  I do not as I say – we do not 
fix as a hard and fast rule but I do not think it would prejudice you 
either. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 7 of 102 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  It certainly will not Chair but 
what I do find particularly disturbing is the manner in which control is 
sought to be exercised over the way the legal team has planned and is 
asking its questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let me say this.  I have thought of saying this 
before but I am going to say it now.  The legal team of the commission 
is there to do a certain job.  The legal team for the former President is 
there to do a certain job.  I am there to do a certain job.  All of us have 
our own jobs to do.  The legal team for the former President has no 
power to prescribe to the commission’s legal team how to do their job 
10 
nor has the legal team of the commission has power nor has the legal 
team of the commission power to prescribe to the former President’s 
legal team how to do their job.  They may have views about each 
other’s way of doing their respective jobs but in the end each side 
needs to do what it has to do.  One with a view to allowing the 
proceedings to proceed as smoothly as possible however without 
comprising their own position.  So those are the two things that I think 
would guide all sides.  Whatever I also do in terms of questions I allow, 
rulings I might make they are aimed at 1. Ensuring a smooth a flow of 
proceedings as possible.  Fairness to all concerned but without any 
20 
compromise on my part on the job that I have to do.  So when either the 
former President’s legal team makes any submissions to me which they 
are entitled to make as to any objection to certain questions or any 
objection to anything I will look at it in the way that I as Chairperson 
should look at it.  If they are right I will uphold them.  If they are wrong 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 8 of 102 
 
I will reject their submissions.  I will do the same with the legal team of 
the commission.  And if questions are asked to the former President 
that I feel are unfair I will intervene.  If questions are asked that his 
team or even he feels maybe unfair if I feel there is nothing unfair with 
them I will allow them.  So to the extent that the commission’s legal 
team may feel that the counsel for Mr Zuma is trying to control anything 
the legal team of the commission must resist that.  The commission’s 
legal team must do its job and resist anything that may not be 
appropriate.  Mr Zuma’s legal team they will also be trying to do their 
job in terms of protecting their client if they think there is anything 
10 
unfair but if the legal team of the commission believes there is nothing 
unfair they have to – to make that clear.  And where I need to make a 
ruling I will.  Whereas yesterday I think a discussion might produce a 
result that allows us to proceed I will do that.  So – so I just want to 
say and I think in regard to that I want to point out that it is important 
to draw attention to – in terms of the role of the legal team to draw 
attention to Rule 3.2 of the Rules of the Commission.  And I draw this 
just so that there is no confusion.   
“A member of the commission’s legal team may put 
questions to a witness whose evidence is presented 
20 
to the commission by the commission’s legal team 
including 
questions 
aimed 
at 
assisting 
the 
commission in assessing the truthfulness of the 
evidence of a witness.  Subject to the directions of 
the Chairperson the commission’s legal team may 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 9 of 102 
 
ask leading questions.” 
I do not understand – it is not my understanding that anything that the 
– that Mr Zuma’s legal team has said either in the past two days or 
today.  I do not understand that anything they have said is something 
that suggests that Mr Zuma should not be asked questions aimed at 
establishing the truthfulness of any of the issues and the commission’s 
legal team is free to do its job the way they believe they should carry it 
out and if in doing so Mr Zuma’s legal team feels there is a problem 
they will raise it and if necessary I will make – I will make a ruling.  So 
I think that on the issue that was raised by Mr Sikhakhane a few 
10 
minutes ago my understanding is that he understands the attitude taken 
by the Chairperson and he mentioned something that was of concern.  I 
think once I have explained – I had explained my attitude he was not 
rigid about it.  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Zuma 
yesterday when we adjourned we were dealing with the evidence of Ms 
Hogan and she had testified as was pointed out to you in regard to how 
Chief Executive Officers and board members of state owned entities 
were appointed in the normal course and she described a process with 
which I understood you largely agreed and that appears at page 403 of 
20 
the bundle GG[b] – GG[b].   
CHAIRPERSON:  Have you got the right one Mr Zuma?  The right file? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I hope so.  That is… 
CHAIRPERSON:  On the spine it should be written GG[b] on the spine.  
If it is written GG[b] it will be the right one. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 10 of 102 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja GG[b]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Do you have apge 403 Mr Zuma? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  403 the red ink? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Red number yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Having set out in her evidence 
the normal processes or processes that she recorded as normal she 
says in paragraph 22 something different.  She says that in practice 
however and I am referring to paragraph 22 there were parallel behind 
10 
the scenes processes.   
“As the ruling party the ANC had expectations that 
they would have influence over who was appointed to 
boards via the deployment committee of the ANC.  
When that ANC came into power in 1994 the 
deployment committee played a useful role in 
identifying appropriate candidates from among the 
ranks of progressive forces to fill crucial positions as 
the state at that time was staffed entirely by the 
previous apartment government appointees.” 
20 
A matter that has concerned the commission’s investigation is how 
senior people in the boards and executive posts of state owned entities 
are appointed.  Whether those appointments are appropriate or have 
resulted in the appropriate fulfilment of tasks and whether that has 
influenced in any way what has happened in the state owned entities 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 11 of 102 
 
over an extended period.  And one of the issues raised by Ms Hogan 
was the issue of deployment.  Does the practice and perhaps you can 
help us with your knowledge and experience to understand the 
deployment process if it exists – understand why it exists and 
understand how it is exercised and what influence it plays in 
appointments at state owned entities at board level and senior 
executive level.  Could you tell us a little please about deployment?  If 
it exists firstly and secondly if it does exist how it is employed or 
utilised as a manner of influencing selection of board members and 
SOE’s and senior executives in SOE’s? 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Thank you Chair.  Yes there is a 
deployment committee in the ANC.  The ANC took a decision that given 
the fact that it was a ruling party.  It is given that position because it 
has won elections.  In other words people in the country feel that the 
ANC can lead them better on the basis of its policies.  Now the ANC 
has an interest once it has put its government because the government 
would have come as a result of the ANC having been accepted by the 
voters that the programmes and policies that it is putting across would 
indeed be implemented.  And therefore it took a decision that there 
must be some assistance to government in terms of finding people to 
20 
do specific things.  And also Ministers as they search for people to put 
into positions they would also rely to the party to say I want to deploy 
so and so or a person in this kind of position is there any person 
capable for this that you could recommend etcetera.  In other words the 
interest of the ANC is to ensure that there are [indistinct] who will 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 12 of 102 
 
implement the programmes appropriately.  So they interact with the 
deployment committee in the process as you would be looking for 
somebody you – where you head hunt at times.  At times they do not 
have to come to the committee if they have got individuals they believe 
that can do the job.  But once that is done then the processes of the 
government will kick in.  And at times the Minister might say look I 
think I have got a better candidate I do not think this one will fit.  The 
deployment committee assisted that process because its aim is that 
things should be done.  It does not impose them whether you like it or 
not it is a discussion that takes place and then once that process has 
10 
been done there will have to be a government process as well wherein 
people go through interviews.  Where the Minister appoints or put 
together a number of colleagues to help in the process of interviews.  A 
person perhaps that the deployment committee felt this could be the 
right person to this position might actually fail the – the interviews.  So 
it is not that once you have taken that decision then it is a foregone 
conclusion because you might find that the person does not have the 
necessary things that are needed for a particular job.  It is all done to 
help that when you make the - or you put people you do not just get 
restricted to one person.  There is a variety of people that you look at.  
20 
And that is what happens.  And Ministers will go to the deployment 
committee to say I am looking for a person or the deployment 
committee could say Minister we have people that you could look at.  
So it is a process that fits into the process of the government the one 
that comes from the political – ah what you call a – deployment 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 13 of 102 
 
committee.  In other words it helps the government firstly to make the 
candidates available and also to look at specific people.  At times the 
committee has nothing to do because there will be no need at all and 
the Minister could be knowing what they are doing, find somebody and 
bring that somebody.  It does not mean that each and every person who 
gets appointed goes through this process.  That is generally how it 
works. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  As I understand it there are 
three issues that you have emphasised and I would like to understand 
them to see if I have it correct.  The first is that the deployment 
10 
committee of the ruling party is involved in decision making from time 
to time in the appointment of board members of state owned entities 
and senior executives.  Do I understand that correctly? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  The deployment committee does 
not necessarily appoint.  It recommends. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  It is involved I was getting to 
that. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  In the process. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  It is involved in the process of 
appointment either in hearing from Ministers what – who their 
20 
candidates might be and giving input on that or suggesting candidates 
to the Minister that – in that process. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  I understand you to also say that 
the deployment committee is not decisive in that process but that the 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 14 of 102 
 
final decision would rest as I understand you with the Minister following 
the selection procedures interviews and the like. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:    Is that correct. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Does that mean that the deployment committee would 
have a list of people with indications of what their qualifications are, 
what their experiences are, in what sectors and so on so that whenever 
they are consulted by a Minister in regard to a particular post they 
could go to that list and see who do we have in our list who have 
10 
qualifications that are relevant for this post and experience and then 
we could – they could say here are some of the people you could look 
at or is there no list they work – simply work on the basis of people that 
they know? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  They do not necessarily keep a 
list for that.  I think it happens that the ANC knows – the party knows 
its people and it knows some of them, their capacities.  Some may not 
know.  So when that situation arises they will then look at those.  It 
might be some other lists etcetera.  Once they know what type of – or 
what type of person is wanted to assist the process.  Not that every 
20 
time it happens they must go to the deployment committee to look at a 
list not at all.  At times it does not happen at all.  But when it happens 
that is a recommendation the deployment committee will make to assist 
those in government. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 15 of 102 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Who would ordinarily sit on the 
deployment committee Mr Zuma? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Sorry? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Who would ordinarily sit on the 
Deployment Committee Mr Zuma? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Who would ordinarily sit on the 
Deployment Committee?  Is it appointees of the party?  Is it people who 
fulfil particular posts?  Can you assist us there? 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes.  The people – there are 
people who are appointed ever since it has existed.  Normally it is the 
person who has been chairing.  It would be the Deputy President.  Why 
the Deputy President because the Deputy President is a Deputy 
President of the party and Government.  He would also understand 
what is needed in Government. 
So you do not have a person who is chairing this Committee 
who knows nothing about what is happening in Government because he 
would not be able to assist to get the kind of people that are really 
needed in Government and – and that is why he sits there to chair.  
20 
Some of the members of the Deployment Committee would be Ministers 
of a particular type. 
Also who will be knowledge about what happens in 
Government.  So the – the members are not just members handpicked 
because they are there.  They are people who will help this process. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 16 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And are they elected or appointed at (intervenes)? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Appointed – appointed by the 
structures – senior structures of the movement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would it be the NEC that would appoint? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Would the sitting President sit on 
the Deployment Committee? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No he does not sit.  He does 
not sit but can – if he has ideas about things he can also interact with 
10 
the Chair whatever but does not sit.  It is the Deputy President who 
chairs.  The highest kind of officer would be in that Committee.  The 
President no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do they have – that is the Deployment Committee – 
do they have a term like whenever there is a new NEC that new NEC 
appoints a Deployment Committee for the duration of the life of the 
NEC or they were appointed at a certain stage and they continue 
irrespective of the change of the NEC or what is the position? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja.  It – it goes with the term. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The term of the NEC? 
20 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  With the term, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  You might find new members if 
there is a new term but you might – you do not have to be appointing 
and appointing in the process of the five years. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 17 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  So that is how it goes.  It goes 
together with the term. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  One more general point by way of 
introduction Mr Zuma.  Does the Deployment Committee involve itself 
with the appointment of Boards of SOEs or Board Members of SOEs, 
Senior Executives in SOEs as well as appointments in Government 
Departments? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  At times because they might – 
10 
they might recommend if they know some people who have experience 
in the Boards.  They might recommend if that kind of activity comes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS: 
 
As 
well 
as 
Government 
Departments? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Government Departments in 
what sense? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Well an appointment to a Head of a 
Government Department for example.  Would that be something that 
might fall within the … 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  That could also – that could 
20 
also go to … 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Jurisdiction or ambit of the activities 
… 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja.  Particularly … 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Of the deployment? 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 18 of 102 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Particularly at the leadership 
level of the department. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  At paragraph 23 on page 404 
Ms Hogan expressed some views - quite firm views in fact on the 
usefulness of the Deployment Committee and the effectiveness in effect 
of its process.  She says in paragraph 23: 
“However, the usefulness of such a Deployment 
Committee these days is debatable.” 
And she asks the question: 
“How can just a handful of people possibly have the 
10 
institutional knowledge and resources to pronounce 
on suitable candidates for every senior position in 
Government and the private sector?” 
Let us leave aside the word “every” there and may I ask you 
to comment on that - that observation of hers.  She is saying in effect 
as I understand it that people in the Committee would not have the 
institutional knowledge and resources to pronounce on suitable 
candidates for senior positions in Government and the private sector. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Well I do not know.  This would 
be her views as an individual but the organisation has taken a decision 
20 
to have these kind of structures … 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Because here she is just 
expressing her own views. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  No I understand. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 19 of 102 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  This is not accurate.  The views 
are not accurate because as I said setting up that Committee there are 
Ministers who serve there who have the institutional memory who serve 
there chaired by the Deputy President who sits in the Cabinet and 
every Cabinet Committee.  So it is not a correct argument that she is 
putting.  She is just expressing her view. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  I just want to take a step back and 
explain why these questions are being asked because it is a matter of 
concern or a matter that is part of the issue that this Commission is 
investigating and that is how senior appointments in SOEs take place 
10 
but let us move on.  She says that – in paragraph 23 in the second 
sentence: 
“It cannot be that closeness to or Membership of 
the ANC, or any of its Alliance structures (or to 
factions within the structures), should be the 
determining factors in the selection of candidates 
for senior positions.” 
Do you have a comment on that? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No.  I think she is still pursuing 
her argument really.  How she is looking at this. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Yes I understand that. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  That is how it is – it is her view 
but the manner in which we – we handle this is the manner in which I 
have just explained. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  What I think she is saying in 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 20 of 102 
 
substance is that the Deployment Committee would inevitable favour for 
appointment to important positions in SOEs persons who are close to or 
members of the ruling party and close to or members of Alliance 
structures.  That there is a – there is a bias in their favour in the 
activities of the Deployment Committee in the process.  I think that is 
what she is saying. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Well I do not know what she – 
she thinks should happen.  Why the people who must be appointed 
should not come from the people who either – the people know and they 
know the experiences and in the process of that the people who are 
10 
here are people who would be known either because of their profession 
or their performance but also that are people who would implement the 
policies appropriately and who – who might – who may not be opposed 
to the policies that made the party to be elected to Government. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Do I understand from what you are 
saying that the Deployment Committee would consider as an important 
attribute for appointment to Senior Executive positions and Boards the 
ability or willingness of a candidate to implement policies of the ruling 
party.  Is that correct? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes I see it so.  That is part of 
20 
the elements. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I do not know whether Mr Pretorius might have 
been accurate in suggesting to you that what Ms Hogan says in 
paragraph 23 in the second sentence that she is suggesting that the – 
there might be bias in favour of people put up by the Deployment 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 21 of 102 
 
Committee but I do see that in that sentence she says and this is a 
sentence that Mr Pretorius did read. 
“It cannot be that closeness to or Membership of 
the ANC, or any of its Alliance structures (or to 
factions within the structures), should be the 
determining factors in the selection of candidates 
for senior positions.” 
My impression is that she seems to suggest that Membership 
of the ANC or of the Alliance partners is the determining factor that 
either the Deployment Committee looks at or those in Government who 
10 
are given names by the Deployment Committee taken into account.  
That is my understanding of it.  I do not know whether now that I have 
read it to you – you also have the same understanding of what she is 
saying but if I am correct it is important to put your understanding of 
what the true position is. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  That is why I was saying she is 
of course putting her own views on - on the matters.  In other countries 
for example when one party wins elections and let us say to clarify the 
issue it has been the – the opposition wins the elections.  When they 
come to the office they do not take people who are there.  They remove 
20 
everybody out and put their people. 
It is a general practice in the world.  We are not even doing 
that.  It is a question of how the party looks at not only to the members.  
Even those who are not members at all.  That is what we do.  In other 
countries it is extreme.  They come even with a sweep everybody else 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 22 of 102 
 
of the new party because they must implement the party policies that 
was accepted by the people. 
You cannot take people because the opposition would not do 
so.  So – that is why I am saying she is just raising more - her views 
about this. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Chair as I understand the purpose 
of certainly this tranche of questions and answers Mr Zuma is in a 
unique position given his history and association with leadership in this 
country over the past many years to assist us in this and I would not 
want to confine the questions and answers to the precise wording.  It is 
10 
an issue that is raised and we might narrow the questions and answers 
to closely if we simply … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No I … 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Deal with the precise wording and 
opinion of Ms Hogan. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS: 
 
We 
are 
interested 
in 
this 
investigation in how the President can – former President can assist us 
and understanding the issue of deployment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the – I mean counsel for Mr Zuma will indicate fi 
20 
they have a problem but my – my inclination is that since the issue of 
the Deployment Committee is being raised here if you have questions 
relating to the Deployment Committee on which you think Mr Zuma can 
assist in enlightening the Commission you should be able to put those. 
He has indicated that the Deployment Committee is chaired 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 23 of 102 
 
by the Deputy President.  He was Deputy President at a certain stage.  
I am sure he therefore chaired the Deployment Committee.  So he 
should be quite well informed at least how it has been functioning and I 
am sure he will – he will assist us as far as he is able to. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Thank you Chair.  If I could just then 
attempt to understand your evidence in relation to the activities of the 
Deployment Committee in appointments that we have discussed.  Your 
emphasis is not so much as I understand it on closeness or 
Membership of the ANC.  Your emphasis is on an ability and willingness 
to implement the policies of the ruling party in those posts.  Have I got 
10 
it correct? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes generally. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Is that correct? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja generally. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Thank you. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  That is what – that is what it is. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  She says in the last sentence of 
paragraph 23 Mr Zuma: 
“Directorships on Boards should never be granted 
to the favoured few as a reward for loyalty to a 
20 
party or a faction of a party or as a retirement 
benefit for the well connected.” 
Her evidence there it seems is to say that such appointments 
as maybe directed or suggested by the Deployment Committee should 
never be granted as a reward simply for loyalty to a party or faction of 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 24 of 102 
 
a party.  Do you have a view on that? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I think once again she is 
expressing her views. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  She is expressing her views 
because as I was explaining the party cannot just allow a situation 
where you take anybody anyway that we have no knowledge of.  Now 
those people including her they – whilst they are because of their 
loyalty to the – to the party - to the organisation.  They believe in the 
policies of the organisation. 
10 
Now who will say deliberately let us forget about those 
people and just find some other people.  I do not understand the logic. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I … 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I am explaining this because it 
maybe her own view because of certain cases.  She may be aware of if 
such a thing happened.  It is not – it is not meant to take your friends 
this one if you are a member of this.  You do not take your friends.  You 
look at – because the Committee discusses it would discuss what type 
of a person we want.  It is not going to be which friend we take. 
I think the point she is make – she is putting a point her own 
20 
point because she might be having an experience of that nature but in 
terms of the process it is not done in the manner in which she is putting 
it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe I can just say Mr Zuma that sometimes a 
witness will be expressing his or her view but it may be important if you 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 25 of 102 
 
know – you have knowledge in relation to the – that issue to indicate 
whether that view is correct or is justified or not but you may elect that 
you do not want to enter into that but I am just saying that because the 
way this is put here suggests that the Deployment Committee might not 
be doing what you have testified it is doing. 
You have said that the Deployment Committee looks at people 
within the organisations who have certain skills.  So that when there 
are positions in Government that need to be filled they are able to say 
to Ministers here are some names.  We are not saying you must take 
them.  We say they must go through the normal appointment processes 
10 
and – and ultimately the Government functionaries make the decisions.  
That is my understanding of what your evidence says. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Hm, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But this sentence suggests that her understanding is 
that people who might not be deserving to be appointed to certain 
positions are suggested or put forward by the Deployment Committee 
for the – for the reasons that she gives and she says: 
“It is a favoured few, as a reward for loyalty to a 
party by faction of a party, or as a retirement 
benefit for the well-connected.” 
20 
So I – I am just putting that because it may be important for 
the bigger picture for the Commission to understand what is the role of 
the Deployment Committee and have two facts.  So I thought I would 
just explain that.  Obviously you can decide when you say well I want to 
engage with that view because I think it is not correct or it is not 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 26 of 102 
 
justified about the Deployment Committee or about whatever or you 
might say look I do not – I do not – I have no comment or something 
but you do not have to add anything now that I have said this unless 
you want to. 
I was just wanting to make sure that as we move forward you 
– you understand that it may be important some times to engage or give 
a view in regard to another view but you – you might say no I do not 
want to.  I have no comment.  Okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Thank you, thank you Chair.  I 
think the – the last sentence is very clear.  She has views.  She – 
10 
maybe she has some experience and then she is saying look when we 
do this selection it must not be based on - on these things that she is 
talking about but for example the way she is putting it must not be an 
award for loyalty. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you might say you agree with that or not? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No Chair I am – I am just 
making the point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  If you say it must not be loyalty 
to the party. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Why should you no – not take 
people who are not loyal to the party … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Well … 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  If they have … 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 27 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Skills and everything. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  You know them.  They are 
people who interact all the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well … 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Why must we say no because 
you are loyal to the party we are not taking you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you – you might say it would be wrong to say 
somebody must be appointed simply on the basis of loyalty to the party 
10 
and on no other basis … 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if loyalty to the party is one of a number of 
factors including qualifications, experience and whatever then you – 
you might have – you might have – you might say there is nothing 
wrong with that.  I am not sure. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes absolutely true.  I am not 
necessarily saying all other elements that she is putting here … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  You should.  The fact that she 
20 
should – it should not also be loyalty to the faction etcetera.  She is 
expressing a view.  She must be having a particular experience 
because indeed you - you cannot have a – a kind of a Government 
which is based on factions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 28 of 102 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  That is not the issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I am not saying the statement is 
wrong … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, hm. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  But … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  It is her view because she must 
have come across something. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I am sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I am saying those people look 
at the capabilities and suitability’s of people not whether this person 
agrees with me politically or whatever. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Just to summarise then.  As I 
understand what you have said Mr Zuma about the issue of loyalty is 
that loyalty is an indicator of the willingness and ability to implement 
the policies of the ruling party.  Do I understand your evidence 
correctly? 
20 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No I – I am not saying loyalty 
covers all of those elements. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Is it part of it? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  That is why – that is why I made 
a very broad point as an example that there is no party in the world 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 29 of 102 
 
that wins elections and then forgets about the supporters and the 
people and look for other people who do not know whether they are 
going to sabotage your work in order to make you to lose the next 
elections. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Alright.  Can we move on then to 
what is said in paragraphs 24 and 25?  I am not sure it is appropriate 
to enter into an historical debate about the issues raised by Ms Hogan 
in paragraphs 24 and 25 and I will try and summarise it and if you wish 
to take your time to read those paragraphs please do so but what she 
has said is that after the Polokwane Conference which she describes as 
10 
divisive there were factions within the ANC and these factional battles 
as she calls them in the ANC had an effect on who was appointed.  She 
says her own words are: 
“These factional battles in the ANC only served to 
encourage and entrench nepotism and patronage 
from within the ranks of the ANC and the Tripartite 
Alliance, and this would have very damaging 
consequences for SOEs and our economy.” 
If one takes – expressed in a more neutral fashion I think 
what she is saying and would invite your comment on Mr Zuma is that 
20 
there were factions in the ANC after Polokwane and that membership of 
or loyalty to one or other faction was a factor in the appointment of 
people to SOE Boards and positions and that was damaging to those 
SOEs and the economy.  That is sanitised of the language what I think 
is being said. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 30 of 102 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Well Chair I am not sure how 
deep we get into these issues.  I was trying to indicate that she is 
expressing her own views here.  I do not know whether I should now 
debate those views because it is not true after Polokwane.  It is not 
true that people entrenched their own sides.  It is not true. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA: 
 
There 
is 
evidence 
that 
comrades that would have been on opposite sides in terms of 
supporting a candidate.  They were put in these structures of 
Government and other places.  It is not true.  I am not sure whether I 
10 
am keen to debate her views.  I was trying to run away from this 
because … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  She is expressing her views. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let me say this that as you will have seen when 
you read her statement … 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Later on she talks about maybe to put neutrally 
certain challenges that she says she met with in trying to have CEOs 
appointed to certain SOEs and – and Boards and it may well be that in 
20 
saying this she is trying to indicate that these problems of factions 
affected  - ultimately affected maybe governance in SOEs and so on. 
So I – I am just saying that at this stage but I am – I am quite 
happy to leave it to you when you are given a chance to comment to 
make your judgment at this stage if you do not think it is – it is 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 31 of 102 
 
important but and – and Mr Pretorius if he feels that he – he – it is 
important to have your views he – he will indicate but the first 
opportunity is to get – for you to get a chance to say oh this is what 
this witness is saying and this is what I have to – I have to say about 
that if I have anything. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No my problem Chair is that 
here is a report to – to the Commission.  It gets into some happenings 
in the party and they are not accurate.  They are not accurate.  We will 
10 
end up now discussing the ANC politics because I do not - if – if you 
put that statement generally you have got to do … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Your selection fairly … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Partly it cannot be that as – as 
for an example the Deployment Committee it is a Committee.  You 
cannot have that Committee with almost everybody coming from a 
particular faction.  It cannot be.  People there are – they – they are not 
appointed on the basis of that.  They are actually appointed by the 
20 
structures. 
You know firstly the – there is a working Committee that this 
looks at this then the NEC that appoints these people of the 
Deployment Committee.  You cannot say the whole NEC is a faction and 
therefore it has appointed its faction.  I am not sure we want to get into 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 32 of 102 
 
those discussions.  That is why I kept on saying looking she is more or 
less expressing her own views.  She was part of the process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well … 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I am not sure we want to debate 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let me – let me say – say this.  The – the ANC is 
the ruling party and has been the ruling party since 1994.  It may be 
that certain things that it does or certain things it does not do may be 
said to affect Government in certain ways.  With that understanding it is 
possible that there are certain things that are really party things.  That 
10 
are ANC that the Commission might have to look – look at insofar as it 
can be said that they may have had or they may have a bearing on how 
Government has been working or how it has dealt with certain things. 
So I just want to mention that.  It might be difficult.  There 
might be different views as to which one falls legitimately within that 
ambit which one falls outside but I just want to say it might be that just 
because certain things are things that happen within the ANC it maybe 
that they cannot be excluded completely because of the status of the 
ANC being the ruling party but obviously somewhere one must draw – 
draw the line. 
20 
So I – I think that I would leave it to Mr Pretorius to see how 
it deals with it but I think what – what the Commission – what one 
would be looking at is that and what everybody would be looking at is 
that as the former President of the ANC you would be very 
knowledgeable about its structures and processes and therefore you 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 33 of 102 
 
are in a position to enlighten the Commission on anything. 
If there are views that are expressed which do not correctly 
reflect the ANC you are in a position to say no that is not the ANC.  
This is the ANC’s position and to the extent that the ANC – where you 
think the ANC needs to be defended in regard to how it is impacting on 
Government it maybe that you would do that.  Maybe that it is 
somebody else.  I am not sure. 
So I would leave it to Mr Pretorius to see how far he takes it 
but as long as you know that whenever these questions are put to you 
first and foremost it is an opportunity to comment if you – you think you 
10 
should and if you do not think you want to comment then you can say 
that. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  For an example she quotes a 
particular conference … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  And what happened thereafter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Now it is not true. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Also … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  This process is very thorough.  
If for example you talk about selecting other Heads of Department 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 34 of 102 
 
whatever - whatever are the processes even if the process started with 
the Deployment Committee once the Minister if you take the DG has 
gone through the process.  Firstly it is a Committee that sits to 
interview and there would be scoring at the points as they interview and 
you cannot say somebody who has scored very poorly because he is my 
– he is in my faction … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No sorry about his work would I 
want this one.  It is never done.  It is the process of the people who are 
sitting there who might not necessarily be in one grouping politically 
10 
because they are looking at are we getting the right person.  That 
process is taken to the – this Committee is small.  What then they 
recommend finally is taken to the Cabinet Committee and the Cabinet 
Committee is – is a big Committee. 
The President, the Deputy President participates in those 
discussions discussing these very individuals.  Then the Cabinet 
Committee recommends to the Cabinet that – that person wherever that 
person started will end up being discussed by the Cabinet to take the 
final decision.  So I do not know how do you succeed to have your 
clique with you because these people who are meeting here they may 
20 
have different views about these matters. 
They are looking at the capability of the candidate and it is 
discussed there now with the entire Cabinet.  In fact there is a serious 
debate even discussing individuals in the Cabinet.  Some people would 
say look this candidate is not right.  I know these are the witnesses’ 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 35 of 102 
 
etcetera.  At times the Cabinet will say we are not accepting this 
candidate.  It is not just like as you – you pick and walk.  The process 
is thorough.  That is the point I am just making. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I – I think – I think that way of responding 
probably is important because in effect I think you – you are saying she 
may be saying these things because of certain specific instances that 
she knows of but you are – you are saying your understanding and your 
experience of how the Deployment Committee and Government handles 
these things is the following.  So yes thank you.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  I am about to move to a new topic.  
10 
It is 14 minutes past.  Is this a convenient time? 
CHAIRPERSON:  We will take the tea adjournment and resume at half 
past 11.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before Mr Pretorius proceeds I just want to go back 
to an issue that we dealt with earlier about loyalty to a party and 
appointments.  You posed a question and I do not know whether you 
expressed a view, and I want to establish that, you posed a question as 
20 
to why loyalty to the party should not count in an appointment, whether 
somebody should be appointed.  Did I understand that part correctly 
that you posed a question along those lines, or did I misunderstand? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No I did not pose a question. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh did you express a view? 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 36 of 102 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I was just explaining what 
happens. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Because that’s a universal 
thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Parties cannot take people who 
have -  who do not like party to come and work for the government of 
that party, that’s a point I was just making.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, maybe let me just ask is it your understanding 
10 
that loyalty to the ruling party or a political party should be a factor in 
appointments that are made in government? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No I am not necessarily saying 
that should be the case, I am saying political parties, globally, once 
they win elections they take their people to the government to place 
them, because those people are expected to implement the policies, so 
loyalty goes without saying, it is not the only, but it does not mean you 
cannot take somebody who is a professional, who is willing to 
participate in government.  I was just dealing with it insofar as it 
appears here as a point that was made. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes no I think I understand you to say loyalty to a 
party should never be the only factor. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That part I understand.  The question I ask is whether 
it should be a factor at all, whether you ...(intervention)  
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 37 of 102 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No that’s ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  So, and I’m simply asking it because you and I had an 
engagement earlier on around that, and I thought you had asked the 
question why should it not be – why should it not be considered, but I 
think you have said no you were not asking a question, so then I think 
maybe it might be good because somebody else might have understood 
the way that I understood, it might be important if you have view on 
that to make it clear what your view is and – because it leads to the 
question of what would have been expected of government ministers, 
and the President himself, and the Deputy President who sits on the 
10 
Deployment Committee, when among the names that they see for a 
particular post they see somebody that comes from the deployment 
committee, were they expected to take into account that this must be a 
loyal – this must be somebody with loyalty to the party or were they not 
supposed to, and you can answer in terms of your understanding which 
may be right, which may be wrong but your own understanding with the 
experience that you have both in the ANC and in government. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No what I was saying, I was not 
saying that it should be one of the things that you said for it does not 
even arise generally in the discussions. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the appointments yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  The problems that it is here as 
if it is a big factor, it is not.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  That’s why I – rather than to get 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 38 of 102 
 
into the details I was saying all parties in the world when they win 
elections they bring people they trust, people who are loyal to the 
party, people who have got professions, it’s not a factor, it’s not the 
only factor.  In fact in the discussions you will find that this issue has 
never arisen are you loyal to the ANC, you can’t.  That’s why I was 
saying these are individual views perhaps emanating from individual 
experiences I don’t know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay well as you explained now I had some 
things to the effect, it’s not the only factor, so I go back to the question 
whether as far as you know with your experience in the ANC, with your 
10 
experience in government, is it something – was it one of the factors 
that at least the ANC as the ruling party expected government ministers 
and the President and Deputy President, to have regard to when they 
select who should fill certain positions. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No not necessarily. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not necessarily? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  When for an example 
advertisements are made for a particular position, many citizens in the 
country, some of whom we don’t even know they belong to which party 
or they believe in what policy, they apply and they go through the 
20 
process, no one in that kind of interview ask the political issues, it 
does not feature, it is as a given. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, yes.  Okay thank you.  Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you.  Mr Zuma on page 
405, paragraph 28 and following Ms Hogan relates her experiences in 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 39 of 102 
 
relation to Transnet, and appointments within Transnet and certain of 
the detail of her narrative mentions engagements with yourself and I 
therefore need to put them to you for your comment.  Just by way of 
background in paragraph 28 Ms Hogan refers to the resignation of Ms 
Maria Ramos as CEO of Transnet in February 2009.  She then says that 
the Transnet Board, after a careful selection process, and extensive 
engagement with the then Minister of Public Enterprises, Brigitte 
Mabandla, recommended Pravin Gordhan.  Do you know of those 
events, it’s not necessary to go into any detail but just by way of 
background to what follows? 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I think that happened ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, and she says in paragraph 
30 a week later Mr Gordhan withdrew his candidature and several 
months later he became the Minister of Finance.  That again by way of 
background. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  But what she says in paragraph 
30 is that what she describes as a fiction arose at the time which was 
untrue that Siyabonga Gama, Mr Gama, then CEO of Transnet 
Freightrail was second on the list of preferred candidates for the 
20 
position of Transnet CEO.  She says there was no such preferential list.  
Do you know anything about that? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  There was no? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Preferential list.  She says that 
at the time there was a belief or an understanding amongst some, a 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 40 of 102 
 
fiction she says, that there was a list of preferred candidates and that 
second on that list was Mr Gama, do you know anything about that? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes, I remember that ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  I’m sorry. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I say I remember that. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Now do you say there was such 
a list, she says there was no such list.  If you let me just ask you to 
look at paragraph 30 and read to you what she says. 
“A fiction arose at that time which was untrue that Siyabonga 
Gama, Mr Gama, then CEO of TFR [that’s Transnet Freightrail] 
10 
was second on the list of preferred candidates for the position 
of Transnet CEO.  There was no such preferential list.” 
Do you have a comment? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Well I may not remember the 
details of who was in the list or not but all I know is that Gama himself 
had also applied and I know that Mr Gordhan as well so when he 
withdrew his candidature, and I think the discussion was this – the 
second one, instead of starting another process, because Gama was 
known, he had worked there for a long time, his capabilities and 
everything, and in the process those who were doing the process felt 
20 
that here is a man who will fit in into this kind of situation.  There was 
then I think a bit of a discussion, you know people who wanted that we 
should have another round or something, but at the end the – this 
process that I am talking about that many people get involved the view 
– the view in the process was that but this man we know him, he has 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 41 of 102 
 
been working here, he is capable enough, and then at the end I think 
there was kind of a stronger view that no let us take the decision that 
we should take him. 
 
It was a process of the discussion, particularly from I think the 
Cabinet Committee even to the Cabinet, so it was a discussion, it was 
not one person talking to the other, it was that process I talked about 
that produced that result. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Alright, that would have occurred 
shortly before or after May 2009.  You say there was discussion about 
the next in line, Mr Gama, being appointed to the position.  But she 
10 
says something in paragraph 31, as follows: 
“After Mr Gordhan’s withdrawal ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry Mr Pretorius, you said he said the next in 
line that might suggest as if you are saying he said the next on the list, 
whereas he said he didn’t – he wouldn’t know details about the list so 
you might wish to – you might not have intended that. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Well what did you say about Mr 
Gama being discussed in the absence of Mr Gordhan?  I understood 
you said that his candidature was recommended by some as being the 
next person for consideration?  I do not want to get into a debate about 
20 
in line or lists or anything ...(intervention)  
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Because he had applied 
himself. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  ...that’s districting.  Sorry? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja, he as far as I remember he 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 42 of 102 
 
had applied as well for the job, so in a sense in the selection 
committee I think he was one of those who had applied. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And did some feel that he should 
in the absence of Mr Gordhan ...(intervention)  
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  ...be appointed to the post? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes, yes, that’s what I 
remember. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Okay.  The selection committee 
you’re referring to what selection committee are you referring to? 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  The Minister, the Minister if he 
or she wants to appoint a DG, she then forms a panel that will be 
interviewing people. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right.   
CHAIRPERSON:  That would – would that be, you’re talking about a DG 
now, Mr Gama wasn’t going to be a DG but you are making an 
example? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja, an example yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the case of a DG would that selection committee, 
that the relevant minister creates or establishes would it include 
20 
cabinet ministers? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes, yes, cabinet ministers and 
deputy ministers as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And would it consist only of members of the Executive 
or it could include people outside of the Executive? 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 43 of 102 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No generally people of the 
Executive. 
CHAIRPERSON:  People of the Executive, okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is in the case of a DG? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Not only the DG, even board 
members. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Even board members. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Even board members. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And CEO’s ...(intervention)  
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  But the process is the same. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And CEO’s of SOE’s? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you.  Yes Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In paragraph 31, again by way of 
background Mr  Zuma, and that is on page 406, Ms Hogan said: 
“After Mr Gordhan’s withdrawal the Board had difficulties 
getting a firm direction from Government.  They wanted to 
commence with a new search but could not get an unequivocal 
endorsement to do this.  At this point the election had begun.” 
20 
She does say that: 
“Minister Mabandla did however approve the appointment of 
the Chief Financial Officer of Transnet, Mr Chris Wells, as the 
Acting CEO of Transnet and Arnot Singh, a Transnet employee 
as the Acting Chief Financial Officer of Transnet.” 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 44 of 102 
 
Again by way of background do you have any comment, do you recall 
this happening? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I’m not sure because the 
withdrawal of Pravin brought some activities, and I might not have – I 
may not remember everything, but there was activities, this may be so, 
it may not, but I cannot remember exactly. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In relation to the further search 
it is said in paragraph 32 on page 406: 
10 
“The Transnet Board nevertheless embarked on a further 
search as they felt that they could not abandon their fiduciary 
responsibilities.  On the 18 t h of June 2009 the Transnet 
Chairperson, Mr Phaswana, met with me and submitted a 
memorandum dated 9 June 2009, which was annexed to the 
original statement, which amongst other things recommended 
the appointment of a candidate for the position of CEO.  This 
was a highly capable and experienced black candidate who 
had the requisite experience and admirable managerial 
capabilities.” 
20 
It seems that in this narrative being related here that there was a 
further search embarked upon by the Transnet Board and this resulted 
in a memorandum being submitted to the Minister for the appointment 
of a highly experienced – capable and experienced black candidate.  It 
appears that that person was Sipho Maseko, do you know of that? 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 45 of 102 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Well I don’t remember exactly 
now whether – but the name Sipho Maseko I remember, I can’t just 
remember the background, the details. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And she says: 
“It is important to note that the Board had nominated only one 
candidate for the appointment, that is Mr Maseko.” 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Hmm. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In any event if we could go then 
to paragraph 33 because this now becomes directly relevant to your 
own involvement Mr Zuma.  She says in paragraph 33 at the bottom of 
10 
page 406: 
“Approximately a month after my appointment as the Minister 
of DPE I met with President Zuma and gave him a full 
background about the developments in Transnet.  I informed 
him that the Transnet AGM was coming up very soon and that a 
GCEO and a Chairperson of Transnet would have to be 
appointed as a matter of urgency.  I briefed him about the 
Board’s candidate of choice whom I too endorsed and the 
enquiry potentially implicating Mr Gama.” 
Do you recall that engagement? 
20 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes I do. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Is that a fair summary of what 
was discussed? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Then in paragraph 34 on page 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 46 of 102 
 
407 Ms Hogan says the following: 
“I was shocked and disappointed when President Zuma 
informed that he was adamant that Mr Gama was his only 
choice for GCEO.  I informed him that that was not possible 
and that Mr Gama was not the Board’s choice and I could not 
override the Board as they had undergone a very professional 
selection process.” 
Do you have any comment about that? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  May I just read it. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Please. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I don’t remember myself saying 
these things.  How could I have said this when somebody is being 
charged with serious charges, and I would say no take the person, I 
don’t remember me insisting on this. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Well perhaps in fairness we 
should take it step by step Mr Zuma.  What she says is at that meeting 
you informed her that Mr Gama was your only choice for GCEO. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Was? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Your choice for GCEO. 
20 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No, I can’t recall. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And not just choice, you were right, your only choice. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  It couldn’t be like that, we don’t 
work like that.  As I say there is a process that determines how 
becomes either the winning candidate.  When – or what the Ministers at 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 47 of 102 
 
times do they will come to the President just to brief the President, and 
only to discuss whether we should do this or not, and I am not even 
fond of making such determined statements, I would not have said this, 
not at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I just want to say this is one of those parts of 
her statement where it is quite important that your answer be the 
answer that is really to the best of your recollection because the way 
she has put it is quite emphatic and so it is important to distinguish 
between you don’t recall and I didn’t say it or I couldn’t have said it, so 
that one can understand it. 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I think I will say I could not 
have said this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You could not have said this? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Because it means I would also 
be undermining the process itself, at a level when the Minister consults 
you might express a view or not, but it does not determine the final 
decision, because the final decision must be a product of the process.  
I would not have said this because I would have been saying this is my 
20 
person, finished, it does not work like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But certainly that’s the impression that comes out of 
that paragraph. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Not at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That’s the impression that one gets when one reads 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 48 of 102 
 
that paragraph, that you were saying this is my only choice and you 
were not prepared to look at another candidate.  That’s my impression 
of what she is saying. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No I could not have said that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You could not have said so? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mmm. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, I understand two things 
from your answer Mr Zuma, firstly that you would not have said that, 
secondly as I understand what you said that a statement such as that 
10 
would show that this was a complete deviation from the proper process. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Absolutely because I would be 
saying there was no need for discussions.  This is a choice I’ve made 
finished.  No.  The process doesn’t work like that 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  It follows that the second 
sentence would also not have been part of that conversation but let me 
not make any assumptions and let me put it to you.  I informed him, 
that is Ms Hogan informing yourself, that that was not possible and that 
Mr Gama was not the Board’s choice and I could not override the Board 
as they had undergone a very professional selection process.  Do you 
20 
recall that being said at the meeting? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I don’t recall this. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And then do you recall being 
informed that Mr Gama was the subject of an enquiry? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Sorry? 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 49 of 102 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Do you recall being informed by 
Ms Hogan at that meeting that Mr Gama was the subject of an inquiry? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes there was a time where Mr 
Gama was accused, I remember the period.  I’m not very sure whether 
we discussed this, I think it came as just a report about Mr Gama, not a 
discussion whether we should take him or not.  That’s why I’m saying 
these answers that are put here that I said them I don’t remember 
having said this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you saying you do have a recollection of the fact 
that at some stage you got to know that Mr Gama was facing some 
10 
disciplinary process but you can’t say whether you were told that in a 
meeting with Ms Hogan? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are not sure about that. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  In fact it was a well known fact 
that Gama faced charges, everybody knew in the country. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes, and is your recollection that that was known 
at the time when an appointment of GCEO of Transnet was supposed to 
happen. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Because the allegations against 
Gama took a long time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 50 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In the last four lines of that 
paragraph Ms Hogan says the following.  She says: 
“President Zuma said that if that was my view no appointment 
whatsoever was to be made at Transnet until Mr Gama’s 
disciplinary process was over.  We agreed that I would provide 
him with more detailed information for him to further apply his 
mind to.” 
Do you recall anything of that nature being said at that consultation 
with yourself? 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I’ve got difficulties with this 
report because a consultation that the Ministers do they will be 
reporting, they will be saying this is what has happened, and me as a 
Minister this is what I think or the Board this is what the Board thinks, 
and then is there any other process that is going forward you report 
that, and from the position of the President you say fine go ahead, 
when things are okay you would come back.  I don’t remember 
discussing an individual like Gama to say this cannot happen, this is 
my choice.  I could not have said so.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe I could say this and maybe something that 
20 
comes later in her statement. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m saying I want to say something that maybe comes 
later in her statement. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Okay. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 51 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe the noise of the aircon might be affecting us, 
we will see what we can do if it interferes.  I think at some stage in her 
statement when one reads it one gets the impression, and I want to put 
it no higher than that, gets the impression that she may in regard to 
these appointments whether of a CEO of an SOE or the Chairperson of 
a Board that she would be putting forward to cabinet that she would 
want first to have an idea whether the President has no problem with t 
he particular candidate.  That’s the impression I get, she might not be 
saying that, and in a way when I read that I thought well maybe if you 
are going to a certain meeting and you want to put in a proposal you 
10 
might want to check with certain people who are important in that 
meeting if they have any problem with your proposal, because if they 
have a problem you might wish to rethink, but if they are fine you will 
confident to then take it forward to a bigger meeting.   
 
That’s what I was thinking.  So it may well be that to the extent 
– if she did come to you with the names maybe that the idea was to 
check whether you had any problem with the names.  Would that sound 
like something that would happen at cabinet ministers? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No, normally ministers would 
come to the President before, it’s not just a thing which perhaps does 
20 
not happen, it does. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It does happen yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja, to say the DG I am 
recommending this one or whatever for the President to know.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 52 of 102 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  They could also engage in the 
discussion, it is possible. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  And the President might have 
views and say we will check this or whatever, but what I am saying the 
President can’t say you can’t do this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Because that decision must be 
taken by the collective. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay, thank you. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And do your comments apply 
equally to an SOE as well as a Government Department? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Sorry? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  It’s just been brought to my 
attention that your comments might have been directed at government 
departments, rather than State Owned Entities. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Even the State Owned 
Enterprises they come as well. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  She proceeds in paragraph 35 
Mr Zuma to say the problem was that President Zuma, two of my 
20 
cabinet colleagues and elements within the ANC and the Tripartite 
Alliance, including the Secretary General Gwede Mantashe, were very 
vocal that the candidate of their choice, Mr Gama, would become the 
next GCEO of Transnet, despite the fact that the black dominated board 
of Transnet after a rigorous and professional selection process were 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 53 of 102 
 
clearly of the view that Mr Gama was not an appropriate candidate.  
Her comments then are extended insofar as they relate to support for 
Mr Gama to arrange with other persons and entities, or persons rather, 
do you have any comment on that? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Well I’m not sure here because 
she is now including many people. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Around this name, she knew 
...(intervention)  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  If I may just put it to you on a 
10 
basis that is fair to you, she says they were very vocal about it. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  That’s what she is saying. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, do you have any knowledge 
of that? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I don’t know, I don’t know 
because you don’t meet as an alliance to discuss those matters, those 
are just government matters.  So I am not sure, as you can see this is 
really pulling everybody to an issue of a specific government putting 
the Secretary General and everybody else, we never discuss this with 
the Secretary General or other Alliance people.  As a Minister maybe 
20 
from the human point of view people must have been coming to her, I 
don’t know. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  She said there was vocal 
support and widespread vocal support for Mr Gama to be appointed as 
the next GCEO of Transnet.  It may be that she implies, maybe not but 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 54 of 102 
 
perhaps I should put it to you that it was well known that many people 
supported Mr Gama. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I’m sure as Minister because 
they also do consult with the Unions, because at times Unions have 
views about people who are appointed for the fact that she said people 
are vocal, it means she has maybe been canvassing or talking to many 
people. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I guess that amounts to saying you can neither admit 
or deny that, that’s what she says and it’s possible. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  What was your view Mr Zuma 
about the appointment of Mr Gama as GCEO of Transnet? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  What? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  What was your view as to 
whether he should be appointed or not? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I think I was looking at the 
process that whatever happened at the end that would be the decision, 
I did not put my preferences on Gama or whoever. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What would you have – what do you think would have 
20 
been your view if she told you, as she says she did, that there was a 
rigorous selection process that had been followed by the Board 
considering a number of candidates, one of whom was Mr Gama, but 
that after considering all the candidates the Board had recommended 
Mr – is it Maseko?  
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 55 of 102 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Maseko, do you have an idea what your normal 
reaction would be when a Minister comes with names after a process 
like that, would your natural or normal reaction be if that is what the 
Board wants and you are happy then it’s fine or would your position be 
just give me some more information about this candidate or all these 
candidates, I want to look at them, I want to scrutinise them or take it 
to cabinet and we will see what cabinet says.  What would be your 
normal reaction when a Minister comes with candidates – a candidate’s 
name after such a process? 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No in fact in the majority of 
cases that is what the Ministers do.  To say here is a process.  The 
board looked at this.  They prefer this one.  The Minister might give 
some details and it might not give some details to say therefore the 
process is moving forward.  Boards recommend.  The boards 
themselves know that their recommendation could be accepted or not 
accepted by cabinet.  And that there is no process that can be stopped 
halfway.  It would just be to alert the President about what has 
happened.  Partly because in the cabinet the President would be 
chairing most of the time.  The debate would be among the Ministers.  
20 
Just making the President aware that these are the issues and the 
Minister could also express her own preference and the reasons why he 
or she feels this would be the right person. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And maybe I could ask this as well?  Do you have any 
recollection whether in such a process when a Minister comes to 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 56 of 102 
 
cabinet with a name whether he or she would include information about 
other candidates who were not successful according to the board or it 
would just be in – for the information about the candidate that is being 
recommended, is that something that you are able to remember or is 
that something you do not remember? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  At times – at times the Minister 
would give information about others for an example you might say there 
were so many candidates, this one is one.  The concentration would be 
on this one.  In the process of the discussion people can say, let us 
hear number 2, what was he – what was the kind of thing?  Or the 
10 
Minister could mention it even at the beginning.  In other words it 
varies how they present the matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  In relation to SOE board 
appointments do I understand it correctly… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I am sorry I think Mr Sikhakhane has got 
something. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  This is – this is poor.  This is really poor.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please come forward so I can hear you. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  I know you said Chair I cannot tell you 
about your jobs but I will now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no, no.  I said you can make submissions and 
everyone must do their job. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 57 of 102 
 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Chair this is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  I must say this is poor. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  This witness right comes here – you have 
Annexure D which tells you what the process is.  This is no expert in 
those processes.  You have it in Annexure D in your document and you 
are told by the Minister.  I do not think it is fair to ask someone who 
was head of state to explain to you the process of selecting people 
when you have the document that tells you from the right person.  I do 
10 
not think it is fair to this witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Sikhakhane sometimes you have a laid down 
process and you have a different understanding of persons of what the 
actual process was that was followed.  Sometimes a laid down process 
is not followed so the question was meant to get what his 
understanding was of what the process was as opposed to what the 
process was that was prescribed by law. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Then Chair if I may ask? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  What has that got to do with fraud and 
20 
corruption? 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is has got to do with whether where it is alleged 
that as it is here that he said he had only one choice of a candidate.  
Whether it is possible that the – his understanding of the process is 
different from what is laid down.  Genuine understanding. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 58 of 102 
 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Chair I do not know.  This is really poor.  He 
– he has told you what he – that he could not have said it.  We have 
spent 35 minutes on a question my client has answered and he is – you 
are asking him – you are not asking him what – whether he wanted a 
deviation.  He is being asked about how does the process unfold.  You 
have a document that tells you that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Sikhakhane I have just said to you – you can 
have a law that says this is the process and you can have people who 
are supposed to apply that process having a different understanding.  
And the question is aimed at establishing whether his understanding – 
10 
what his understanding was of the process. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Okay thanks Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Chair to just make one comment 
from the legal team’s point of view on this issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  At the beginning of this commission 
you made it public that its task and the task of the investigators and 
the legal team was to try and understand in relation to its terms of 
reference what happened. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  To try and understand how it 
happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  And to make recommendations in 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 59 of 102 
 
regard to the correction or assurance that it – whatever is found to 
have happened ultimately in your recommendations would not happen 
again. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  The appointment of persons to state 
owned entities is an integral part of all three legs of that inquiry.  It is 
something which is being debated intensely up to now by other 
witnesses and it is something that the former President with his 
knowledge and experience can assist with and I am quite sure he is 
willing to assist with it.  He is not being accused of anything in that 
10 
process.   
CHAIRPERSON:  And again Mr Zuma I just want to say that where you 
do not know feel free to say that I do not know.  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  In any event Mr Zuma if we may 
continue.  In paragraph 36 the deponent to this affidavit Ms Hogan 
raises another concern about Mr Gama’s candidacy and it was a report 
that he had been engaged in a contractual relationship with a cabinet 
colleague Mr Nyanda.  Did you know anything about this allegation at 
the time? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes I remember slightly that 
20 
there was something that had happened between the two. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  And do you recall that there were 
allegations about the propriety or lawfulness of those engagements 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 60 of 102 
 
between Mr Nyanda and Mr Gama. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Do you recall anything about – you 
do? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes I remember that.  I do not 
remember the detail but I remember the incident. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  She goes on in paragraph 37 to say: 
“Notwithstanding all this Mr Gama’s supporters 
claimed he was being victimised by an anti-
transformation white cabal that had instituted inquiry 
10 
and later disciplinary proceedings to prevent him 
from being appointed the GCEO.” 
Do you know anything about those sentiments expressed by Mr Gama’s 
supporters?  Not from – need dwell there too much but … 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I think there were murmurs 
about the victimisation whatever.  I do not remember the details but I 
know that this as I said the Gama thing was a well-known thing in the 
country.  The problems that he had with the – with the company.  But I 
cannot remember the details. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Alright.  She does note in paragraph 
20 
39 on page 408 that Mr Gama was later found guilty of unwarranted 
criticism of Transnet executives a charge serious enough to warrant 
dismissal.  I do not what to go into the details of the inquiry and the 
charges but that is what she says.  Do you recall that there was a guilty 
finding in relation to Mr Gama’s inquiry? 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 61 of 102 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I think there was some 
conclusion but I do not cannot remember exactly how – what was – how 
the final conclusion was. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  I think to assist you it will become 
clearer later so we can park that for the moment. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  She says in paragraph 40 on page 
408. 
“On or about 28 July 2009 I sent President Zuma a 
comprehensive report attached hereto marked D with 
10 
annexures detailing the selection process.  The 
strong 
motivation 
for 
the 
appointment 
of 
the 
candidate that had been recommended to me by the 
Transnet 
board. 
 
Details 
of 
the 
procurement 
irregularities under investigation by the Transnet 
Audit Committee.  The Corporate Governant aspects 
of CEO appointments in including the legal opinions 
prepared by Mr Michael Katz and Advocate Wim 
Trengrove SC in this regard.  However President 
Zuma did not respond.” 
20 
Did you recall receiving such a report?  Would you have read it or 
would a subordinate of yours have read it and advised you?  What 
would the position have been? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No I received the report.  It was 
just a report like all other reports for me to know. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 62 of 102 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Right.  And did you note it, did you 
read it or did you ask somebody to advise you about it. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I read it.  I read it. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Right. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  But it was a report like all other 
reports. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Right.  Paragraph 40 – the report 
itself is at page 422 of bundle GG[b], Exhibit GG[b] and it is headed 
Decision Memorandum.  It is addressed to you as President from Ms 
Barbara Hogan.  It is dated the 28 July 2009. 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  What page are you in? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  422 – red 422. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  4 –  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Pretorius. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes I have got it. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  I am sorry I thought you were 
looking at it. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No I have… 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Thank you. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I have got it. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Let us leave aside the legal advice 
contained in the report for the moment.  We may return to it if it is 
necessary or you want to but there is a summary of the report at page 
423 which says in paragraph 2.1 
“Following the resignation of Ms Ramos the board 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 63 of 102 
 
initiated a CEO recruitment process to ensure 
continuity in Transnet business operations. As a 
consequence 
of 
the 
withdrawal 
of the 
boards 
unanimously recommended preferred candidate Mr 
Pravin Gordhan it says it should not be the board 
extended its search for a suitable candidate and has 
now recommended a further preferred candidate with 
two other short listed preferred candidates for 
appointment as CEO.” 
In paragraph 2.2 she says or the report says: 
10 
“The recruitment and selection process conducted by 
the board raised questions regarding the appropriate 
authority to appoint the CEO as well as the correct 
process to follow.” 
Let us leave that aside for the moment.  It says in 2.3: 
“The 
recruitment 
process 
was 
initiated 
at 
an 
unfortunate 
time 
when 
the 
board 
was 
also 
undertaking 
investigations 
into 
alleged 
corrupt 
activities against some of the senior executives at 
Transnet.  This time overlap may have raised 
20 
concerns regarding the process and criteria followed 
in the recruitment and selection of candidates.  The 
process conducted by the board has been assessed 
and found to be robust insofar as it was referenced 
to labour law compliant and internationally recognise 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 64 of 102 
 
candidate profiling.” 
The important point in this summary at least is made at paragraph 2.4. 
“Due to the delay in the appointment of the CEO and 
media speculation it has now become critical for the 
shareholder to resolve on the appointment of the 
CEO and to re-establish leadership stability at 
Transnet.  This memorandum serves to address 
questions and concerns raised with a view to 
agreement on the way forward in appointing a CEO 
for Transnet as soon as possible.” 
10 
Do you have any comment in relation to 2.4?  I would assume but 
perhaps I should not that – that it would be in any state owned entity 
critical for there to be leadership stability at all times and thus would 
include Transnet and that undue delay in the appointment of a suitable 
candidate to CEO position would in general circumstances be 
undesirable.  Would you accept that? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Hm.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  He is still reading. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I was not sure – I am not sure whether… 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  I am sorry did you not – I missed 
20 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That was an answer – whether there was an answer 
or not? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No I was saying yes there was. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Thank you. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 65 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I thought I – I thought I nodded 
[indistinct]. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Sorry.  It is just that the record 
would not pick up a nod. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Oh okay, okay, okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  We may be filmed for other reasons 
but not for that reason.  In paragraph 3.13 she summarises the object 
10 
of the memorandum it is at page 426 Mr Zuma she says: 
“In view of the aforementioned it is considered 
prudent that the board …” 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Sorry where are you? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Page 426 paragraph 3.13. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  426. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  I am sorry I … 
CHAIRPERSON:  426. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  426, red 426 paragraph 3.13. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Do you have it Mr Zuma? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Yes.  She says: 
“In view of the aforementioned it is considered 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 66 of 102 
 
prudent that the board in consultation with the 
relevant 
Minister 
conducts 
a 
recruitment 
and 
selection process for a CEO and recommends 
suitable candidates to the Minister for consideration 
and appointment subject to approval by Cabinet.” 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  That is in very, very broad summary 
the process. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  And I think you have agreed to that. 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Hm. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  She then details the recruitment and 
selection process of the CEO of Transnet that was followed and she 
goes into some detail in paragraph 3.2.2 of the type of procedures 
conducted in such a process by the board’s corporate governance and 
nominations committee.  Probably not necessary to go into any detail 
but just to remark that there is a thorough process of examination of 
candidates on a number of criteria.  You note that. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  And that is in accordance with your 
20 
own understanding? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  The paragraph 3.2 various 
candidates are mentioned including Mr Gama and several others and 
then in paragraph 3.2.4 by way of background there is a recordal that 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 67 of 102 
 
the board unanimously recommended Mr Pravin Gordhan.  But I would 
like to go to the next page if I may?  Because we know that his 
candidate here was withdrawn to the top of page 428 where it says: 
“The preferred internal candidate Mr Siyabonga Gama was thoroughly 
considered but the board is of a view that his assessment showed that 
there are important gaps relative to the requirements for the position.  
According to the independent assessment and board evaluation he 
currently requires greater cognitive development to handle the 
complexity of this position.” 
You say you would have had regard to this report. Do you recall that 
10 
observation being conveyed to you? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Which one?  I was just looking 
at the – at page. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  I am sorry.  Page 428. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Because I mean paragraph. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  If you want the first paragraph.  
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Page 30 – 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:  428 I think.  Did you say 438? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  428. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At the top. 
20 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  428. 
CHAIRPERSON:  428 at the top.  Must I ask somebody to come and 
assist you? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 68 of 102 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  You can do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes could – Lerato.  Go and look for page 428 at the 
top. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Is it page – even on the right 
what you call it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On the right one. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Oh okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Each time we talk about a page it will be the red 
numbers at the top. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes okay. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Fine I was looking at the 
paragraphs. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Are you holding me to that DCJ? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you had to deviate yesterday at some stage.  Ja 
okay.  Do you want to read it and then put your question again? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Yes may I read it to – perhaps I 
should go… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you reading it from page 27 up to 28 – 428. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Yes correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay the paragraph he is going to read Mr Zuma 
starts on the previous page which is 427 at the bottom and continues at 
the top of page 428. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Paragraph 3.2.5 on page … 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 69 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Page 427. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Red 427.  I am going to read it. 
“In addition… 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I think he must see it as well.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Can you see it? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  What is the paragraph? 
CHAIRPERSON:  42 – 32… 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  3.2.5. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  3… 
CHAIRPERSON:  At the bottom. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  3.2.5. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  On the bottom of page red 427. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes, yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Do you have it? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  It reads: 
“In addition the board disclosed the names of all the 
candidates short listed for final interviews. The list 
20 
was not presented in order of priority and comprised 
of the following names:  Ms Moses, Mr Gama, Mr 
Tloti, Mr Ketso Gordhan and Mr Pravin Gordhan.  
Regarding the assessment of the other candidates 
the board reported to the Minister that “the other 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 70 of 102 
 
candidates were found to be less suitable for the 
position or not suitable at all.”  The preferred 
internal 
candidate 
Mr 
Siyabonga 
Gama 
was 
thoroughly considered but the board is of a view that 
his assessment showed that there are important gaps 
relative 
to 
the 
requirements 
for 
the 
position.  
According to the independent assessment and board 
evaluation he currently requires greater cognitive 
development 
to 
handle 
the 
complexity 
of 
this 
position.” 
10 
In short the board’s position was that after consideration of his 
assessment including an independent assessment it determined that he 
was not suitable for appointment to the post.  Where you aware of that 
sentiment and that that was the sentiment of the board? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes I think so. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Right. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Hm. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  That sentiment is repeated in 
paragraph 3.2.7 on page 428 which reads: 
“On 9 March 2009 the Transnet board provided the 
20 
Minister with a summary of assessments of all the 
short listed candidates and in addition informed the 
Minister of allegations of misconduct involving one of 
the short listed candidates Mr Siyabonga Gama.  The 
board cited the reasons why Mr Siyabonga Gama was 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 71 of 102 
 
not recommended for appointment in the first place 
and the inherent pending uncertainty regarding the 
outcome of the investigations against him as why – 
as to why it should read he should not now be 
appointed to the position of CEO.” 
Were you aware of those sentiments? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  And then it concludes – well a 
conclusion in paragraph 3.2.12 on page 429. 
“After the interviews were conducted the corporate 
10 
governance 
and 
nominations 
committee 
recommended three preferred candidates who could 
fill the position of CEO namely Mr Sipho Maseko, Mr 
Tau Morwe and Mr Kgomotso Phihlela with full and 
unanimous 
support 
of 
the 
Transnet 
board 
recommended Mr Sipho Maseko for appointment as 
CEO.” 
And then it goes into the reasons why he was recommended.  Were you 
aware of that recommendation? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I think so yes. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Then there is a section of the report 
addressed to you dealing with the further processes particularly those 
conducted on Transnet’s behalf by Ernst and Young and others in 
relation to various matters relevant to the board’s conclusion.  And if 
one goes to page 433 if I may?  Paragraph 3.4.1 the report reads: 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 72 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let him get there first. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Paragraph 4 – page 433. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Hm. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:  Paragraph 3.4.1.  Do you have it? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS:   
“As 
executive 
authority 
and 
shareholder 
representative of the state it is incumbent upon the 
Minister of Public Enterprises to exercise the rights 
of the shareholder to appoint the CEO of Transnet in 
10 
general meeting.  In keeping with company law and 
corporate good governance codes such as King3 it is 
important 
that 
the 
shareholder 
engages 
in 
a 
meaningful and constructive fashion with the board in 
selecting a CEO to the lead a company – to lead the 
company.” 
Do you have comment on that?  Would you agree with that sentiment? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  “In this regard …” 
The paragraph continues: 
20 
“…finding a suitable candidate for appointment as 
Transnet’s CEO considering the company’s impact 
on the economy the magnitude of its infrastructure, 
built program and global economic context is a task 
with high impact and potential risk.” 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 73 of 102 
 
Would you agree with that sentiment? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Then if we may proceed to page 
434 the conclusions of this section relating to the process from a 
factual point of view are set out in paragraph 3.4.5 on page 4-3-4.  Do 
you have that? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  The first bullet – if I may 
summarise mentions that: 
“The recruitment process conducted by the Board 
10 
has been robust in assessing both internal and 
external candidates.” 
The second bullet says: 
“The investigation of alleged misconduct on the part 
of Mr Siyabonga Gama is not trumped up or trivial 
but potentially significant and the Board will be 
failing in its fiduciary duty if it does not complete 
the investigation in accordance with due process.” 
You 
would 
have 
been 
informed 
then 
of 
both 
those 
observations I take it? 
20 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  (No audible reply). 
CHAIRPERSON:  The – the microphone must be able to catch the 
response. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 74 of 102 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Okay, okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was your answer yes? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  The third bullet reads: 
“The Board is confident that the substance and 
method of the recruitment and selection process 
were kept discreet from the investigation.” 
Discreet in that sense means separate from as I understand 
the sentiment there.  At page 4-3-5 that is over the page the third, 
10 
fourth and fifth bullets if I may read the first bullet: 
“At no stage did the Board indicate that it has 
shortlisted Mr Gama as second in line preferred 
candidate to Mr Pravin Gordhan and the Board 
embarked 
on 
an 
extended 
search 
after 
the 
withdrawal of Mr Pravin Gordhan as it was not 
confident 
that 
the 
other 
candidates 
available 
including Mr Siyabonga Gama were suitable for the 
position.” 
The Board would have communicated or that would have been 
20 
communicated to you in the report.  Am I correct? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I think so. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  The next bullet reads: 
“I 
have 
had 
an 
opportunity 
to 
peruse 
the 
independent assessments in respect of all the 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 75 of 102 
 
candidates interviewed by the Board and have 
confidence in the recommendation by the Board that 
Mr Sipho Maseko, 
Tau Morwe 
and 
Kgomotso Phihlela are in order of preference the 
most suitable candidates for appointment as CEO.” 
That also would have been communicated to yourself in the report … 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Hm. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  That this had the Board’s 
approval and Executive authority approval? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And then in the last bullet the 
urgency of the appointment is stressed.  It reads: 
“In the interest of establishing leadership stability 
at Transnet, an appointment of a CEO be made 
without undue delay and that the ultimate criteria 
should be the confidence that the Board and the 
shareholder has in the competence of the candidate 
to lead the organisation.” 
Do you have any comment in relation to that observation? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No, no comment. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Do you agree with it?  Do you 
disagree with it? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Sorry. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Do – do you accept that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well he says no comment.  No comment says he has 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 76 of 102 
 
no opinion on the … 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  You do not wish to comment or 
because you have no issue with it? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I said no comment. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  That is what I wanted to clarify.  
Do you have any issue with that …? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No I do not have an issue. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
And 
then 
finally 
the 
recommendation is at page 4-3-6. 
“It is recommended that the President notes the 
10 
contents of this memorandum; and approves the 
submission 
of 
a 
Cabinet 
Memorandum 
recommending the appointment of Mr Sipho Maseko 
as Transnet’s CEO.” 
It seems – before I ask you to comment Mr Zuma that the 
process here was that the Board would have undertaken its selection 
process, recorded that selection and presented it to you in this 
memorandum.  I do not know what other processes might have been 
followed and asked you to approve the submission of a Cabinet 
Memorandum recommending the appointment of Mr Sipho Maseko’s 
20 
Transnet CEO. 
So you would have been involved prior to it going to Cabinet 
as I understand it here as a matter of fact whatever the other processes 
might have been.  Did you respond to this recommendation? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I think so.  I think I responded if 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 77 of 102 
 
I remember. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe before you make a final answer on that or 
move on to this I see that in – at the end of that report 
Ms Barbara Hogan was asking you to note the contents of the report … 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And to approve that the – to approve the submission 
of a Cabinet Memorandum recommending the appointment.  I am – I am 
saying – I am mentioning it because earlier on I think you did emphasis 
that Ministers would come to the President for the President to note … 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before certain matters where they would then be 
taken to Cabinet. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay thank you. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Just before we leave the report 
Mr Zuma again this is really a – a request for some information and 
assistance from you.  If one goes to page 446 this is part of an opinion 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I am sorry.  I am sorry Mr Pretorius. 
20 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think I may have interrupted both you and Mr Zuma. 
You had asked him a question whether he had responded to this report 
and I think he had indicated that he thought he had … 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  I will come back to that 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 78 of 102 
 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you might not have finished. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Because I just … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Do not want to leave the report 
now and I am (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Well I want – I want to know the answer  
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Allow me to do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No but I want to know the answer. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Well … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Mr Zuma did you respond to this memorandum if 
you remember – this report? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA: 
 
There 
were 
so 
many 
memorandums. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You cannot remember? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  You know – if they come like 
this unless there is a problem … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Where you could say this – no I 
cannot move generally. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  They – because you are not 
deciding the final thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Let us allow the process to go. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 79 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So normally you would allow … 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You would grant the approval that a Minister is asking 
for unless there was a problem? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  (Intervenes). 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  At times Ministers do not even 
come.  At times they send the document … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  And look at the document.  
What is important is that if at all there is a problem I will then indicate 
that no do not take it to the Cabinet right now … 
CHAIRPERSON:  As yet? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Until we discuss but generally 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  It is just – it is just a formality. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But as to what you did with regard to this one you are 
not able to remember or you are able to remember? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No I am saying I am not able to 
remember … 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 80 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Because they come all the time 
(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  To remember one in the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Many of them … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Because it is not coming – it is 
not coming for me to discuss. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  It is to say this is what we have 
done. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  The process has come up to 
this point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  We are now going to the 
Cabinet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Normally if I did not for an 
example say anything the memorandum goes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  If there is anything that is 
particular I would then say Minister, memorandum so and so there is a 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 81 of 102 
 
problem I would like to discuss with you … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Or I will discuss the problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  It does not mean if for an 
example I did not respond. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Then the – the memorandum 
does not go.  It goes a process … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Particularly the officials they 
will be talking more. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  For example the official from 
the Minister will say to the official who deals with the Cabinet things. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Is – is – has the President said 
anything on this one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  He will say no, no nothing no 
20 
problem.  It goes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I am just saying and there are 
many. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 82 of 102 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Where that happens. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I think if we take that process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  It did not necessarily – even if 
you do not agree with it or not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  It must go to Cabinet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  So if – if ever the President were to say to a Minister 
no do not take this one to Cabinet as yet I want to discuss something 
with you about it.  It would be something quite important? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If it is not something so important the – the idea 
would be to say take it there we will discuss at Cabinet? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but in the Presidency would there be records of 
any correspondence if for example - you cannot remember now – but if 
you did respond by way of a memorandum to the Minister or a letter 
20 
would you know whether there would be such a record in the 
Presidency or you would not know? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  In this process we do not 
necessarily write to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  To Ministers? 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 83 of 102 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  To the Ministers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Either you ask the Minister to 
come to say I seek the clarification or so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Or you talk to the – even to the 
official … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  From the Presidency … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Or the people who are in charge 
of the Cabinet itself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  The Secretariat. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  You say tell Minister so and so 
there is this kind of an issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Maybe we will clarify it in the 
meeting or whatever. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Unless the matter is more 
serious … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  When the President feels this – 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 84 of 102 
 
this cannot pass. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Simply because the deeper 
discussion about anything here will be in the Cabinet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  The President at time might feel 
this one but I should not … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Stop it? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Delay this … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  But in the meeting the President 
will say at his own time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Minister just clarify this one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  It depends how it goes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
May 
I ask 
Mr Zuma 
the 
memorandum having been submitted to you with a recommendation who 
would have in your office had to ensure that it went further to Cabinet?  
20 
Would there be a responsibility within the Presidency to do that?  How 
would (intervenes)? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes.  It is – it is the Cabinet 
Secretariat who do the up and down whether the thing must go or not 
go and whatever.  For the President is to look at the thing.  He would 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 85 of 102 
 
be aware of what is happening.  Also with an aim of guiding the meeting 
properly and the Secretariat if there is something for an example 
because they know the process that they do not think it is fine. 
They could even deal with the department on their own to say 
please put this right or something … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Or alert the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Before we leave the report or 
memorandum that was given to you I would just like to ask you one 
10 
question to assist you.  If you have no recollection or ability to answer 
that is also fine but if one goes to page 446 red 446.  At the bottom of 
the page paragraph 5 you will see reference to a Protocol and under 
the heading “General” at 5.1 it reads: 
“The Protocol was published by the Department of 
Public 
Enterprises 
in 
1997 
with 
a 
view 
to 
inculcating good governance in the SOEs in 
accordance with King Code of 2002.  The Protocol 
thus does not have legislative effect but sets out 
the principles of corporate governance for SOEs.  
20 
The Protocol also deals with the appointment, 
disqualification and removal of Directors.” 
Do you know anything about that protocol? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes I remember it slightly, ja.  I 
think there is.  I cannot remember the details in it. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 86 of 102 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  There was a protocol. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  There is just an interesting 
paragraph 
quoted 
in 
the 
next 
paragraph 
under 
the 
heading 
“Appointment of Directors.”  Paragraph “5.1.6.1”.  It reads: 
“The performance of the SOE depends on the 
capabilities and performance of its Board.  It is 
therefore imperative that when appointing Directors, 
the shareholder should ensure that the Board is 
properly constituted.  In this regard, the Board 
10 
should, at all times, comprise of individuals with 
integrity and accountability, competence, relevant 
and complimentary skills, experience and expertise.  
This is aimed at avoiding possible dominance by 
any one Director or blocks of Directors and, above 
all, ensuring commitment to the success of the SOE 
and the satisfaction of the shareholder.” 
Were you aware of that or do you have any comment in 
relation to that? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No.  No comment. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You – you put two questions at the same time 
Mr Pretorius.  The one was whether he was aware of that. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The other was whether he has comments.  He has 
already said he has no comment.  Were you aware of that at the time? 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 87 of 102 
 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes I think there was this … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That paragraph? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Provision, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I think so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  We have heard this morning in 
relation to the appointment of Board Members of State Owned Entities 
your comments Mr Zuma and I think you said it was normal or happened 
most of the time.  Correct me if I am wrong but the Minister would 
10 
engage with the president from time to time to discuss candidates. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Yes I said so. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Is that correct? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Hm. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Did this apply to Heads of 
Government Departments as well? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja, it … 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  That practice. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  It would.  It would apply as well. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Chair I am about to go back to 
20 
the statement of Ms Hogan.  Perhaps I should just conclude.  
Paragraph 40 on page 408. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Paragraph? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  40 on 400-and – page - red 408. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  400-and …? 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 88 of 102 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Page 448 but the paragraph Mr Pretorius you said 
what paragraph? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  40 – 4-0. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I cannot see 4-0 at page 448. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  4-0-8.  Chair have I …? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Page 4-0-8 or page 4-4-8?  Let us talk about the page 
first. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  4-0-8. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  I may have misled Mr Zuma.  I thought you 
said 4-4-8. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Oh, 4-4-8 I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  I am following instructions.  Red 
4-0-8. 
CHAIRPERSON:  4-0-8, okay.  That is the page. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Paragraph 40. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us get there first.  Let us get there first then we 
can talk about the paragraph.  I am at page 4-0-8 and I can see 
paragraph 40.  Are you there Mr Zuma? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Ja, I am there. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  In that paragraph she said that 
she sent the memorandum to you.  She describes it as comprehensive 
report on or around 28 July 2009 and then she says in the last 
sentence: 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 89 of 102 
 
“However, President Zuma did not respond.” 
I presume she means to her.  Do you know whether you did 
respond to her or not? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No I do not – I do not 
remember.  As I said earlier if the report comes in the majority of cases 
for the President to – to understand and read the report but not 
necessarily to respond at all material times because that – the report 
does not end with the President.  The reports are - the final area of 
looking at the report is the Cabinet. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Chair would that be a 
10 
convenient time? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  We will take the lunch adjournment now and we 
will resume at 2 o’ clock.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let’s proceed. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Zuma if we 
could go to page 408, we had dealt with paragraph 40 before the long 
adjournment, do you have that paragraph? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is it, just repeat for me the page Mr Pretorius 
and the paragraph? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  408. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Paragraph? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  40, we had completed paragraph 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 90 of 102 
 
40 and I would like to go on from there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Chair I’m sorry, I’m sorry to 
make this interruption.  I have a problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I have a problem because I am 
being made to go through the details that are the details of the officials 
and expected to remember every other detail on the work that generally 
is done by the DG’s and the officials.  The, the, the question this 
morning, we have gone into those details.  I have a problem because I 
10 
am not an officer or cabinet secretary, those who take minutes 
etcetera. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hmm. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  The manner in which I think I’m 
being asked questions on the details that I cannot even remember 
properly, because I was not working with those details.  Now naturally 
this will have its own results, the results that would make the 
Commission to take some conclusions.  Now I thought there are serious 
issues or policy issues that one could be bogged down to deal with.  
Now if we take this document either the DG or the Secretary for 
20 
Cabinet or something they would know everybody – they worked on it, 
and I am not sure about the purpose of me having to remember where 
the i’s were dotted and the t’s were crossed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think it is fair to say that as President there would 
be certain things that you might not know because they will be dealt 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 91 of 102 
 
with by officials and other people and that there will be certain things 
that you would be expected to know, I think that’s fair, fair comment.  
Where there may be difficulty, and I think we can have a look, and I did 
say earlier on you are free to say look I don’t know that, I wouldn’t 
have known that you know, and I think Mr Pretorius may going forward 
have to maybe apply his mind more in terms of what is important that 
you are likely to have known or to have dealt with to the extent that 
maybe some of the questions might be questions that might not have 
fallen within what you would have known, but I think what he may be 
trying to do is to make sure that in the light of the allegations that Ms 
10 
Barbra Hogan has made for example that you interfered with the 
processes of the appointment of for example the CEO, Group CEO for 
Transnet, and she goes into details into her interactions with you on 
her version. 
 
It may be important for the Commission to understand for 
example when you go to that report that Mr Pretorius took you through 
to say do you remember having received this report, did you note some 
of these points that she made for example that the Board had made a 
certain recommendation.  Some of those may be important because 
when a decision has to be made as to whether what she says you said 
20 
was actually said or whether you said it or not, it might be important to 
have that full picture, but at any time feel free to say those kind of 
details wouldn’t have been part of what I would deal with, and I would 
simply say to Mr Pretorius as we go forward do have a look in terms of 
what’s important for purposes of Mr Zuma in terms of what you are 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 92 of 102 
 
looking at, so in principle I accept the point that there may be details 
that as president you wouldn’t know but I think that maybe that Mr 
Pretorius doesn’t want a situation where he doesn’t put certain things 
to you only to find that later on they become relevant in terms of what 
exactly happened and then you have not been given a chance, that’s 
my thinking of what he is doing, but I think going forward it may be that 
he might wish to bear your concern in mind as he goes forward. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I hear you Chair, I hear you, but 
my problem does not go away. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
10 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  For an example the allegation 
as put forward by the Minister is that I interfered. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I don’t know what does that 
mean, I don’t know, because a President talks to his ministers about 
the work they do.  I don’t understand what is it, if for example there 
were to be an appointment of an officer, they consult with the President 
the President might have views insofar as discussing that thing.  I don’t 
understand this very broad word “he interfered”, in what way?  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  We are not getting for example 
that point.  We are going to paragraph one line I don’t understand, 
that’s my problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well to a certain extent we are at that point because 
we have dealt with a point where she says she had a meeting with you, 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 93 of 102 
 
where she briefed you on the process for the appointment of the Group 
CEO at Transnet, and she says at that meeting she told you that the 
Board had recommended a certain candidate after considering a 
number of candidates including Mr Gama, and she says she was 
shocked and disappointed when you said, according to her, you have 
only one choice, that is Mr Gama. 
 
Now that seems to me if it is true what she says happened may 
well be an interference, I am not saying it is, it may well be an 
interference, I am not sure.  You might be able as you say to say a 
President and a Minister would discuss such issues as – a Minister of 
10 
Public Enterprises would discuss issues as to candidates to be 
considered but the President if he has a view would express a view but 
would not be saying his view is the only view or the decisive view and 
that gives me at least another version to say well she says this is what 
was said but you say this is what happens, not what she is saying.   
 
So in terms of that report Mr Pretorius was going through it 
because he is still looking at that issue and I did indicate earlier on 
that in terms of her statement of – in terms of accusations that she 
makes that’s one of the very important accusations that she makes that 
must be dealt with properly, so it may be that there are certain details 
20 
where you say look I really don’t know that part, and I wouldn’t know it 
as President and that’s legitimate, so I am saying I hear your concern 
and I want to urge Mr Pretorius to bear it in mind as we go forward to 
try and avoid details that you might not have known about as President.   
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Chair the allegation is that the 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 94 of 102 
 
President interfered, and she makes the statement which I have – I 
mean responded to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I would have never said so, 
because I don’t as a President, I can’t say I want this and it succeeds 
because it is going to go through the processes, even if I talked to her.  
No matter what was the end of the discussion, the matter is going to a 
discussion which will determine even if – just for argument sake I had a 
view that view might not work at the end.  Now I have answered the 
question that I never said that.  That must be the understanding of the 
10 
Commission. 
 
Now if we go through the details I just have a problem, 
because I am no longer dealing with that allegation as it were. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let me make this other point and some of this 
might be something that I need to explain, if for example as we have in 
relation to this accusation that she makes that you interfered with the 
appointment process in relation to the Group CEO of Transnet she says 
you interfered and you say no I never interfered and actually it is not 
true that I said I had a choice of the candidates, not even to speak 
about one – only one choice, or if I said anything about candidates all I 
20 
may have said was maybe Mr Gama might have been okay but let’s go 
and talk at Cabinet, or you might say I don’t think I expressed any 
preference in either way and that’s not how I normally dealt with these 
matters and that’s not how as far as I know a President deals with 
these matters. 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 95 of 102 
 
 
At a certain stage she might have to be called back to deal 
with the fact that you have said you couldn’t have said that and 
because in the end I may have to make a finding as to did the meeting 
that she talks about take place between the two of you, and is it true 
that you said what she says she said, and when I look at that I can’t 
look just at that, I have got to look at a number of factors relating to 
the circumstances of the whole matter.  That’s where some of the 
things might be relevant.   
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Chair my problem you see if she 
said I came and I said (indistinct) with this one, it is my only candidate. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  And I didn’t do so, these 
matters where you take the decision it is at the cabinet.  In the Cabinet 
all members including the President has a right to express a view in the 
Cabinet.  Now that’s why I’m saying I have a problem with the – if I’m 
looking for that or the Commission is looking for that kind of thing, that 
now I must go through the detailed page by page, paragraph by 
paragraph. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well maybe the paragraph by paragraph might not be 
the best way, it may be that Mr Pretorius must look at the gist of certain 
20 
portions of her statement and be able to put those to you rather than 
paragraph by paragraph there.  There I think you may have a point 
there, you know Mr Pretorius will respond but it may be that he needs 
to look at a number of paragraphs and get the gist and put it, 
particularly because your version is I could not have said this, this is 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 96 of 102 
 
not how things have worked and therefore it might not be helpful to go 
into certain details because my version is it could not have happened 
and I am now putting my own words – it may be that you say couldn’t 
have happened this way because if it happened this way it would have 
been improper and I wouldn’t have done that kind of thing. 
 
So if it is fine with you I want to urge Mr Pretorius to look at 
trying things that way and let us see how it goes and if there is still a 
concern then you can raise it again. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Chair I hear you and I 
appreciate what you say. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  I am being really cross-
examined, very thoroughly on the details and I don’t know what will be 
the outcome of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well – were you still in the middle of saying 
something, I don’t want to interrupt you. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were you in the middle of making a certain point, I 
don’t want to interrupt you? 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  No I was just making the very 
20 
same point that if we are looking on that particular allegation you know 
as I was – like dealing with her report insofar as what happened in the 
conference of the ANC for an example about groups or cliques or 
whatever.  I said she is expressing her own views here, and these are 
matters that even any ordinary ANC member will take issue with that, in 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 97 of 102 
 
the manner in which she has written her stuff here. 
 
Now I’m saying if I go through all of that and the Commission 
is not taking my answer to the question whether I interfered or not, 
even if I’ve given the answer we will still go to the details.  For me 
what other answer must I give that will make the Commission to be 
satisfied, is it to go to the details in one form or the other? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you see when Ms Barbra Hogan gave her version 
to say you interfered the Commission didn’t accept what she said as 
true, as necessarily true, that’s how I should put it.  Equally when you 
say what she is saying is not true, the Commission doesn’t necessarily 
10 
at this stage say what you are saying is true, at this stage the 
Commission is  hearing different witnesses saying what they have to 
say on certain issues, there will come a time when the Commission 
must weight up all the evidence and see and decide what it decides is 
true, but at this stage it – just because you have said what she says 
happened is not true the Commission cannot say that is the end of the 
matter, it must still look at all relevant circumstances so that when at 
the end of its work it has to weigh up and decide it has a full picture, 
that is the attempt, to make sure that it has a full picture from all sides 
before that time comes.   
20 
 
Maybe I should allow Mr ...(intervention)  
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  But the details Chair they will 
include me not remembering these details because they are not even 
mind and I don’t know what would you do where I perhaps am saying I 
cannot remember, I cannot comment, you will weigh all of that, that is 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 98 of 102 
 
my point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  If you made me to go through 
every other thing here which it could not be my, (indistinct) of my 
activities, and that is why I have got a worry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, let me hear what Mr Pretorius has to say. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Well Chair if Ms Hogan 
implicates in her evidence Mr Zuma directly we are not only duty-bound 
to put it, but it is fair to put it in all its relevant detail.  If Mr Zuma 
cannot remember that is the end of the story, but if a report dealing 
10 
with a particular request and stressing the urgency of the request is 
addressed to Mr Zuma and Mr Zuma says he received the report and he 
considered its contents then its contents may or may not be relevant 
but certainly should be put in the sense that Mr Zuma has a chance to 
comment, so that when submissions are made at the end of the day one 
just does not say here’s the report, Mr Zuma acknowledged receiving it, 
he is in a sense – must be accept to have agreed to its contents.  That 
would be unfair.   
 
But I understand the complaint in relation to stressing detail 
and I am about to get to the gist of the matter now, in which I will put 
20 
as up to this point at least in broad summary what Ms Hogan is saying 
to enable Mr Zuma to answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I think maybe what you should try and do is to try 
and avoid the kind of details that might not help in deciding what 
actually happened with regard to this incident, and just bear in mind his 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 99 of 102 
 
concerns, his concern. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So we will bear it in mind.  If the attempt that will be 
made after some time it looks like it still does not meet your concern 
please feel free to raise it again.  Sometimes it is not as easy as it is 
but Mr Pretorius will try.  Okay. 
 
Mr Zuma is not agree – oh I’m sorry, Mr Sikhakane, I didn’t see 
your hand. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKANE:  Chair I am going to be very cautious, you 
raised your voice last time I raised this complaint, so I am going to 
10 
...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKANE:  I think I am going to have to repeat what I 
said to you and Mr Pretorius in a private place in chambers, I don’t 
want to do that, but what I need to do now I would like to have an 
adjournment, I have a view that my client was brought in here under 
false pretences, and now I am need him to take, to make up his mind 
whether he wants to be cross-examined, because it is clear, it has just 
been confirmed he is being cross-examined.  All I am asking Chair, all I 
am asking, I am going to repeat the things I said to both you and Mr 
20 
Pretorius, but for now because I advised my client to respect this 
process, come here, cooperate with it, I want him to consider that 
position, because I think I advised him in bona fide but I do not think I 
was right, and I would like him to consider his position, because now it 
is clear to me he is being cross-examined on the version, not his 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 100 of 102 
 
version, on what people said.  I do think I need an adjournment with 
him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, how much time do you need? 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKANE:  Chair if you give me 30 minutes, I will come 
back at three, so that ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  At three o’clock? 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I will give you, we will adjourn for 30 minutes, 
we will resume at three.  Thank you, we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
10 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  I had said we would resume at three o’clock it did not 
happen.  That was because there were still discussions that were going 
on.  As you know we adjourned because the former President had 
expressed certain concerns with regard to the details or questions or 
some of the questions that he was being asked and his counsel 
expressed those concerns as well and requested an adjournment so 
that the former President and his legal team could reflect on the 
situation.  The – there has been a discussion involving me and the 
legal team of the commission as well as the legal team for the former 
20 
President.  They – both sides made a certain suggestion which I have 
agreed to.  This commission would like to make sure that as far as 
possible it takes everybody on board.  At least it should make attempts 
as far as possible to do so.  The former President has expressed 
certain concerns and what has been agreed is that there should be an 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 101 of 102 
 
opportunity for both the commission’s legal team and the former 
President’s legal team to look at the concerns and see whether a way 
can be found in which they can be accommodated without the 
commission’s legal team compromising their job that they need to do in 
terms of the investigation.  It has been decided that we should adjourn 
the proceedings for the day and we should not sit tomorrow in order to 
give a full opportunity to the commission’s legal team and the former 
President’s legal team which would involve the former President as well 
because he is concerned in the matter to see whether a way can be 
found in which his concerns are addressed without the commission’s 
10 
legal team compromising any part of their obligations.  We – I must 
take this opportunity to say that I said yesterday I think I said it 
yesterday that I believed that all sides were trying to find solutions to 
whatever issues arose and I indicated yesterday for example that the 
former President’s counsel or legal team indicated that they did not 
want Mr Pretorius to be looking over his shoulder as he was asking 
questions. They did not want to keep on raising to raise objections.  
They were going to raise objections only if it was something really 
serious.  So there have been an issue now they will come together and 
they have discussed and a decision has been taken that let there be 
20 
time to look at issues and see if common ground can be found so that 
then we can continue.  So we are therefore going to adjourn the 
proceedings until Friday morning.  I am confident that a way that there 
are reasonable prospects that a way will be found to make sure that we 
can proceed with a certain understanding.  So we will have to wait until 
17 JULY 2019 – DAY 135 
 
Page 102 of 102 
 
Friday but tomorrow all sides will be interacting with one another – with 
each other to try and see how or the concerns that have been raised by 
the former President can be accommodated.  I am confident that it 
ought to be possible to find a way.  Unless there is anything that 
counsel for the former President or Mr Pretorius wants to say I am 
happy that we adjourn.  I think both indicate that they have nothing to 
say.  We therefore adjourn until Friday 10:00 am.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 19 JULY 2019 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
