 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
17 JULY 2020 
 
 
DAY 234 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757 
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 255 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
17 JULY 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 3 of 255 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 17 JULY 2020 
CHAIRPERSON: Good morning Ms Hofmeyr, good morning 
everybody. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I see that you seem to be optimistic that it 
is not going to be so cold. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Today. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I am trying to add something to the 
prospect so… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Let us continue. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Mothibe when we 
concluded matters yesterday we had been looking at the 
press coverage from the Business Day in relation to the 
Ernst and Young review and I had asked you whether you 
could 
assist 
in 
looking 
through 
the 
working 
files 
in 
anticipation of today and whether you were able to find any 
media articles that had been collected by your team under 
the 2016 audit procedures.  Were you able to find those? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair I looked at the file I could not – I 
20 
would not – was not able to identify any – any of those.  
Safe to say Chair as I did indicate yesterday the collection of 
the review of media reports it is not a requirement in terms 
of the other standards.  It is one of the parties that we had 
and there are also a number of other ways that we do 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 4 of 255 
 
accumulate audit evidence. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  But then the facts are Nkonki your joint 
audit partner for the previous year collected extensive media 
articles each month of the year as part of the audit 
procedure but your PwC team in the subsequent year did not 
do that.  Is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair Nkonki did that as part of their own 
procedures and in keeping with PwC it is part of our 
procedures, we did look at that in the previous year. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes and in your year, the 2016 year ending 
10 
31 March 2016 you did not.  
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair we did not do that.  We used other way 
– methods of procedures to accumulate audit evidence and 
to determine our risk assessment. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  But was it not a designed part of your audit 
procedures that you would collect media articles? 
MR MOTHIBE:  No Chair it was not part of exact procedures 
it was an audit [?] procedure that we had – would be.  As I 
indicated it is not a requirement of the ISIS that one reviews 
media reports.   
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Mr Mothibe I accept subject to something I 
am going to come to in relation to reportable irregularities 
that it may not be a requirement of the ISIS but your own 
audit procedures that EGA that we looked at indicated that 
you would on a monthly basis and regularly check media 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 5 of 255 
 
articles, did it not? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair that EGA was – is not part of the 
standard EGA’s that are in the PwC audit guide.  It is an 
additional step that we had added.  So it is – as I indicated it 
is not a standard requirement Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But Ms Hofmeyr makes it clear to you 
that 
she 
understands 
the 
part 
about 
it 
not 
being 
a 
requirement and maybe – and maybe one should say a 
requirement falling under a certain category maybe.  But she 
is saying or at least part of what I think she is saying is as a 
10 
matter of fact you have Nkonki who had been doing that and 
if I am not mistaken you said yourself yesterday and – but 
you must tell me if I misunderstood it is a good practice to 
do that.  And I think her – her real enquiry is since it is a 
good practice to do this since another firm was doing it why 
did you not do it?  Ms Hofmeyr you – is that part of what you 
are looking for? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed.  Chair the only aspect I added is 
that we looked at that EGA the Evidence Gathering Activity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Which has been designed in their own 
audit procedures. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And it stipulated that media articles would 
be looked at. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 6 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  As a source. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, actually I think that was the last – last 
point she was asking. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To say but if it is in that Evidence 
Gathering document. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Activity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh activity it – it says you are supposed to 
do it. 
10 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It might not be seen as maybe an essential 
requirement but you are expected to do it. 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair as I indicated it is an extra step that 
we added.  It is not only – on the standard EGA requirements 
it is not there.  It was an extra step that we added and I think 
Chair I did agree to that. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed.  And then you did not follow in the 
2016 audit your own step? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair that step was not there in the 2016 
20 
file.  So it is not – it would not be entirely correct to say we 
did not follow that because it was not in the – in the file – 
the step did not exist. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But when you say it was not in the file you 
are not suggesting that at that time that was not one of the 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 7 of 255 
 
steps in terms of which in terms of the firm’s policy you were 
supposed to take.  You are not saying that it was introduced 
after.  You are not saying that or are you – that step? 
MR MOTHIBE:  I am not too sure I understand the Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. That step of media gathering.  I am 
saying – I am asking whether you mean that at that time 
when you did this audit you mean that this step had not been 
introduced by PwC as – as part of what you would do. 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that what you are saying? 
10 
MR MOTHIBE:  Yes Sir – Chair as I indicated Chair in 2016, 
we – it was an extra step that we added it is not part of the 
mandatory steps that is included in our own process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes when was it introduced – this media 
step? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair it was not introduced it was an extra 
step that we added because of what we considered to be a 
necessary process to gather evidence or to understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But when was it – when was it added? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Had it been – had it been added already at 
the time you were doing this audit? 
MR MOTHIBE:  No Chair it had not been added Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was it added afterwards? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair I do not know – Chair as I indicated it 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 8 of 255 
 
is not part of the process it was an extra step that as a team 
we thought we should add to help us in the risk – with the 
risk gathering – risk assessment process so it has never 
been added.  It is an extra step that the team took. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  I am trying to get us to a point 
where we are on the same place.  So that is why I was now 
using the word – the verb, added because that is the verb 
you used.  Now I am going to use took.  Now when did you 
as a team take this decision to have this step as an extra 
step?  When was that? 
10 
MR MOTHIBE:  As I indicated Chair.  For the 2015 year we 
decided to add that step, that extra step in our file. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOTHIBE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So at the time when you were doing the 
audit in 2015 or for the 2015/2016 financial year was it 
there?  Had you taken the step to add this extra step? 
MR MOTHIBE:  In 2015 yes Chair it was there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.   
ADV HOFMEYR:  And then in 2016 you did not follow that 
20 
step Mr Mothibe.  Could we have just a clear answer to that 
question? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Yes the step was not added in 2016. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Was not followed? 
MR MOTHIBE:  No, no it was not added on the file. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 9 of 255 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Mr Mothibe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.   
MR MOTHIBE:  I think Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let – let us put this.  The step is 
media gathering if we give it an acronym, is that right? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja news gathering through the media. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  That is the step. 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  So did you do that in the 20 – or the 
2015/2016 financial year? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair we did that in the 2015 financial year 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  2015/2016 financial year? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair sorry just so we get the financial 
20 
years right.  As I understand it you did it for the financial 
year ending 31 March 2015, is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You did not do it for the year ending 31 
March 2016? 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 10 of 255 
 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And it was the year 31 March 2016 when 
PwC took over the primary performance responsibility for 
SCM compliance, correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Yes that area was allocated to us in 2016 
Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Whereas the previous year it 
had been Nkonki’s performance responsibility, correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Mr Mothibe I said that I keep promising I 
am going to come to the reportable irregularities’ guides 
reference to the need to look at press reporting or third-party 
sources.  You indicated yesterday if I recall your evidence 
that you were aware of that requirement of the Irba guide for 
reportable irregularities.  Did I have your evidence correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair I am – alive to the requirements of the 
Irba Guide on reportable irregularities. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So I do not then suggest we need to go 
20 
there but just to refresh your memory.  What the guide says 
– fell free to pull it up if you want to but I do not suggest it is 
necessary for you to go there Chair.  It is in DD19C at page 
129.  It is a section of the Irba reportable irregularities guide 
for auditors and it says at paragraph 7.1.3: 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 11 of 255 
 
“The auditor also considers matters which come to the 
auditor’s knowledge from third party sources.  For instance, 
criminal charges, allegations of non-compliance raids, press 
coverage of suspicious or suspicions or enquiries directed to 
the auditor would be information which the auditor should 
consider 
in 
determining 
whether 
reportable 
irregularity 
exists.” 
 
Mr Mothibe I would like to then draw your attention to 
another article that your team failed to consider in the audit 
for the year ending 31 March 2016.  And that is a particularly 
10 
important article because it traverses in quite extensive 
detail 
the 
concerns 
that 
were 
happening 
within 
the 
management of SAA towards the end of 2015.  It is specific 
about the Swiss Port contract and what appears from the 
face of the article to be very concerning events happening 
around it.  That is an article you will find in Exhibit DD19C 
which is in your first file at page 132 point 21.1.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it 132 point 21.1? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed, Chair and I am going to try today 
not to ever go to a fourth point if I can possibly help it. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Because it is terribly difficult to find the 
pages. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So Mr Mothibe this is an article – a money 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 12 of 255 
 
web article that you will see if you just flip through it spans a 
total of four pages and it is entitled SAA Defies National 
Treasury and DTI Instruction.  CFO resigns.  Board persists 
with 30% procurement set aside and it is dated 17 November 
2015.  I would like to flag a few points in this article because 
had your team been doing this media checking it would have 
come across some of these pertinent items in this article.  I 
am reading from the middle of the first page and asked by 
italicized words. 
“The SAA board is persisting with efforts to have 30% of its 
10 
procurement contracts set aside for transformation partners.  
In defiance of express instructions by National Treasury and 
the Department of Trade and Industry to stop this practice.  
Against this background tensions between board and top 
officials who continued to war against unlawful practices is 
reaching breaking point.  This has become clear from a 
money web investigation into efforts to amend the SAA 
ground handling contract with Swiss Port International. 
 
So that is the introduction and then I will flag a few 
other important points over the page at 132.21.2 I will pick it 
20 
up at the second paragraph: 
“Money Web has since learnt that both National Treasury and 
the DTI wrote to the SAA board in September to advise it 
that SAA’s 30% requirement does not comply with the BBBEE 
Act the codes of good practice or the procurement legal 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 13 of 255 
 
framework.” 
 
And then you can click and actually see the letter 
that National Treasury sent to the SAA board or click on the 
second link and go and read the letter from the DTI.  If we 
go on there is an indication of some of the content of the 
letter.  On September 13 DTI acting BBBEE commissioner 
Zondwa Ntuli wrote: 
“SAA should not proceed to implement the 30% set aside 
until approval is applied for from the Minister of Trade and 
Industry.” 
10 
 
And on September 28 Chief – sorry Treasury Chief 
Procurement Officer Kenneth Brown wrote: 
“The resolutions of the board to set aside the 30% in its 
current form is not supported by any procurement legal 
framework and must be stopped with immediate effect.” 
 
It goes on: 
“From email correspondence that Money Web has seen 
between SAA head of Supply Chain Management Doctor 
Masimba Dahwa, Kwinana and Chief – a SAA Chief financial 
officer Wolf Meyer it is however clear that Kwinana was 
20 
driving the amendment of the Swiss Port contract to include 
a 30% BEEE partner from November 1.” 
 
If we move on a little bit further down under the 
heading Changing Contract Dates we read: 
“In the correspondence Dahwa points out that changing the 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 14 of 255 
 
commencement date of the Swiss Port contract from the 
original date in 2011 to 2015 could be challenged legally.” 
 
And then the second paragraph: 
“Kwinana responds by brushing this concern aside and 
asking whether Dahwa will implement the board resolutions 
on the matter.” 
 
It goes on: 
“Meyer to whom Dahwa reports and who also serves on the 
board then takes over and writes a long response about the 
Swiss 
Port 
agreement 
as 
well 
as 
our 
Engen 
board 
10 
memorandum.  He warns in detail against several aspects of 
the proposed amendment at Swiss Port agreement that 
would not be – that would be non-compliant with Supply 
Chain principles, the Public Finance Management Act and 
good governance.” 
 
And then if we skip to the penultimate paragraph: 
“Meyer concludes by stating SAA is currently exposed to and 
cannot 
afford 
an 
audit 
report 
containing 
findings 
of 
governance transgressions.” 
 
And a last aspect of the article I would just like to 
20 
flag for your attention is over to the following page at page 
132.21.3.  There is a reference there to a response that Ms 
Kwinana gave to Money Web when they were preparing this 
report at least this article and it is in the second paragraph.  
She is quoted there as saying: 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 15 of 255 
 
“That she had said that the Swiss Port file was brought to 
the 
board 
for 
approval 
and 
that 
the 
prospected 
transformation partner Ganicron [?] Pty Ltd was brought by 
Swiss Port.” 
 
Chair I am just going to pause there.  Some of those 
facts about the Swiss Port contracts are still going to be 
traversed in the evidence of Mr Ndzeko who is still 
scheduled to appear before the commission and whom we 
had not got to receiving his evidence in February.  And Mr 
Mothibe just to mention Doctor Dahwa who is referred to in 
10 
this article is somebody who has previously been given – 
who has previously given evidence before this commission 
and he spoke about a fateful Friday evening at which he was 
put under eight hours of pressure to sign the very Swiss Port 
contract with this 30% set aside and persistently refused to 
do so on the basis that it would be unlawful. 
So that is the background Mr Mothibe that your team 
I submit would have benefitted from if it had considered that 
media article.  With hindsight do you regret that they did not 
consider it? 
20 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair as Ms Hofmeyr has indicated in terms 
of the – the guidance on identifying reportable irregularities 
we consider matters that come to our attention even if they 
come from the media.  This matter had not come to our 
attention from the work that we had done and therefore we 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 16 of 255 
 
would not have been able to consider it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But the question is a different one as I 
understand it. 
MR MOTHIBE:  Yes Chair I am – I was going to give the 
ground Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Alright. 
MR MOTHIBE:  And had the information come to our 
attention do our audit would certainly have taken a view on 
that and following it through Chair.  Because there are 
issues there at risk anyway. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  If you had followed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Apologies Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please you will just have to raise your 
voice.  
MR MOTHIBE:  I shall do so Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have asked them to switch off the air 
conditioner so that one – I will see whether we will be as 
cold as we were yesterday and two hopefully, I can hear you 
better.  Please just repeat the points you were making and 
20 
raise your voice. 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair just – the closing one Chair to say that 
had the information come to our attention we would have – 
we would have raised red flags and would have responded 
on that Chair. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 17 of 255 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Mr Mothibe do you accept that this article 
sets out important information about what was going on at 
SAA? 
MR 
MOTHIBE: 
 
The 
article 
does 
set 
out 
important 
information Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Do you agree that those letters that 
National Treasury and the DTI wrote to SAA would have been 
something you ought to have considered if you had been 
aware of this coverage? 
MR MOTHIBE:  There has been of interest to us Chair. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And do you accept that if you had 
implemented the procedure in the financial year ending 31 
March 2016 to consider media reports this would likely have 
come to your attention? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair as I indicated despite the fact that it is 
not a requirement of the – of the standards had it been there 
Chair and had the team identify the article it would have 
been of interest to us Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How easy would it have been for your team 
to come across this article if they had done the gathering of 
20 
information from media articles?  Would there have been – is 
there any – big chance that you might not have come across 
it, do you know? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Having its – bearing in mind its source who 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 18 of 255 
 
published it and so on? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair I cannot say whether it would have 
been easy or not.  Safe to say Chair we – there is a big 
[indistinct] of media articles out there and if they had 
searched Chair it may have come up as part of the search. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You might wish to take that further Ms 
Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But – and you may have been intending to 
anyway. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it is also important to see what the 
chances are that they would have missed it if they had done 
this exercise. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I would like to suggest the chances are 
extremely slim Chair.  And the reason I say that is because 
in the six pages that comprise the media reports that they 
picked up for the previous financial year there are numerous 
reports from both News24 and Fin24 and I stand corrected 
but my understanding is Fin24 does publish the Money Web 
20 
articles.  So it was clearly on their radar to collect these 
particular news items.  I suspect you can assist me Mr 
Mothibe the way that they might have done it is a general 
review each month.  It seems to be monthly that they pull out 
important media reports that come from – that relate to SAA, 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 19 of 255 
 
is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair I am not too sure if they can 
necessarily say it is a monthly process but I just say if you 
go into the internet and you search.  You will get – you might 
get quite a lot but I would – they did not do that on a monthly 
basis, no Chair.  This is not how they approached it. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair I must indicate I asked my learned 
friend Ms Armstrong to check me on my assumption that 
Fin24 publishes for Money Web that is not the case.  But 
there are numerous publications in the six pages of media 
10 
reports from the previous year and so my proposition to Mr 
Mothibe stands.  I put to you Mr Mothibe that it is very 
unlikely that an article with this in-depth attention to SAA 
published online by Money Web would not have been an 
article that came to the attention of your team if they were 
doing this work.  What is your response to that?   
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair as Ms Hofmeyr said earlier in 
reviewing the previous years a lot of them Fin24, News24 
and there is not much from Money Web any.  So Chair I think 
I can say Chair do a – done a search and whether it will be 
20 
picked up or not Chair I cannot – I honestly cannot say 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did your team or would your team have 
taken notes of how Nkonki had done this before – in the year 
before and maybe checking the sources that they had used 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 20 of 255 
 
or would that not be something that your team would have 
checked?  I am just thinking that if somebody else has been 
doing a job the previous year and you come in you might 
wish to see how they went about things and if you came 
across the fact that they have also used – they gathered 
information from the media you might look at the sources 
that they were using – you know looking at all the main 
newspapers or TV or whatever and then saying, well are we 
going to do the same, look at the same sources or we 
choose some of the sources?  Or you might see that for 
10 
example maybe Business Day appeared to have been very 
helpful to your predecessors and therefore you might wish to 
– to ensure that Business Day or the Star is one of those 
that you look at? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair off the top of my head I would not think 
that it would be one of the steps they would have taken.  
Chair the work that [indistinct] we performed have been 
subject to a considered view and we importantly focus on the 
significant issues first before you look…  And in my 
experience Chair if you follow through a process, I would not 
20 
think that this would necessarily be that high up on the list. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm; 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Mothibe you clarified 
for us yesterday that you only saw the board resolution 
relating to this contract at some point between April and 30 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 21 of 255 
 
September 2016, is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  My recollection Chair is that the – there was 
a review of board minutes which had been delegated and I 
had access to extras of those board minutes and the full 
resolutions Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Apologies but somebody in your team 
would have looked at it, is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Somebody in my team would have looked at 
some of the board minutes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes but I understood your evidence 
10 
yesterday to be you had received this particular board 
minute – at least resolution related to this decision.  Did I 
have your evidence correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair yes I did receive it Chair as Ms 
Hofmeyr indicated but the review was then delegated Chair, I 
did not do the review myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And the person who was doing the review 
in your team would that be the person who was looking at all 
relevant board minutes and board resolutions? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair I would have to look at the file 
20 
because it would have been more than one person because 
there is different minutes that we had access to and Chair 
they would have looked at samples of those as there – as 
and when required Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You see if that team was doing this work in 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 22 of 255 
 
reviewing 
the 
minutes 
and 
the 
resolutions 
and 
were 
communicating with each other I want to suggest to you that 
they would have noticed that when the board usually takes 
procurement decisions the resolution talks about the process 
that 
has 
been 
followed. 
 
It 
talks 
about 
the 
BAC 
recommendation because the usual procurement process is 
coming from BAC to the board and then the board confirms 
whether it approves or disapproves the BAC’s decision.  Is 
that something you are familiar with in the governance 
structure at SAA? 
10 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And then they would have found this 
resolution of the 14 March 20 – sorry 14 March 2016 and 
would have seen that it reads quite differently.  So I would 
like to take you to it.  It is at page 132 in the same bundle 
that you are busy in DDC at 132.43, 43.   
MR MOTHIBE:  I have it Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you have that Mr Mothibe? 
MR MOTHIBE:  I have it Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So this is a resolution of the SAA board of 
20 
directors and it is entitled Request for SAA board to approve 
the terms and conditions for the Swiss Port SAA contract and 
note the contract duration period effective from 1 April 2016 
until 31 March 2021 for ground handling services and cargo 
services to be rendered at Johannesburg, Cape Town, 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 23 of 255 
 
Durban, Port Elizabeth and East London.  It says the board 
by Round Robin 2016/ - I think that is B05 as of 14 March 
2016 resolved too.  And then the resolutions are as follows: 
Approve the contract to be entered into with Swiss Port SA 
for the duration of five years commencing on 1 April to 31 
March 2020 and then it stipulates what it covers and then… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not think you mentioned the year or 
after April and the 31s t. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Oh apologies sounds like. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I think you said after March 2020 
instead of 2021. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Apologies let… 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
If 
we 
are 
looking 
at 
the 
same 
...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:  My error.  Let me go again.  So what they 
resolved to do was to approve the contract to be entered into 
with Swiss Port South Africa for the duration of five years, 
commencing on 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2021, covering 
20 
ramp handling, PAU’s, wheelchairs, GPU’s and air site crew 
transport to be rendered at Johannesburg, Cape Town, 
Durban, Port Elizabeth and East London with the following 
conditions. 
A. Swiss Port South Africa to acquire all the GPU 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 24 of 255 
 
equipment that has been purchased by SAAT.  
(That is South African Airways Technical). 
B. Swiss Port South Africa to enter into a contract 
with a BBBEE company that has representation of 
black women, youth, military veterans and disabled 
persons from which Swiss Port will purchase all 
their equipment required for the SAA contract. 
 
And 2 reads: 
“To note the feedback of the negotiations and 
approve the execution of the contract with Swiss Port 
10 
South Africa...” 
 
Mr Mothibe, I want to put it to you that if your team had 
looked at this resolution, it would have stuck out as different 
to the ordinary resolutions where the board takes a decision 
on 
procurement 
because 
it 
traverses 
none 
of 
that 
procurement procedure that you would usually find in such a 
resolution.  Do you accept that? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, having not seen or at least all the 
other resolutions, I am not too sure I can necessarily 
comment on that Chair. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Well, you accepted earlier what the 
procurement process was in SAA.  Is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And if I say to you, you must take it as 
assumed for this, that other resolutions of the board when 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 25 of 255 
 
that procurement process is followed, is specific about “We 
approve the BAC recommendations which record that the 
award of the tender should go to whoever”. 
 
If that is what the standard resolution looks like and a 
member of your team gets this resolution, do you accept that 
this resolution would read differently? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That will be correct. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And if your team had been reading the 
Moneyweb article, then the reference to the BBBEE company 
that is going to be getting a portion of this contract, might 
10 
have raised a flag for it, might it not? 
MR MOTHIBE:  If we had sight of the article.  Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  But that article was explaining how 
National Treasury and the DTI had demanded that SAA seize 
with immediate affect its endeavours to set aside 30% of its 
contract outside of the procurement framework.  Did you see 
that in the article? 
MR MOTHIBE:  In that article as shared with us today here.  
Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Now Mr Mothibe, you have 
20 
indicated that there were no processes followed in the 
financial year ending 31 March 2016 to review media.  I 
accept that.   
 
But can you tell me what your processes are for dealing 
with subsequent events that comes to your attention after 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 26 of 255 
 
the end of an audit year that you are doing the audit on? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, the Audit Standards require that we 
consider all subsequent events that impact the numbers of 
the financial year that the present financial year, to the 
extent that what has not yet signed ...[indistinct]  
ADV HOFMEYR:  But if something comes to your attention, 
despite the fact that your team was not looking at the media 
reports, but if somewhere between 1 April 2016 and 
30 September 2016, when you signed the audit report about 
this contract and the concerns about it, would that have 
10 
required your attention? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That will be correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Did this contract and its irregularity come 
to your attention in that period? 
MR MOTHIBE:  It did not come to my attention Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Did you in the course of your processes 
look at what Internal Control within SAA was saying about 
the contract that it entered into? 
MR MOTHIBE:  I am not too sure I understand the question 
Chair. 
20 
ADV 
HOFMEYR: 
 
Apologies. 
 
The 
Internal 
Control 
Department within SAA would regularly review its own 
processes, would it not? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That should be correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And did you look at Internal Controls when 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 27 of 255 
 
you were doing your audit work? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, when we... from the audit of South 
African Airways and as part of the requirements of the 
standards, we did an assessment at company level, looking 
at the issues Chair relating to governance, management, 
competency and the controls that they have in place. 
 
And we have, after review Chair, consider that and we 
could 
not 
allow 
Internal 
Controls 
and 
their 
approach 
adopted.  South African Airways was a substantive audit 
approach Chair. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And did you ever ask for the Internal Audit 
Team’s own findings on regularity, procurement and contract 
management to be fed through to your team? 
MR MOTHIBE:  The Internal Audit Reports Chair were 
provided to us.  It is one of the audit steps that we undertake 
and they were also included in the minutes of the Audit 
Committee. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So were you aware of the Internal Audit 
Team’s report on the 15t h of September 2016 that found that 
the Swiss Port contract had been concluded irregularly 
20 
because no competitive process was followed? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, I am trying to recall Chair if in 
September 2016 we had received those minutes Chair. 
ADV 
HOFMEYR: 
 
No, 
you 
were 
filing 
on 
the 
30t h of September.  Should you not have contented yourself 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 28 of 255 
 
that those documents had been made available to you before 
you signed off? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, we reviewed what was made available 
to ourselves and what were requested.  Hence, Chair I am 
trying to recollect whether or not that... at the time of the 
year, we had access to those minutes. 
 
Chair, the... one of the biggest issues that occupied us 
as we got to close to signature of the Audit Opinion then it 
occupied both partners and both audit teams, time was 
needed... the challenge around who it concerns. 
10 
 
Where we critical ...[indistinct] stage Chair where we 
part of raising ...[indistinct] because we obviously just 
something always had with the cash-flow issues and the 
...[indistinct] status. 
 
And Chair, 15 September Chair if memory serves me 
right Chair, I cannot recall having read those minutes but I 
stand to be corrected Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Well, let me just take you to them.  It is the 
report that you find, it is next to the ...[indistinct] report.  You 
will find at page... in the same bundle, DD19C at page 
20 
132.53.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You might confuse the reader of the 
transcript in due course.  You have now been referring to the 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 29 of 255 
 
bundle as 19C.  [laughs]  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair, the file is actually 19C but that is 
because of the method we used yesterday and I am sorry it 
does 
not 
accord 
with 
what 
is 
on 
your 
spine. 
 
So 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but what I am saying is.  I think it is 
more 
accurate 
if 
you 
say 
exhibit 
rather 
than 
bundle 
...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...because ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  No, no.  That is where the error is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...when you say bundle, people will look on 
the spine. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Oh, that is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Absolutely Chair.  I do apologise. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And to correct the record.  It is EXHIBIT 
DD19C at page 143.53.1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So this is an excerpt of the report from a 
member of Internal Audit to... well, the Head of Procurement 
at that stage at SAA, Mr Lester Peter.  That is where we 
have 
picked 
it 
up 
in 
an 
email 
circulated 
on 
the 
15t h of September 2016.  I will take you to that in a moment 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 30 of 255 
 
Mr Mothibe. 
 
But this is the report that is attached to that email and 
what it is headed there at the top of the page at page 
132.53.1 under the paragraph 11.1 is, “Contravention of 
Treasury Regulations and SAA SC and Policy (Swiss Port 
Contract)”. 
 
And the audit finding rating is high.  And then what this 
document does is, that it sets out the legal requirements, 
Treasury Regulation 16A.6.1.  It records the resolution of the 
board in that block that says finding.   
10 
 
And then if you go over the page to page 132.53.2, you 
will see in the block third from the bottom that is entitled 
“Risk/Implication”. 
 
What the Internal Audit Team of SAA had determined 
was the risk related to this contract.  It reads as follows: 
“None-compliance with the Treasury Regulations with 
departments 
trading 
entities, 
constitutional 
institutions and public entities of March 2005...” 
 
And the next bullet reads “Exclusion of Competitive Bids 
or Pricing”.  And you will see in the next block of that table, 
20 
there is a heading “Route Course”.   
 
And they identify that the route course is that SAA Port 
and Swiss Port could not agree on the transformation aspect 
of the contract. 
 
And then under the section headed “Recommendation” 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 31 of 255 
 
right at the bottom, the first bullet reads: 
“The services should have been procured through a 
competitive bidding process in line with the DOA 
Approval and Reporting Process...” 
 
So do I take it Mr Mothibe that you did not see that 
report before you signed your audited opinion on the 
30t h of September 2016? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, that will be correct.  If my memory 
serves me right, the last audit committee meeting that we 
had was sometime in August and I would not have been 
10 
aware of this ...[indistinct] minute before I signed. 
 
And as I did indicate Chair that we... at that time we 
were all invested in trying to get ...[indistinct] comfort on the 
growing concerns ...[indistinct] of South African Airways 
because it was quite a big critical issue at the time Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Do you accept ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I may have missed something.  Is this... 
does this come from PwC report? 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  This comes from... no.  From the Internal 
Audit Team within SAA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So they were reviewing their own tender 
compliance ...[intervenes]  
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 32 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  ...and in September 2016, that internal 
audit... Internal Control Team ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  ... is saying, this ...[indistinct] [coughing] 
did not follow procurement processes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And my question to Mr Mothibe was, did it 
come to his attention?  And he has indicated in his evidence 
it did not.  I think further, in fairness Chair.   
10 
 
Mr Mothibe, you make the point that your last... the last 
Audit and Risk Committee meeting had occurred in August.  
So this comes later.  It is 15t h of September 2016.  So it was 
not brought to your attention in the August meeting.  Is that 
right. 
MR MOTHIBE:  If memory serves me right, that is correct. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would it be correct to say, had it been 
available much earlier, there is no way you would have 
missed it? 
20 
MR MOTHIBE:  If it had been available earlier Chair, we 
would not have missed it and it is one of those items that 
would had to then be reported under none-compliance with 
laws and regulations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, my logic says to me.  If your External 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 33 of 255 
 
Auditors to an entity, it is to be expected but I could be quite 
wrong.  It could be expected that you would look at whatever 
the Internal Auditors have been doing.  See what they can 
give you.  What they have picked up.   
 
Obviously, assess if they have, you know, picked up 
everything that should be picked up.  Still do your job 
independently but it could assist.  If you ignore what they 
have done, could miss something quite important. 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, we do engage with Internal Audit 
...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOTHIBE:  ...on their work.  They assist us in identifying 
areas of risks where we should be focussing on because... 
So yes, Chair.  Internal Audit is ...[indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Is an important step? 
MR MOTHIBE:  ...that we did talk ...[indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And if that would come to your attention, 
would you have confidently resolved that... this R 1,8 billion 
contract constituted irregular expenditure? 
20 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, it would not have resulted in an 
irregular expenditure because the contract had just been 
entered into.  So if there has been none-compliance with law 
and regulations in that... in the supply chain, management 
process not been followed.   
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 34 of 255 
 
 
It is only when they start expanding on that that it 
becomes irregular expenditure.  So that would have been... 
because the contract is from 1 April 2016 the subsequent 
year.   
 
In that year, it then becomes irregular expenditure.  So 
at the end, it would only have been none-compliance with 
laws and regulations. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Is expenditure not incurred when the 
liability is incurred for the entity? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, if I read this correctly.  This is a 
10 
contract that takes... whose term starts on the 1 s t of April.  
So it is a commitment to procure senses(?) from Swiss Port. 
 
So what they will do is.  Depending on the contract, 
whether it be on a monthly basis, they will then issue 
invoices. 
 
So it is only when the... if... when the expense is then 
incurred that that becomes irregular expenditure. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  But the liability... there is a liability for five 
years on a stipulated bases and that liability was incurred 
when the contract was concluded on the 15t h of March 2016. 
20 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, it is not a liability Chair.  It is a 
commitment.  It only becomes a liability when the services 
have been provided and all settlement then it is an expense 
but ...[indistinct] Chair the matter(?) is not a liability in terms 
of the accounting framework is a commitment. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 35 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just to see if one can look what appears to 
be a difference in approach between yourself and Ms 
Hofmeyr.  Are you saying from an auditor’s point of view a 
liability, 
which 
Ms 
Hofmeyr 
is 
talking 
about 
and 
the 
commitment which you are talking about. 
 
You are saying you cannot talk about an irregular 
expenditure from an auditor’s point of view or as you 
understand it the position unclear or there has been... until 
there has been payment, until there has been expenditure on 
that commitment or that liability.  Is that what you are 
10 
saying? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair.  It cannot be an 
irregular expenditure because there has been no spent. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because there has been no expenditure as 
yet. 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So each year of those five years when 
payments were made in terms of the contract, it would then 
have constituted irregular expenditure, correct? 
20 
MR MOTHIBE:  Yes, from the time that it becomes 
expenditure, yes.  It then becomes irregular expenditure.  In 
the 
subsequent 
years 
we 
were 
not 
auditors 
Chair 
...[indistinct]  
ADV HOFMEYR:  And Mr Mothibe, if we can then go through 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 36 of 255 
 
the elements of the reportable irregularity obligation on you 
as the auditor in respect of this Swiss Port Contract.  You 
remember the first is that there is an unlawful act.   
 
I understand your evidence to be that you have already 
accepted that this contract was entered into in a manner that 
was not compliant with the PFMA.  Is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is the case Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And it would then have constituted an 
unlawful act, correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, it is an unlawful act. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And was it committed by a person 
responsible for the management of an entity... of the entity. 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, it was committed by the board which 
was management before governance of entity Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And then after remaining three alternative 
requirements for the reportable irregularity.  I would like to 
focus on the material breach of judiciary duty aspect. 
 
Mr Mothibe, we have looked at the media articles that 
flagged this 30% set-aside policy which was in the view of 
National Treasury and the DTI an unlawful step for the 
20 
company to take.  You accepted that was what the media 
reporting at the time, correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  If one looks at the article.  That is what... 
that is correct Chair.  
ADV HOFMEYR:  And you may have noticed in that article 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 37 of 255 
 
that Mr Meyer who was the CEO... CFO at the time at SAA, 
had warned particularly about the risks for SAA if it would 
continue to embark on this policy because it would have 
damaging consequences for the reputation of the entity, as 
well as, potentially expose it to adverse Audit Opinions.  Did 
you see that? 
MR MOTHIBE:  I saw it in the article Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And you did not ever actually see those 
National Treasure and the Department of Trade and Industry 
letters?   
10 
 
Because there you have early informed the Commission 
that you were charged with disciplinary proceedings by the 
Regulatory Board of Auditors. 
 
And you have consented to accepting breaches of the 
Auditors Code and your obligations under the Auditing 
Professions Act.  Is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, that is correct. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And if we go to your supplementary 
statement, you will find it in EXHIBIT DD19B which is in the 
first file that we are still working in and you will pick it up at 
20 
page 30.2.  Three, zero point two.   
MR MOTHIBE:  I have it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I have got it too. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So at paragraph 7, you are referring to the 
draft charges that you received from IRBA and you are 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 38 of 255 
 
explaining here the basis for your entering into a consent 
order with IRBA.  Did that consent order include an 
acknowledgement of the fact that you have breached 
relevant provisions? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, the consent order is in relation to 
what I considered to that... Chair, we should have as 
auditors 
disclosed 
a 
none-compliance 
with 
law 
and 
regulations in the Audit Opinion. 
 
It was immediately(?) identified when we performed our 
work and reported to management and that we also reported 
10 
to the Audit Committee. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So what you first accept is that your failure 
to disclose material none-compliance with Legislation and 
Internal Control deficiencies for the year 2014 and 2015.  Is 
that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And you accept that you do not distance 
yourself from your obligations as a joint auditor for those two 
years or be it that Nkonki performed the audit work on those 
aspect, correct? 
20 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, that will be correct. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And you have also accepted that there was 
none-compliance with legislations in Internal Control in the 
2016 year.  Is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, that is correct. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 39 of 255 
 
ADV 
HOFMEYR: 
 
And 
the 
consequences 
of 
those 
concessions Mr Mothibe is that the Audit Opinions for all 
three of those years were incorrect.  Is that right? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, what... and maybe to put it... 
emphasise Chair.  That when you carry out the audit, there 
were two parts.   
 
The first part Chair is the audit in terms of the 
International Standards of Auditing, where we were having a 
look at the numbers to show that we... the financial 
statements fairly presented ...[indistinct] operations for the 
10 
period under review and the cash-flows. 
 
Chair, that work was performed and we were able to 
obtain sufficient comfort numbers in the financial statements 
were properly(?) disclosed Chair and that there was no 
material mistake in those numbers Chair. 
 
The area where this concern audit relates to Chair.  It 
relates purely on the compliance side of the audit in that we 
have identified areas of... or areas where there were 
deviations 
from 
required 
...[indistinct] 
processes 
which 
should have been elevated to the ...[indistinct] 
20 
 
As I indicate Chair, we did raise these matters with the... 
with management and with the Audit Committee but we 
omitted to include them in the Audit Opinion. 
 
So Chair, in a nutshell, the Audit Opinion as far as it 
relates to the fair presentation of the numbers Chair, we still 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 40 of 255 
 
stand by that. 
 
Chair, we are happy that we have done sufficient work.  
It is only as it relates to the compliance of laws and 
regulations that we could have did(?) more Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Mr Mothibe, I try to make a note of exactly 
how you put it in your answer.  You said the aspects of 
compliance with legislation accept and Internal Control 
should have been elevated to the Audit Opinion.  Did I get 
that right? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is what I am saying Chair. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I want to put it to you that it is worth and it 
simply should have been elevated and it was not elevated 
but that suggests there was something that should have 
been there that was not. 
 
In fact, what was there was false because you gave a 
clean bill of health on compliance with Legislation and 
Internal Control. 
 
So the outside reader of this auditor’s report for 2016, 
gets a false impression of the state of compliance with 
Legislation and Internal Control at SAA.  Do they not? 
20 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, it is important to note that at one 
never give assurance on the Internal Controls.  We would not 
do that Chair.  Neither... if you look at Audit Opinions of any 
enterprise, the auditor never gives assurance on Internal 
Controls.   
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 41 of 255 
 
 
You give input where on controls that you have reviewed 
specific areas that relates to do audit work or areas that we 
were auditing.  One can never give Chair assurance on 
Internal Controls Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Mr Mothibe, that was not my question.  My 
question was, when an outside reader of your 2016 audit 
report reads: 
“We have performed procedures to obtain evidence 
that the public entity has complied with applicable 
laws and regulations regarding financial matters, 
10 
financial management and other related matters and 
we did not identify any instances of material none-
compliance with specific matters in applicable laws 
and regulations set out in the general notice...” 
 
They would get the wrong impression because there 
were, as I understand your concession, material none-
compliances with applicable laws and regulations, were there 
not? 
MR MOTHIBE:  There were ...[indistinct]... there were items 
that were identified Chair ...[indistinct] as I talked to earlier. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, what do you say to the suggestion by 
Ms Hofmeyr that whoever would read the audit report would 
therefore be mislead by that?  What do you say to that? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, to the extent that the reader would be 
looking at the compliance law and regulations part of it 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 42 of 255 
 
...[indistinct] Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR MOTHIBE:  The... what were disclosed was not accurate 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And what you disclosed in relation to 
Internal Control was also not accurate, correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, as we indicated... as we have 
indicated in our ...[indistinct] audit, we believe that after 
going through the review Chair we could have included more 
10 
in terms of ...[indistinct] in that regard 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes.  Let us talk about when the errors in 
our auditing came to your attention because what is 
noteworthy 
Mr 
Mothibe 
is 
that 
it 
is 
only 
in 
your 
supplementary statement before this Commission that you 
have indicated your acceptance of these deficiencies in your 
audit work.  
 
Now I want to probe with you why you did not make that 
known earlier on in the process?  Because the evidence of 
the auditor general was that when the auditor general moved 
20 
in for the 2016/2017 audit year, they took steps to engage 
with you and your colleague, Ms Masasa about the work that 
you have done. 
 
And in the course of those interactions, the evidence of 
Mr Sokombela for the Auditor General was that, the 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 43 of 255 
 
deficiencies in your approach to Supply Chain Management 
were brought to your attention.  Do you accept that? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, when we engaged with Mr Sokombela, 
we... his office performs work on procurement and contact 
management on a regular basis. 
 
And if I can use the word, they were experts in that area 
and they give that... in looking at the work that were 
performed, they would like to do a bit more work Chair. 
 
Compliance... procurement and contract management is 
a complicate scene(?).  It is that where ...[indistinct]  
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Mr Mothibe, I want to suggest to you that it 
was not simply that there was slight disagreement or a 
difference between the manner in which you had approached 
Supply Chain Management and the approach taken by the 
auditor general. 
 
And I want to refer you to an email that Mr Sokombela 
prepared, recording the outcome of meetings that he had 
with you and Ms Masasa.  And for that purpose, Chair and 
Mr Mothibe, we need to move to a new set of files which is 
Mr Sokombela’s files. 
20 
 
But Chair, I think just before the tea adjournment, maybe 
it is convenient for us to take it now and then we can get the 
new files arranged for you so that we do not have to take the 
time later. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, let us do that.  We will take the tea 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 44 of 255 
 
adjournment now.  Shall we resume at twenty-five-past which 
is fifteen minutes? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or just how...? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Well maybe half-past will be fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe half-past so that ...[intervenes]    
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you, Chair.  Just for a bit more time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. Yes, okay.  Alright.  We will take the 
tea adjournment and resume at half-past eleven.  We 
adjourn. 
10 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS: 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, thank you.  Let us 
proceed. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, Chair.  What we did over the 
break is just made available to you the files containing Mr 
Sokombela’s evidence.  Now his evidence is contained in 
EXHIBIT DD20.  There are four files in DD20 and we have 
asked that what gets placed before is DD20D.  So, Mr 
Mothibe, if you will take at DD20D and …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I see on this file it says 23 and then 
on the first page inside it says 3. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   That is incorrect. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It says EXHIBIT DD20C on the inside but 
outside it is 20D. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 45 of 255 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair, just so that I can check the 
numbering, what page number does it commence within the 
file? 
CHAIRPERSON:   The first page is 1296. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ja, that is not correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is not the correct one? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, we must have the last one.  Alright, 
no, I might just have moved my pages slightly.  What I 
need to take you to is page – let me just see here.  Page 
1804. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   1804? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  My learned friend indicated to me 
it should be in the file in front of you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   1804 are the two emails. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that the correct one? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   That is the correct page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it is the correct bundle but there 
might be …[intervenes] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   There is some page at the front that 
20 
should not be there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So we will sort that out over lunch, if we 
may? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 46 of 255 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Mr Mothibe, do you have page 1804? 
MR MOTHIBE:   I have it, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you.  So I was suggesting to you 
before the break, Mr Mothibe, that there was not, as we 
understand the records of the meetings between the AG’s 
office and yourselves and Nkonki Inc, a small deviation 
between the approach that your teams took to the supply 
chain management  and the approach that the Auditor-
General was taking to it and the reason why I say that is 
because what you find at page 1804 is in the bottom of the 
10 
page, bottom half of the page, an email from Mr Polani 
Sokombela, he is the auditor at the Auditor-General’s office 
who gave evidence before the Commission, it is an email 
sent on Wednesday 13 September 2017 to, amongst 
others, yourself, is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct, Chair.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   And you will see if you go to the 
beginning text of the email he records there: 
“Dear Pule and Thuto” 
Thuto is a reference to Ms Masasa, is that correct? 
20 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   He then records: 
“Our meeting dated 5 September 2017 refers.” 
And he goes on and says: 
“We have since visited PwC and Nkonki on the 11 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 47 of 255 
 
September 2017 to relook at the audit file in an 
attempt to resolve significant matters that were not 
evident on file regarding SAA opening balances.” 
And then he says: 
“Below is the detailed feedback of our review.” 
And if you then go after because there are numerous topics 
he traverses, aircraft parts, furniture and equipment, 
etcetera, but then if you go over to page 1806 you get 
towards the end of his email and you will see just above 
the last paragraph of his email which is just below halfway 
10 
down there is a heading Share Trust and then entered 
under that is the text: 
“No evidence of audit work performed on the share 
trust.” 
And then comes the sentence I want to draw to your 
attention, there is recording there: 
“Regarding SCM we agreed that there was not much 
work that was performed in your file...” 
And underlined: 
“...we will not rely on this work.” 
20 
Do you dispute the record that Mr Sokombela places there 
in his email? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, as I initially mentioned before we 
went into the tea break, we did have interaction with Mr 
Sokombela and in that discussions he did indicate that the 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 48 of 255 
 
office of the AG is an expert when it comes to the audit of 
a supply chain, procurement and contract management and 
therefore they would be able to do – if I can – because 
they excel in that area, they would be doing bit more work 
in that area, Chair, and that is how the discussions and the 
speed of discussions were – in our session, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the question is, do you dispute the 
– what Mr Sokombela is placing on record here? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, that statement does not necessarily 
fully capture what we had discussed. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe Ms Hofmeyr you want to 
take him point by point factually? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, indeed.  So when he states that 
they would not rely on your work is that false? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, he did indicate that they would want 
to do much more work that we had performed. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So is it false that he said he would not 
rely on your work? 
MR MOTHIBE:   The email says that, Chair, but in our 
discussions, Chair, the discussions were more to say they 
20 
were experts in the area, they excel and therefore they 
would to do much more work, Chair.  At this stage, Chair, 
when I received this email – because one reflected on the 
spirit of the discussions in the defence(?) 08.52 I did not 
take this on further, Chair. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 49 of 255 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Did that – I am just trying to understand 
what your last comment means.  Does that mean you did 
not respond to say you are wrong, Mr Sokombela? 
MR MOTHIBE:   I did not respond, Chair, to this. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And is that because you accepted it? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, as I indicated, I reflected on the 
spirit of the discussions that we had with Mr Sokombela 
and as I indicated that the office of the AG does this kind 
of work on a regular continuous basis and that he would 
certainly want to do much more than what we had 
10 
performed.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us go straight to the point.  Mr 
Sokombela seems to be saying here or seems to be 
suggesting that PwC did not do their job in regard to 
certain matters and in regard to this particular one.  Is that 
your understanding of what he is saying as well? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or did not do it properly? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, if I read it, Chair …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you can have a look at it to satisfy 
20 
yourself because you need to reflect before you say you 
agree with my understanding or you do not agree. 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, I am not in full agreement with the 
Chair ’s understanding because if you look at it, Chair, it 
says that we have not done much work.  Not in the sense 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 50 of 255 
 
that we did not do any work, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOTHIBE:   And I think importantly, Chair, if we had 
not done any work, we not have been able to identify 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, I do not think anybody is 
saying you did not do any work, as such. 
MR MOTHIBE:   Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Nobody is saying that.  In regard to this 
particular task that he is talking about under Share Trust, 
10 
that sentence: 
“Regarding SCM we agreed that there was not much 
work that was performed.” 
So he is not saying you did not do any work at all but I 
think he is saying you did very little or a little, maybe not 
very, but little work.  And then he, in terms of what they 
could see in your file, and he says in effect whatever you 
did was such that they were not going to rely on it and that 
suggests to me that what you did was not going to be 
useful to them.   
20 
In other words, they could not build upon what you 
had done, they had to like start afresh in terms of that 
aspect.  That is my understanding of what he says when he 
says it was agreed that you had not done much work and 
we will not rely on this work.  Do you agree with that 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 51 of 255 
 
interpretation of what he is saying? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, the way that the Chair put that is 
acceptable. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I am sorry, I did not hear that? 
MR MOTHIBE:   I said, Chair, the way that you interpreted 
– you mentioned it now that he looked at the work that we 
had performed, compared it to how – he probably would 
have compared it to the amount of work that he would 
perform and said he would like to – he would not rely on 
that.  And, Chair, you mentioned that he would start afresh.  
10 
Chair, the norm would always be that he will still have to 
perform his own work anyway, Chair. Even placing reliance 
does not mean that he will not do any work altogether.  He 
will still have preferred to perform some work to – be the 
opinion that we would have given would relate to our 
financial year and he would have to do work to satisfy 
himself – that in his financial year.  So he would always 
have had to perform his own work anyway, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but in terms of what he says here. 
MR MOTHIBE:   Ja, no… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Apart from what may be happening in 
practice, in terms of what he says here, it seems to me 
that he is saying whether it is because of how little work 
was that you did or whether it is because of the quality, 
maybe poor quality of the work, whatever reason, he 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 52 of 255 
 
concludes that I cannot rely on this work.  That is my 
understanding of what he says. 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, I think I had agreed to that, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You agreed to that. 
MR MOTHIBE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Mr Mothibe, at the beginning of your 
evidence yesterday I have it that you accepted that when 
an external auditor like PwC comes into audit a state-
owned enterprise it does that in a sense on behalf of the 
10 
auditor general.  Did I have your evidence correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Because the Auditor-General is the 
default auditor for state owned enterprises, correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, that is correct. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   But now in your evidence you have 
emphasised 
that 
the 
Auditor-General 
has 
particular 
expertise in an area and I want to put it to you that that is 
not an answer to limit or reduce your obligations as 
external auditors of state owned enterprises because you 
20 
stand in for the Auditor-General.  Do you accept that you 
must do as much as they must do when they audit state 
owned enterprises? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, just a correction, Chair, I did not 
say that the Auditor-General was an expert, I think I said 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 53 of 255 
 
that when we engaged with Mr Sokombela, he said that 
they were experts and they do this on a continuous basis, 
Chair.  I think that clarity, I think it is important, Chair, but 
I did not …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, that is fine but I may have heard 
what Ms Hofmeyr heard at some stage, I thought you said 
earlier in effect that, you see, the AG’s office, when it 
comes to auditing public enterprises they are the experts 
or they have the required expertise, they are the experts 
and my understanding of what you were saying was that 
10 
you were suggesting that look, you should not be surprised 
if when the AG’s office comes in they identify certain things 
that we might not have identified.  Maybe that it not what 
you intended but that was my understanding.  I thought 
that you sought to say, you know, those people do – or 
audit public enterprises all the time, they are experts so 
we are not surprised if they see certain things where we 
might not have done things as well as they would have 
done.  That was my impression but this is the opportunity 
for you to clarify if that was not what you intended to say. 
20 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, I think I said earlier to clarify that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOTHIBE:   Because if I – what I will say is that when 
we engaged with Mr Sokombela, when we spoke about – 
we spoke about the issues of supply chain and could have 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 54 of 255 
 
mentioned that, he indicated that he did do that on a 
continuous basis, they are experts.  They said that, Chair, 
it was not my – this is what I was putting forward to the 
Commission, Chair, and I certainly agree that, Chair, when 
we perform work on the audit, Chair, we do our work, we 
should do it properly and diligently, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so whatever expertise the AG’s 
office may have you are not suggesting that when you, as 
PwC, come in and do an audit of a public enterprise on 
behalf of the AG’s office you are not suggesting that you 
10 
are not able as PwC to perform to the same standards.  
That is not what you are saying. 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, that is not what I am saying, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.   
MR MOTHIBE:   We would not accept an appointment if we 
could not deliver it, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I think that is helpful because I was 
going to say PwC is a very big, you know, auditing firm and 
one would not expect that in terms of the quality of its work 
that it would not be able to – it should not be judged on 
20 
any standard that any auditing firm or even the AG’s office 
could be judged on.  Okay, Ms Hofmeyr, I may or may not 
have helped. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, indeed you have.  Thank you, Chair, 
I am indebted.  Mr Mothibe, that was an email referring to 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 55 of 255 
 
a meeting that you had had on the 5 September.   
If I understand it, there was a further meeting that 
was held on the 18 January 2018 and I would like to take 
you to the minutes of that meeting, it is in the same file, 
that is EXHIBIT DD20D at page 1825.  So it is a little bit 
further on in the file.  You will see that first page indicates 
minutes of a meeting, meeting with predecessor auditors 
dated 15 January 2018 and if you look at the attendees it 
is reflected that you were attendance.  Can you confirm 
that? 
10 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And can you just – do you recall this 
meeting, what was the purpose of the meeting? 
MR MOTHIBE:   This was, Chair, the meeting after the AG 
had completed his audit of South African Airways and the 
aim of the meeting, Chair, they were taking us through the 
final results, he raised a number of qualifications that they 
included in the audit opinion and, if I recall, Chair, it was 
courtesy meeting from the AG because at that stage, Chair, 
they were – were about to sign off the financial statements 
20 
and they had to go and present to parliament. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And if I understand it as it is recorded 
under item 3 on page 185 the main purpose of the meeting 
was to discuss, amongst others, the audit outcomes of SAA 
which may have regressed since the AGSA – that is 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 56 of 255 
 
referring to the Auditor-General of South Africa, is that 
correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So which may have regressed since the 
Auditor-General took over the audit in the 2016/2017 
financial year.   
The fact that there may have been questions from 
the users of SAA AFS, that is audited financial statements, 
that might be asked why the opinion regressed and to try 
to formulate an answer to that question together as the 
10 
AGSA and previous auditors, that is PwC and Nkonki.  Is 
that a fair recordal? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, if my memory serves me right, 
Chair, yes, we had a meeting and the outcomes of the 
audit were shared with us and then – I think business 
executive was Mr Eugene Zungu, he is the national leader, 
because was responsible for signing the audit opinion.   
The idea was to familiarise PwC and Nkonki of the 
final outcomes and that they were ready for signature, they 
were going to parliament.  I was not a meeting to – for PwC 
20 
or Nkonki to give input because the audit was already 
finalised and they were meant to go and present to 
parliament.   
 
So it was a courtesy for them to share the outcomes 
of the audit. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 57 of 255 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, to share the outcomes but also to 
discuss with you the likely questioning that would come as 
a consequence of their audit findings because of this 
regression that had taken place.  Is that not so, Mr 
Mothibe? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, in the meeting the discussion 
focused on what was the outcome of the meeting.  The 
meeting did not last – if my memory serves me right, Chair, 
I think – I am trying to think back, Chair, if you – probably 
about an hour or so, Chair, or a half.  As I indicated it was 
10 
a courtesy meeting because they had finalised the audit, 
they were going to parliament. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   But the Auditor-General was concerned, 
was it not, that stakeholders would have a number of 
questions to ask of the previous auditors based on what 
the Auditor-General had found in its audit of the 2016/2017 
year.  Is that not correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   That will be correct. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes and so they in fact discussed with 
you what they thought the big areas were that stakeholders 
20 
who received the Auditor-General’s audit report for that 
year would likely raise because there was this discrepancy 
between the clean audits that had been received for five 
years and now a qualified audit opinion.  Is that a fair 
summary? 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 58 of 255 
 
MR MOTHIBE:   That will be a fair summary, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, I am emboldened in putting that 
summary to you because it is actually a paraphrase of what 
you see on the next page at page 1826.  If you turn over 
the page at 1826, what the minutes record there from the 
second paragraph is that: 
“What was discussed was key matters to note that 
may be asked by the stakeholders.  They include, 
amongst others...” 
And then there is a list of what you at that meeting with the 
10 
Auditor-General were discussing would be the likely issues 
raised.  The first is: 
“Irregular expenditure has significantly increased.” 
The second is: 
“Why the audit outcome has regressed from a clean 
audit to a qualified audit opinion.” 
And the third is: 
“Why the significant matters reported by the AGSA 
in 2016 and 2017 audit were not reported in prior 
years.” 
20 
And then there is a reference to the State Capture report, 
Chair, and the particular interests in the TNA Media 
contract but that is a matter that we have traversed 
extensively elsewhere.   
But those three items, that irregular expenditure 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 59 of 255 
 
has significantly increased, that there would be questions 
about why the audit outcome had regressed from a clean 
audit to a qualified audit opinion, why the significant 
matters reported by the Auditor-General were not reported 
in previous years, did this cause you concern when you 
were at this meeting and you saw such a different outcome 
for the Auditor-General’s report as compared with yours? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, in appreciating that the Auditor-
General came through to SAA more than a year after we 
had been there, Chair, some of the issues that would be 
10 
raised were peculiar to the years under their review and 
not necessarily issues that related to the year that we 
audited.   
If I give an example, Chair, one of the concerns that 
they had relating to – or [indistinct]  was relating to the 
valuation of aircraft.  In the year that we audited, Chair, we 
did some work in that area and we were comfortable in the 
outcomes of that audit process.   
The office of the AG had a challenge in the year 
that the performed the work, Chair, so it was very well  
20 
understood that some of these issues were peculiar to the 
period that they audited, Chair. 
Also importantly, Chair, in that – and even when 
you talk to the issues of irregular expenditure.  Concerns 
were raised that the number had increased significantly.  It 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 60 of 255 
 
is important to note that, Chair, throughout our tenure, at 
South African Airways as auditors.   
The 
Auditor-General 
was 
part 
of 
the 
audit 
committee meetings, they stay invitees, they had access to 
all the reports that were put together, they had a good 
understanding of what was transpiring, Chair, and at no 
time were there any concerns raised, Chair, this on the 
outcomes of our audits.   
So, Chair, the issues are raised in the meeting and 
also some of the qualifications are peculiar to 2017.  As I 
10 
indicated, Chair, we are still comfortable that after we 
performed our audit in terms of the ISAs, Chair, the 
International Standards on Auditing, the numbers for the 
years 2014, 2015 and 2016 are correct.  The financial 
statements were free of material misstatement.   
Chair, we have made a concession relating to 
issues relating to compliance with laws and regulations and 
irregular expenditure which is an issue that was – that has 
been identified in this meeting, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you see, Mr Mothibe, this is quite 
20 
an important part of the Commission’s investigation, the 
role of auditors in the different SOEs that the Commission 
has been focusing on.  Indeed, we may also be looking at 
the role of lawyers as well.   
 
Now with regard to auditors, when I heard evidence 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 61 of 255 
 
about what had been happening at SAA – was it earlier this 
year or last year? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Both. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I can tell you, Mr Mothibe, that one of 
the questions that came to my mind and, I probably 
articulated it at the hearing, was that when I was told that I 
think from 2011 or is it 2010?  2011, 2012 financial year 
for SAA up to I think 2016 that throughout that that period 
the auditors who were doing the work gave SAA a clean bill 
of health.   
10 
I said but how could it be in the light of what I was 
hearing?  How is it possible that year in, year out for four 
years, five years auditors could not find anything wrong 
when on what I am hearing there were serious irregularities 
that were happening, how is it possible that they did not 
pick these things up?   
 
So I am just giving you my reaction at the time.  I 
am not an auditor.   
MR MOTHIBE:   I appreciate it, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am not an auditor but I just want to say 
20 
if you feel that PwC during those years that it was auditing 
SAA that we are looking at did a good job or that whatever 
it did does not deserve criticism, feel free to defend it, this 
is your opportunity to do so.  It may be that some of the 
things that someone like me who is not an auditor is 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 62 of 255 
 
surprised by are things that I am surprised by because I 
am not an auditor. 
 
If I was an auditor maybe I would understand better 
but it is important that you make sure that these things are 
explained if they are explicable in a proper way, but as I sit 
here what is in my mind is still the question that I asked 
earlier this year or last year to say how was it possible that 
for four years or more auditors could not pick up at least 
some of these things because I do understand that auditors 
work on the basis of samples and so on, so I am just giving 
10 
you this picture so that you just reflect properly on what 
you – how you – what  you will defend, what you will not 
defend with an understanding of where I am coming from 
which might or might not be the same perspective that Ms 
Hofmeyr has. 
MR MOTHIBE:   Thank you Chair I appreciate that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you could continue to answer the 
questions that Ms Hofmeyr can put to you but if, in 
response to the remarks I’ve made, there’s something you 
want to say, feel free to say it.  If you say you’ll wait for 
20 
the question, that’s fine. 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, thank you Chair I think, Chair, I do 
appreciate where the Chair is coming from, Chair the 
issues that have been identified at South African Airways 
as I previously mentioned Chair, during our tenure we did 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 63 of 255 
 
look at procurement and contract management, we did 
identify 
deviations. 
 
We 
sought 
responses 
from 
Management to understand how – what has happened so 
that we can appropriately report on that.  We elevated the 
matters with those charged with governance, the Audit 
Committee throughout our tenure at South African Airways, 
Chair.  What we have included, Chair, in our supplementary 
statement is that we acknowledge that we should have 
probably 
– 
we 
should 
have 
included 
these 
– 
that 
compliance matters in the Audit report as required in the 
10 
paragraph under compliance with laws and regulations 
Chair.  So, Chair, it is important to know that we did the 
work, we identified these issues Chair, it is the reporting 
element right at the end where, Chair, I think judgement, 
Chair, we got incorrect and that is the supplementary 
submission that we have made to the Commission, Chair.  
Chair as I emphasised earlier, these matters relate to the 
compliance side on the numbers, Chair, we performed 
sufficient work, we did proper assessment, identified 
certain 
areas 
that 
required 
attention, 
we 
followed 
20 
substantive audit approach because we could not rely on 
the controls, Chair and we were able to get comfort that 
the numbers included in the financial statement fairly 
present the position at South African Airways Chair and 
that the financial statements were free of material mistakes 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 64 of 255 
 
made. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Mr Mothibe you’re aware that Mr 
Sokombela’s evidence was that once they’d looked back 
and received your audit files and looked at the work that 
you’d done, they could not rely on the closing balances you 
had determined it, for the 31 March 2016 year as their 
opening balance for their auditing purposes? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, as part of the review of opening 
balances we – the office of AG engaged with us and they 
requested access to our files to get an understanding of 
10 
the numbers.  There were areas where they felt they could 
not rely on opening balances because they felt they could 
not perform some of the work that we had done.  We 
engaged with Mr Sokombela and shared with him the fact 
that – remember we had been auditors of South African 
Airways for a number of years and in certain areas – 
because we’ve been doing them for consecutive years. We 
also took comfort on the work that was performed in 
previous years in some of the key areas and he, in his 
discussions with us, was only – and rightly so I suppose 
20 
Chair, he was only prepared to look at the 2016 file and 
not look at all the other files because, Chair, had that been 
possible we definitely would have been able to get comfort 
on those numbers Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I mean, I’m not sure if that answered the 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 65 of 255 
 
question. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So maybe you might have to repeat.  
Just listen carefully to the question Mr Mothibe. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Are you aware that the evidence of Mr 
Sokombela, before this Commission, was that he could not 
rely on your closing balance for the purposes of his 
opening balance? 
MR MOTHIBE:   I’m aware of Mr Sokombela’s evidence in 
that regard. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you disagree with his approach? 
MR MOTHIBE:   There were elements in the discussions 
where we did not find each other Chair, but it is the 
approach of the Auditor General, Chair, I cannot question 
the way they performed their work Chair, I’m not in a 
position to do that. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Mr Mothibe if you would turn to page 
1826 we were looking at the aspects that the Auditor 
General’s office had said stakeholders would be interested 
in and then in the middle of the page, I hadn’t quite got to 
20 
it yet, there’s 
another recordal of what the Auditor 
General’s office notified you of, it reads as follows: 
“The previous auditors were notified that there is a 
huge risk on SCM, that stands for Supply Chain 
Management”, 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 66 of 255 
 
 
Is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   “And SCOPA might need answers from  
the previous auditors on why this matter was not 
reported in prior years.  The previous auditors need 
to prepare themselves, especially on SCM if they’re 
called 
to 
do 
a 
presentation 
by 
SCOPA 
or 
Parliament, 
 
Do you see that? 
MR MOTHIBE:   I see that Chair. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So, this was in a meeting of January of 
2018 where it was brought to your attention that there was 
a huge risk on Supply Chain Management, is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And when you started engaging with the 
Commission, do you recall that the Commission indicated 
to you that one of their key areas of focus was SCM 
compliance? 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So why didn’t you, in your first 
20 
interactions with the Commission, come clean and say, yes 
there were deficiencies on SCM, we did not adequately 
check for whether SAA was complying with relevant laws 
and regulations? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, when the Commission started, it 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 67 of 255 
 
was after the office of the AGS and of their opinion, and we 
– after that, Chair, the Regulator had accessed the report 
and was making enquiries, investigating the PwC and 
Nkonki with regards to work that they had performed.  At 
that stage, Chair, we were happy, we were comfortable that 
what we had done would have been sufficient.  It was only 
when the regulator completed his work, and in fact Chair, 
it’s only this year in March that when we looked at the 
input from the Regulator and we took that and read that 
with Mr Sokombela’s evidence that we accepted that this is 
10 
an area that would have required – we should have had 
…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You realised that, that’s an area where 
you fell short?  
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   But Mr Mothibe in September of 2017 
the Auditor General said he would not rely on your work on 
SCM, in January of 2018 the Auditor General said there is 
a huge risk on Supply Chain Management and SCOPA is 
likely to be asking questions of how we could have gone 
20 
from a clean audit opinion to a qualified audit opinion in 
the space of one year and despite all of that, is it your 
evidence before this Commission, that you only came to 
realise 
that 
there 
was 
Supply 
Chain 
Management 
deficiencies in your work, by March of this year? 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 68 of 255 
 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair as I indicated before Chair, the 
issue that was, again was there the lack of reporting of the 
issues that were identified when we performed work on 
Supply Chain Management Chair, it is not that it was not 
performed it is the failure to report these deviations in the 
audit opinion, it’s not to say that no work was performed 
earlier Chair and I think Chair, the question that has come 
from SCOPA is that this – the opinions say there’s no – 
there’s not enough compliance.  Subsequent to that there 
is a lot of non-compliance, what has happened, what is the 
10 
gap and that is where we acknowledge, Chair, that much as 
we had done the work we had failed to report that to the 
shareholders Chair and that is that last link that was 
outstanding. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Isn’t that leg a very important leg? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair it is an important leg Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but the way you testify around it, 
and I think that has been the case in regard to other areas 
where you acknowledged that you fell short, one gets the 
impression that you are trying to give the impression that 
20 
where you fell short in relation to something important, you 
say – you emphasise, we did the work, where we failed or 
we fell short is reporting that, as I understand it and I think 
you concede that reporting is very important isn’t it, it is 
part of your job and it’s very important is it not? 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 69 of 255 
 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair I understand where the Chair – 
where Chair is coming from, I think it is, for me, also very 
important to recognise that work was performed Chair, I do 
appreciate that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.    
MR MOTHIBE:   I think Chair, I needed to clarify. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you didn’t intend to say, it’s not 
important. 
MR MOTHIBE:   Definitely Chair that was never my 
intention. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  
MR MOTHIBE:   I do appreciate our role…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I just want to pick up on the point that 
the work was performed.    Mr Mothibe you accept, in your 
supplementary statement that there were limitations placed 
on the scope of your audit because of, for example, the 
lack of tender files, correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair I do agree with that insofar as it 
relates to Supply Chain and Contract Management. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So, then the work that you performed 
could not adequately determine, for example, whether the 
amount stipulated for irregular expenditure in the financial 
statements was accurate, could it? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, that should be correct Chair.  
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 70 of 255 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I’d then like to look at what the Auditor 
General’s report for the 2017 financial year gave as it’s 
important elements and how they dealt with aspects like 
irregular expenditure and then I’m going to compare that to 
the audit report for the 2016 year which you signed off on 
and to do that exercise, Chair and Mr Mothibe, we’ll need 
to go – and if your registrar can just assist, just to give 
you, Chair Exhibit DD2B, we’ve been working in D you can 
put it away now I won’t go back there we’re going to 
Exhibit 2…[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before you do that…[intervenes]. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Oh sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before we take this off ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I actually think I need to be in D, so 
please keep D but please go-ahead Chair, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let’s go back Mr Mothibe to page 
1826, that’s the last page you were looking at I think – oh 
you have put it away, ja let’s go back page 1826, that’s the 
minutes of the meeting between yourselves and the AG. 
MR MOTHIBE:   I have got it Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, now that sentence that Ms Hofmeyr 
read to you earlier on in the middle of the page, the 
previous auditors were notified that there’s a huge risk on 
SCM and SCOPA might need answers from – it must have 
intended to say there’s a huge risk that, on SCM SCOPA 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 71 of 255 
 
might need answers, I think that is probably how it should 
read, from the previous auditors on why this matter was not 
reported in prior years.  That suggests that the non-
reporting was not confined to one year, you agree? 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, how many years did the non-
reporting in regards to this aspect relate to? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Sir I was a vision partner for three years. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Three years yes, so they say there’s a 
huge risk, that seems to me that they are talking about 
10 
something regarded as really very serious in the failure to 
do work that PwC was supposed to do, is that the same 
understanding you get from this, at least their perspective? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair I would say – I wouldn’t say failure 
to do work but rather to say failure – I wouldn’t say it’s a 
failure, I think from …[indistinct 16.39] they lack to 
understand why there has been such a deterioration. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes but after they had said this, I 
would have thought that you would have taken time to look 
at this aspect and PwC’s role or failure to report and you 
20 
would have made an assessment to see whether there is 
justification in any criticism of PwC’s work in relation to the 
failure to report in this regard, did you do that after 
becoming aware what they were saying, did you reflect and 
say, really did we – can we be criticised or can we not be 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 72 of 255 
 
criticised on this? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair at the time Chair the view that we 
were taking is that we had done sufficient work Chair, and 
if there was a need for us to appear before SCOPA Chair, 
we should be in a position to appear and explain what we 
have done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now you may have taken that view 
before you heard what the AG was saying but after the AG 
had said this, did you continue with that position after 
reflecting or did you not reflect and look at the work again 
10 
and still to the same position? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, at that stage Chair, if I recall the 
manager or senior manager who was responsible for 
performing this work had previously worked for the office of 
the AG and in that regard Chair, one had comfort that, with 
his background we should be able to cover all the critical 
areas, there was a comfort that I had at least Chair, to the 
extent that this will reflect the 2016 financial year that we 
audited, the 2014 and 2015 financial years where these 
areas were mentioned by Nkonki Chair, there had been this 
20 
fairly …[indistinct 19.17] at other big enterprises Chair. 
The view was that we should be able to demonstrate that 
we had done sufficient work Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But was the view – did you accept, at 
that stage that you had not, as PwC reported what you 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 73 of 255 
 
should have reported or were you – did you think that you 
had reported at a factual level.  When the AG said there 
was this huge risk that SCOPA might need answers from 
you on why this matter was not reported in prior years, not 
in one year, in prior years, was your view that, factually, 
you had not reported or was your view that you had 
reported and I don’t even know whether it’s a view, I think 
it’s factual?  Had you reported in prior years on this matter, 
at least now you accept that you have not reported, I think, 
you accept but as at the time of this meeting, did you 
10 
accept that you had not reported this matter in the prior 
years? 
MR 
MOTHIBE: 
 
 
Chair, 
apologies, 
I’m 
trying 
to…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Trying to go back but…[intervenes]. 
MR MOTHIBE:   Trying to go back Chair, so…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No I understand but that’s why I was 
saying to you, I would have expected you, when the AG’s 
office says this about your work, that the least you would 
do is go back and say, is there something that we have 
20 
missed, let us check, did we do our work properly? 
MR MOTHIBE:  And I think, Chair – hence I say Chair, part 
of the comfort that one had was that we had allocated this 
part of work to somebody who had, in fact, spent time in 
the 
office 
of 
the 
Auditor 
General 
and 
that 
they 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 74 of 255 
 
understood…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But checking whether you had reported 
this or not would be an easy thing isn’t it, it shouldn’t even 
take ten minutes, I’d imaging you’d just go to the reports 
and check or is it more complicated than somebody that’s 
not an auditor, like me, thinks?  Is it not a matter of getting 
those audit reports for those years and checking whether 
you had reported or not? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair I do believe we knew what we had 
reported, it was based on the work that had been 
10 
performed, Chair, and as I did indicate, understanding what 
we had reported we were comfortable at that stage that the 
work performed supported what had been reported Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but my question is, here the AG is 
saying there’s a huge risk that SCOPA might need answers 
from you on why this matter was not reported in prior 
years, so I’m saying when the AG says that, the first thing 
sitting in that meeting that should have crossed your mind 
is, did we not report in the prior years and you’d either 
know that you did report it or didn’t report or if you didn’t 
20 
know you would want to go and check at the earliest 
opportunity, maybe after the meeting to say, did we report 
this, because if you did not report, the next thing is, is it 
something we should have reported and if we – if it is 
something that we should have reported and we didn’t 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 75 of 255 
 
report, then if we must take responsibility we must take 
responsibility if we can defend it then we’ll defend it. So 
my question is, at that stage did you know whether you had 
reported this during those years or not? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair like I said I was aware that we had 
not reported. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You were aware that you had not 
reported? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and at that stage did you think it 
10 
was something that you should not have reported? 
MR MOTHIBE:   And I think Chair, what I was alluding to 
was that, based on the work that had been performed, the 
level of people that had performed and the experience of 
people that had performed, we were comfortable that we 
had done enough work to support what is in the audit 
report Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Ja 
okay, 
let 
me 
make 
sure 
we 
understand each other.  As I say I’m not an auditor, you 
are an auditor, as I understand there are certain things 
20 
that must be reported. 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There are certain things that don’t need 
to be reported. 
MR MOTHIBE:   Yes Chair.  
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 76 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now the AG says, here is something that 
should have been reported in prior years but was not 
reported, according to the – that’s how I understand this. 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair I understand it, maybe slightly 
differently Chair in that when the AG performed his work on 
Supply Chain Management, he had identified deficiencies 
which he then was reporting and the amount of deficiencies 
identified compared to the fact that nothing was reported in 
the previous year, as recorded earlier Chair, why is there 
such a big difference. So Chair it’s not to say maybe, 
10 
because he had reported we should have reported but 
rather why is there such a differentiation and my view then 
was, the work that we have performed supported – if the 
AG Chair, has reported it was reported based on the work 
that he has performed and therefore it supports the kind of 
report we had given Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, what I’m looking at is, whether, 
when something was pointed out to you at that meeting as 
I understand it, as needing answers, whether at that stage 
there was a basis for you to think you did have a proper 
20 
answer because you said you thought you were satisfied 
that you had done the job and you could answer, that’s how 
I understand you but I think you are agreeing, and you 
must tell me if I misunderstood you, you are agreeing that, 
as a matter of fact you ought to  have reported in those 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 77 of 255 
 
years but you did not report, you accept that? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Yes Chair, that is what is in the 
supplementary statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but you accept that as of today as 
you sit there, my next question is whether, at that time 
when the AG said this, you knew as a matter of fact that 
you had not reported or you did not know? 
MR MOTHIBE:   I knew at that time that I had not reported 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And did you think you had an acceptable 
10 
answer for not having reported? 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And what was that answer? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair it is based on the work that we have 
been performed that we had employed somebody in that 
area who had experience in performing this kind of work 
and the result that were fed through to us, we did consider, 
we applied our judgement and at that stage we did not 
believe that they should be – we did not believe that it 
should be in the audit opinion. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well – so is your – was your answer, at 
that time that you would say, we were not supposed to 
report during those – to report this matter during those 
years or was your answer, we accept that we should have 
reported but we have an explanation why we did not 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 78 of 255 
 
report? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair at the time, based on what we had 
done and the judgement we had applied at the time Chair, 
we did not think we should have reported. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You did not think you should have 
reported. 
MR MOTHIBE:   At that time Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you Chair.  So just to clarify, for 
the whole of 2018 you held the view that SAA had complied 
10 
with relevant laws and regulations for the three years that 
you audited them, is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Based on the work that we had done and 
the judgement that we had applied. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And then in 2019 you continue to hold 
that view, correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   As I indicated Chair, the work was subject 
to investigation, however, and Chair at this stage we – 
when we handled the file, we believed that we had done 
sufficient Chair. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And then…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry Ms Hofmeyr maybe for the benefit 
of the transcribers you can just spell that abbreviation of 
IRBA for them. 
 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 79 of 255 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Of Course, indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Otherwise 
they’ll 
write 
something 
…[intervenes]. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It’s I-R-B-A, thank you.  So, we clarified 
2018 you held the view that SAA had complied with laws 
and 
regulations, 
2019 
you 
were 
telling 
us 
that 
an 
investigation by IRBA started, so what was your position in 
2019, had SAA complied? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair when the investigation was – there 
was – IRBA, put to us questions, we responded, they came 
10 
back and asked more questions there were areas where we 
had – were able to give them responses, Chair and it was 
only – that process was only finalised this year in March. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, is the answer that during the 
investigation by IRBA you continued to believe that SAA 
had complied with legislation until the outcome of the IRBA 
investigation that’s when you were convinced that you 
should have reported? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair at this stage, Chair we said there 
was no material non-compliance Chair.  So Chair the – that 
20 
is always absolute assurance but we said – we said to our 
viewers that there was no material non-compliance Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And then the commission received Mr 
Sokombela’s evidence in March and I – as I understood 
your evidence earlier that helped to focus the mind.  Sorry 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 80 of 255 
 
they received Mr Sokombela’s evidence in February and 
then that helped to focus the mind and by March of 2020 
you accepted that those indications that there had been 
compliance were incorrect.  Is that right? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair after – we got responses from the 
Regulator and their view was the Regulator’s view was that 
we had not complied and the view from the [indistinct 
00:00:49] was that to me concerned and after reading the 
Regulator’s response we looked at other information Mr 
[indistinct 00:01:00] and chair the view that we took was 
10 
that there was probably a non-compliance which we had 
identified but had not included in the audit opinion and we 
should have done that. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ms Mothibe in fairness to you I think I 
must put this for your response.  That passage of events 
suggests at least to me and I invite your comment on this 
that for two years until the shoe started to pinch, until the 
public exposure of the deficient auditing work by PwC – 
PwC was content not to come clean about the errors it had 
made.  And it was only when there was public disclosure in 
20 
the court at this – in the course of this commission’s work 
that you then had another think and have made the 
concessions that you have made.  Do you have a response 
to that? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair the concession was made after the 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 81 of 255 
 
review by our Regulator.  Chair the process was ongoing 
and Chair one does not want to anticipate outcomes of a – 
of a process.  Secondly Chair we do know that the 
processes unfortunately it does take a bit of time Chair and 
when we initially issued our opinions, we applied our mind 
we applied our judgment on the outcomes Chair.  As I 
deemed – I have already indicated Chair these matters were 
identified and they were elevated to the Audit Committee 
and Management so it was not a – I am not sure if I am 
using the right words that Ms Hofmeyr says a failure 
10 
because work was performed it is easily identified so – and 
I do not want to – and I think Chair as you mentioned earlier 
I do not want to make it sound like it is not a – it is a 
reporting [indistinct 00:02:57] but that is where we fell short 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hm.  What is it that the Regulator said 
that you had not been aware of that made you accept that 
there had been a failure in a certain respect on PwC’s part?  
In other words what was new that they said which you had 
not thought about that – that made you see things differently 
20 
after the outcome of their investigation? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair the Regulator went through the – 
requested our files went through a thorough process and it 
was Chair the Regulator’s view was that the items that he 
identified would not require a judgment Chair which we have 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 82 of 255 
 
– the views that we should have reported them – the matters 
would have been material because the – I am trying to use 
the rights words Chair.  An indication when we could not get 
– when we could not receive the – in some of the areas the 
files that we were looking for which would – should have said 
that the – there is material non-compliance and should have 
been reported Chair.  And the Regulator also read it with the 
– the Auditor Generals Guide on how they approach these 
matters Chair.  And it was that – the problem Chair was that 
the judgment – the [indistinct 00:04:49] judgment Chair got it 
10 
wrong we should have reported these matters where we did 
not report them Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know you said earlier on please Ms 
Hofmeyr do not forget your line. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Not at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said earlier on and you have 
emphasised that you identified did you say the non-
compliances? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Yes Chair which are non-compliance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but did you not report that? 
20 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the reason why you did not report 
them is that you did not think they were material non-
compliances? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair at this stage… 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 83 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that right? 
MR MOTHIBE:  At that stage Chair that is what we thought. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At that stage? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. Now my logic suggests that if you have 
identified the non-compliances and you do not report them, 
we should look at when is a non-compliance material and 
when is it not material.  How could you have thought that 
these non-compliances were not material?  Can you deal 
with that for my benefit?  When is it material – when is it not 
10 
material?  Why did you take the view at that time that in this 
case 
these 
non-compliances 
with 
legislation 
were 
not 
material? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair as I indicated Chair we – we only 
looked at those matters Chair because the judgment that we 
had applied and Chair as I think I mentioned I did refer to 
that in there Chair that one of the biggest things that 
occupies one’s minds when we came to sign the [indistinct 
00:06:52] was the work we were doing around a going 
concern at – at South African Airways that took up a lot of 
20 
time Chair during and after hours Chair and there was if I 
could say Chair one of the biggest things that occupied our 
minds it was the most [indistinct 00:07:18] thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But – but will not – that will not answer the 
question of what is material and what is not material is it 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 84 of 255 
 
not? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair I think what I am [?] Chair we have 
had heavy focus in that area.  The – and we not applied a 
judgment.  One might have focussed so much on this area 
Chair that – and that is where – one we have erred in 
applying our minds correctly in determining whether or not 
those items were material enough to be included in the audit 
opinion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but you cannot use the fact that you 
spent most of your time focussing on a certain part of the 
10 
work and not a certain other part of the work as justification 
for saying, we thought that other part was not material.  That 
does not seem to be logically to me.  You can use it seems 
to me your pre-occupation with that other part of the work to 
say I am sorry I did not get time to do that other work 
because my focus was on that other.  That I can understand. 
MR MOTHIBE:  But Chair I thought that is what I was 
relaying Chair if it did not come out. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Okay.  No.  But if that is what 
you meant that is fine but it does not answer my question.  
20 
My question is, you said you were aware that you did not 
report but you had taken the view that this was not the non-
compliance with legislation that was involved here was not 
material therefore your non-reporting was justifiable or was 
acceptable.  That is my understanding of what you are 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 85 of 255 
 
saying and then I said so when is a non-compliance with 
legislation material and when is it not material?  That was 
my question. 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair in terms of the guidance in the – from 
the AG Chair there is a threshold that I have said for each 
different [indistinct 00:09:39] when should you report and 
when one should not report.  And [indistinct 00:09:45] I 
indicate that having reached the threshold and how material 
is it then – and Chair as I said Chair the area where one was 
aware of that judgment and considered Chair that we got it 
10 
wrong. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But what – did you have a proper basis or 
the view that the non-compliance with legislation was not 
material?  What was the basis that you had at that time for 
taking that view?  Had – did you – did you look at the – at 
the criteria set by the AG and said well this is what it says 
and you looked at the non-compliances that were involved 
and said well it does not meet the cusp so it is non-material.  
Or did you – that is not what happened? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair for the years 2013 and 2014 – 
20 
apologies 2014 and 2015 if you recall Chair this work was 
performed [indistinct 00:11:00] fine so the – yes we had – we 
reviewed the – we [indistinct 00:11:07] view of – and at that 
stage Chair we identified areas of non-compliance which we 
[indistinct 00:11:15] audit committee and to management and 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 86 of 255 
 
by the time it came to preparing the audit report which was 
long since we had finalised the – we have presented to the 
audit committee and to management we [indistinct 00:11:33] 
the act – for 2014 Chair the opinion was only signed in 2015 
in January.  For 2015 it was signed in 2016 early September 
which was more than a year after the required date Chair 
and the other one Chair was signed off none – is it eight 
months – in September the 30 – it was three years apart 
Chair.  With the passage of time one was the preoccupation 
of everything either get what was focussing on was focussed 
10 
on the – on the going concern because Chair that was the 
one area which was going to cause material issues where 
there was a RI and we were preoccupied in resolving those 
issues.  So when it came to preparing the audit opinion Chair 
and as I said also in my submissions Chair the – have 
consideration as to whether or not those items should have 
come to – of opinion Chair.  Because back then we would not 
see this as material Chair we… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Can I – Mr Mothibe… 
MR MOTHIBE:  We erred – we erred in not considering that 
20 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Mothibe.  Can I take it – can I take it 
that on reflection you are able to say you did not have a 
proper basis for the view that the non-compliance with 
legislation was not material?  I am putting this to you 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 87 of 255 
 
because I have asked you a few times that what I am looking 
for is the basis or the view you took at the time that the non-
compliance with legislation was not material.  We have spent 
some time I do not seem to understand that you are able to 
give me the basis or that view so my question now is, can I 
take it that on reflection you are able to say looking back our 
view did not have a proper basis?  You nod is that yes? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOTHIBE:  I nod yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  I would like to now go to 
the Auditor General’s Report for the year that they moved in 
and Chair you will… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  I interrupted you when you 
moving to another file. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Okay.  So before we move. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that where you are going? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Before we move. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I would like to ask you just to get out of 
Exhibit DD20D which is in front of you.  The report of the 
Auditor General for the 2017 year and you will find that 
commencing at page 1672.   
CHAIRPERSON:  1672. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 88 of 255 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes and Chair in this [indistinct 00:14:46] 
we are going to need to compare it to the report that PwC 
and Nkonki produced for the prior year.  So my suggestion is 
maybe just to take it out of the file.  We can ensure that we 
insert it again for you over the break and if you were to 
extract it you would take out pages 1672 to page 1678.  You 
will see that page 1678 has the signature of the Auditor 
General at the bottom.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry are you suggesting that we take 
it out of the file? 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes so that when we move to the next file 
you will have the two next to one another Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Just because of the comparison exercise. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And then we will make sure we insert it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay.  And then which other file 
must we have? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Then you will have in front of you DD19D 
which is the second file of Mr Mothibe’s evidence. And just to 
20 
be clear that is Exhibit DD19D and there you will pick up 
page 601.  So what you should now… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Both have before you is the Auditor 
General’s Audit Report for the 2017 financial year and we 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 89 of 255 
 
will be able then to compare it to PwC and Nkonki’s audit 
report for the prior year.  But before we do that comparison, I 
do just want to do a little bit of background based on Mr 
Sokombela’s evidence before the commission. 
 
And it may be… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you do that. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which one is whose report between the 
10 
two? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Okay.  Indeed.  So the one that has come 
out of DD20, Exhibit DD is the Auditor General’s.  You will 
see at the top it is entitled Report of the Auditor General. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So that is the one that is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh the other one is Auditors Report. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So that you write PwC. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  If you want. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Okay.  So – but as a precript to going to 
the comparison between those two I would like to just remind 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 90 of 255 
 
us about what Mr Sokombela’s evidence was of what they 
found when they looked at procurement processes in SAA.  
Because we spent some time in his evidence looking at a 
table Chair you might recall it.  It was a table in the more 
extensive audit report where he identified the number of 
contracts that they tested, the number in respect of which 
they had found non-compliance, the numbers in which they 
identified irregular expenditure.  I do not suggest it is 
necessary for the both of you to have it in front of you I am 
going to just tell you what the highlighted facts are there.  Mr 
10 
Mothibe if you want to go to it at any point you will let me 
know.  But the upshot of the Auditor General’s evidence was 
that 
when 
they 
did 
the 
Supply 
Chain 
Management 
compliance work for the purposes of their audit, they 
selected using the method that he described first high-risk 
contracts 
and 
then 
contracts 
pursuant 
to 
a 
sampling 
exercise.  And the total number of contracts that they 
selected for review was 96 contracts.  And that was to a 
value of R7.5 billion just a bit more but I am rounding off for 
now.  And in the course of that analysis of those awards they 
20 
found that 80 of them – 80 – 80 of the 96 were awards, 
tender awards, contract awards where non-compliance was 
identified.  And that came to a total of R6.6 billion.  So 83% 
of the contracts that they selected for consideration were not 
compliant with legislation.  And then of those there were 62 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 91 of 255 
 
of the 96 contracts where irregular expenditure had been 
identified.  So we understood from him that non-compliance 
was broader than simply irregular expenditure.  There is of 
course fruitless and wasteful expenditure as well and other 
non-compliance issues but of that portion 62 of the 96 were 
– which is 64% were irregular expenditure.  And Mr Mothibe 
despite having done that rigorous work and establishing that 
83% of the contracts that they reviewed were not in 
compliance with legislation they still identified a limitation of 
scope.  Are you aware of that? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think – ja I was going to say move the 
microphone closer – towards you – yourself. 
MR MOTHIBE:  See Chair I read that in the audit opinion 
Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes because what they did was they – 
despite looking at those 96 contracts they were still not 
satisfied that they had obtained sufficient appropriate audit 
evidence to verify the amount of irregular expenditure.  And 
what does not come through in the audit report is the actual 
figure that they regarded as unverifiable of the procurement 
20 
process and that was to the total of R279 million worth of the 
awards simply could not be verified because they could not 
obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence.  So – Mr 
Sokombela that is the background to – sorry Mr Mothibe that 
is the background of Mr Sokombela’s evidence to what he 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 92 of 255 
 
then ends up saying in his report and what I would like to 
then compare with what you disclosed in your report the year 
earlier.  And that for that purpose we will go first to the 
Auditor General’s Report that is in Exhibit DD20D at page 
1672.  You will see there at the bottom there is a heading 
Irregular – well let us start – sorry.  There is a heading, 
Report on the Audit of the Consolidated and Separate 
Financial Statements, do you see that? 
MR MOTHIBE:  I see that Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And then under that there is a heading 
10 
Qualified Opinion, do you see that? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Now the Auditor General gave a qualified 
opinion you gave an unqualified opinion in the previous three 
years, is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  We will come in a moment to what the 
difference is between those two.  But what then happens as I 
understand the report is the next heading is Basis for 
Qualified Opinion.  So now the Auditor General is telling us 
20 
why did he regard it as appropriate to give a qualified 
opinion.  Am I understanding it correctly? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And before we go on just in terms of 
qualified and unqualified audit opinions can you help us with 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 93 of 255 
 
the following?  As I understand it but I like the Chair am not 
an auditor so we are going to rely on your expertise here.  
An auditor will give a qualified audit in two scenarios and for 
this I am relying on ISA 705 and I just want to check that you 
and I agree on this.  The first is where he has or she I would 
like to add sufficient appropriate audit evidence but regards 
there to be material misstatements in the financials.  Does 
that accord with your understanding?  That is the one 
circumstance. 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And then the second circumstance is when 
the auditor is unable to obtain sufficient appropriate audit 
evidence on which to base the opinion but concludes that the 
possible effect on the financial statements of undetected 
misstatements could be material but not pervasive, is that an 
accurate understanding? 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So for a layman like me this seems to 
suggest to me that there are two situations.  The one is you 
have got sufficient audit evidence but you conclude that 
20 
there are material misstatements in the financials and that is 
to be compared with where you do not manage to get 
suitable appropriate or sufficient appropriate audit evidence.  
The consequence of which is that you actually not able to 
detect whether there are misstatements of a material nature 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 94 of 255 
 
in the financials.  Is that a fair summary Mr Mothibe? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That sounds fair Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And – of the two scenarios that Ms 
Hofmeyr has alluded to from an auditor’s point of view and 
from the point of you maybe of the users of financial 
statements and auditor’s reports which one is the worst 
situation or is the position that either could be worse than 
the other depending on the circumstances.  In other words, 
in the one where there are misstatements it might depend on 
10 
the nature of the misstatements it could be quite a bad 
situation.  Or is the position that where you do not get given 
the information that is actually regarded as the most serious 
of the crimes so to speak? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair I must admit I have never thought of it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In that way? 
MR MOTHIBE:  In the way that you ask me because we 
cannot Chair as auditors, we… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOTHIBE:  We perform your work and we will then issue 
20 
appropriate audit opinion Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ja but all situations are bad?  Are 
bad. 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair I would think… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Generally speaking. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 95 of 255 
 
MR MOTHIBE:  I would think that any entity would especially 
qualified Chair it might – it – you do not go down [indistinct 
00:25:43]  
CHAIRPERSON:  It is unacceptable. 
MR MOTHIBE:  Depending on the – on the nature of the – of 
the qualification Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOTHIBE:  There could be qualification as a result of an 
error.  If it is an error say general error then you will be able 
to explain it but it is the qualification.  So I think Chair the 
10 
circumstances – it is difficult to respond to your question. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No.  But of course, if you do not 
have 
the 
information 
it 
means 
you 
are 
– 
there 
is 
incompetence or you might deliberately be concealing 
information.  You – there is incompetence or negligence in 
keeping the records properly or you are – you may be 
deliberately concealing the information from the auditors. 
MR MOTHIBE:  Is that a fair statement to say why an entity 
might not be able to – to give the auditors material 
information and documentation? 
20 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair that is a difficult… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Oh am I too harsh? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Yes I think the Chair – it is a bit of a difficult 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is alright – okay.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 96 of 255 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  So if we commence with 
the report of the Auditor General, we were at Exhibit DD20D 
at page 1672 we – we are in the section on that page where 
he sets out the basis for the qualified opinion and the one I 
would like to turn to is under paragraph 7 which is headed 
Irregular Expenditure.   
MR MOTHIBE:  I have got that Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You have got that.  And you see it 
references the relevant section of the PFMA, the is Section 
55(2)Bi and it is recorded that that section of the PFMA 
10 
requires the SAA group to include particulars of irregular 
expenditure and the notes to the financial statements.  The 
SAA group did not establish adequate controls to maintain 
complete records of irregular expenditure.  I was not able to 
obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence to confirm the 
amount 
of 
irregular 
expenditure 
to 
be 
disclosed 
by 
alternative means.  Consequently, I was unable to determine 
whether any adjustment to irregular expenditure disclosed in 
Note 
42 
to 
the 
consolidated 
and 
separate 
financial 
statements was necessary. 
20 
 
Now what is – I want to just focus on in that recordal 
there is that the statement that the SAA group did not 
establish adequate controls to maintain complete records of 
irregular expenditure because there was a point yesterday in 
your evidence Mr Mothibe where I understood you to be 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 97 of 255 
 
trying to emphasise well the Auditor General comes in in 
another year and what he finds might be different to what we 
had in front of us.  Did I understand you to make reference 
to that? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair that is correct. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You see this was the point that the Chair 
took up quite regularly with Mr Sokombela in his evidence 
because part of what we were trying to probe was exactly 
that. Is it just that something strange happened in the 2017 
financial year that meant there was suddenly no records?  I 
10 
mean maybe we were after some sort of massive fire in the 
building or some such thing.  Or was it the case that this was 
an endemic situation?  And I want to remind you of what Mr 
Sokombela’s evidence was there.  Chair I will just give the 
references to the transcript. 
 
So the first thing that Mr Sokombela said was that the 
contract register was entirely inaccurate and most contracts 
reflected there simply did not exist.  That is his evidence on 
the 21 February 2020 page 16 lines 1 to 5.  He then said this 
problem must have been going on for many years because of 
20 
the magnitude of the problem.  And he said that on the same 
day page 15 line 16 to 24.  And he went on to explain that 
when they asked for tender documents to be located, they 
had to deploy an entire team to search for months and he 
described words as systematic and you will find that in the 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 98 of 255 
 
transcript of the 21 February 2020 page 67 lines 8 to 10. 
 
 
So Mr Sokombela what I am interested in is certainly 
– Mr Mothibe what I am interested in is Mr Sokombela’s 
evidence before this commission is it was not a once off.  It 
was a systematic failure, they could not even find the 
existence of contracts that were reflected in the contract 
register.  What is – what was your experience?  Did you just 
have a completely different situation when you were there? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair I will again make reference to our 
supplementary 
submission 
in 
that 
in 
the 
[indistinct 
10 
00:00:0047] performed we did identify our deficiencies.  
There were issues raised where there was a preliminary 
contract register and we raised these matters Chair to 
management and to the Audit Committee as I indicated Chair 
and we have got – in our concerns to the IRBA Chair it talks 
to the same that there were challenges related to the 
[indistinct 00:01:17] governance and we concede – we agree 
Chair we should have – it should have been in the audit 
committee which we had unfortunately done Chair.  We erred 
in that Chair.  So the challenges that Mr Sokombela 
20 
encountered we did see them also Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now you will have heard from what Ms 
Hofmeyr said when referring to what Mr Sokombela testified 
that his evidence included that he thought that the problem 
was so big that it must have been there in the previous 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 99 of 255 
 
years.  And my question is, was the explanation for PwC not 
picking up such a big problem for three years? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair ordinarily when one goes into perform 
work on – on contracts you would initially focus on new 
contracts.  If you had been auditing an entity for some time 
Chair you would have – you take comfort on the work that 
you have done previous years on – on – because you would 
of in the previous year’s selected new contracts for review 
and to the extent that you are provided with those contracts 
you have done sufficient audit work and those contracts 
10 
would have – would run for a particular time.  So when we 
performed our audit Chair the initial focus it is on a new 
significant contracts.  That said Chair I think Chair that said 
as I indicate Chair, we did identify deficiencies.  We did 
identify challenges with regards to the contract register and 
there were elements where we could not be provided with 
contracts that were – that we had requested for audit 
purposes.  We raised the matter with the – with management 
and with the Audit Committee and Chair those deviations as I 
indicate should have been included in the audit – in these 
20 
matters  - we should have included them in the audit report.  
So we did identify those issues Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair I see we have just gone past one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 100 of 255 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I know we have taken much longer than we 
both thought but … 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Not at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think it has all been important. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Evidence so it was not wasted and I know 
we still have another witness. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  We do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it seems to me that – it seems to me 
10 
that we should just take normal lunch for now and come back 
at two. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then try and finish with Mr Mothibe 
and then move onto the next witness ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed.  Chair I – I think that will work. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And we will complete both today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja.  Okay let us take the lunch 
adjournment we will resume at two.  We adjourn. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES: 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, let us continue. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you, Chair.  Chair, before the break 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 101 of 255 
 
we have spent some time in the auditor general’s report or 
the financial year ending 31 March 2017. 
 
And Mr Mothibe had made certain concessions in 
relation to the approach that PwC and Nkonki had taken for 
the three prior years. 
 
Mr Mothibe, what I would like to go to now is your 
auditor’s report for the financial year ending 31 March 2016 
and I ask you to have that in front of you before.  That was 
in EXHIBIT DD19D page 601.  That is where it starts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry.  I see the noise of the aircon is 
10 
back.  Did we say it will come back or did we will decide? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I think we were going to try it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay and see how it goes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes, indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us see how it goes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  If it is creating an interference, we will 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am very aware of the fact that I have a 
certain benefit [laughs]  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ja. [laughs]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...which other people do not have.  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  At least, it keeps us focussed. [laughs]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you, Chair.  But please do let us 
know if it becomes an interference.  Then we will just ask for 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 102 of 255 
 
it to be ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, that is fine.  The part... part of the 
problem is that sometimes it makes noise in such a way that 
I cannot hear the witness properly but it is not all the time. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So let us see how it goes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Let us see how it goes.  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, I will make sure that I will raise my 
voice. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] Okay.  In order to make sure that 
we do not switch it off. [laughs]  
ADV HOFMEYR:  [laughs] Thank you, Mr Mothibe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So we are going to turn to your auditor’s 
report and what I would like to focus on in that report is on 
the second page that is the paginated page 602 because it is 
recordables on this page, which I understand from your 
supplementary statement, you have accepted ought to have 
been different.  Is that correct? 
20 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So let us pick up on irregular expenditure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry, Ms Hofmeyr.  I missed that. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Apologies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You said something and he agreed and I 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 103 of 255 
 
did not get what-what? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes.  Sorry, let me traverse that again.  
What I said is your focus on the second page of the auditor’s 
report 
because 
there 
are 
recordables 
there 
which 
I 
understand Mr Mothibe in his supplementary statement to 
have conceded should have been different. 
 
For example, where they identify under compliance with 
legislation that they did not identify instances of material 
none-compliance. 
 
He has now accepted that should have read differently.  
10 
Is that correct Mr Mothibe? 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I would like to start the heading “Irregular 
Expenditure and Fruitless and Wasteful Expenditure” on that 
page.  It is just above the middle of the page in capitals. 
 
And what you record there when you... and you have 
signed this off on the 30 t h of September 2016 is: 
“Without raising a material finding, we draw attention 
to the disclosure note 46 to the annual financial 
statements on page 166, Irregular Expenditure to the 
20 
value of R 5,4 million and Fruitless and Wasteful 
Expenditure to the value of R 7,3 million that have 
been identified and reported in terms of Section 
55(2)(b)(i) of the Public Finance Management Act...” 
 
Now just before the break, you will recall we looked at 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 104 of 255 
 
the auditor general’s comments under that topic in the audit 
report from the year later and he took the view that there 
were not adequate controls to maintain complete records of 
irregular expenditure and further had been a limitation of 
scope.   
 
He simply was not in a position to confirm the amounts 
of irregular expenditure.  Now, as I understand it Mr Mothibe 
and you can find this in your supplementary statement in 
EXHIBIT DD19B at page 50.30.4. 
 
Chair, I do not suggest it is necessary for you to go 
10 
there unless you want to look at the particular wording.   
 
But you acknowledge there at the bottom of the page 
that your entry under Irregular Expenditure and Fruitless and 
Wasteful Expenditure for the 2016 year should have been 
different.  Is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is what is in my supplementary 
submission Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And what should you have said as you 
record it hear? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Shall I read it out Chair? 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you, yes. 
MR MOTHIBE:   
“Irregular Expenditure and Fruitless and Wasteful 
Expenditure:  Section 55(2)(b)(i) ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Raise your voice.  [laughs]  
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 105 of 255 
 
MR MOTHIBE:  Oh.  I am competing with the... 
“Section 55(2)(b)(i) of the PFMA requires the SAA 
Group to include particulars of irregular expenditure 
in the notes to the financial statements. 
The SAA Group did not establish adequate controls to 
maintain complete records of irregular expenditure 
and fruitless and wasteful expenditure. 
We are not able to obtain sufficient appropriate audit 
evidence to confirm the completeness of the amounts 
of irregular expenditure and fruitless and wasteful 
10 
expenditure disclosed in the ...[indistinct] report for 
the 2014 financial year and note 46 and 45 of the 
consolidated and separate financial statement for the 
2015 and the 2016 financial years...” 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Now Mr Mothibe, as I read your now 
revised statement of what should have been contained in 
your report.  It applies to the 2014/2015 and 2016 financial 
years.  Is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And there a limitation of scope in all of 
20 
those years, correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, that will be correct. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And as a consequence of that limitation 
placed on the scope of the audit, you were not in a position 
to confirm the completeness of the amounts of irregular, 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 106 of 255 
 
fruitless and wasteful expenditure?  Is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is how my supplementary statement 
reads Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  It is also... you confirm that 
you... you confirmed that the contents of your supplementary 
statement are true and correct.  That means, you support 
what is stated there as having been the necessary revision 
to the auditor’s report.  Is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Okay.  It is just because when you answer 
10 
“that is what is in my statement” it is not as clear that you 
support the revision in those terms.  So that is just why I am 
questioning.  Thank you.  So then I want to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, I am sorry.  Well, I do not want to 
forget this because I forgot it earlier.  When we look at the 
auditor general’s report and we look at Mr Sokombela... Is it 
Sokombela? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Certainly.  Sokombela. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja.  When we look at his evidence and 
it transpires that... and we... we look at your own evidence 
20 
today and yesterday where you say during those three years 
of whatever period that PwC was involved in auditing the 
SAA, you identified some of the problems. 
 
You did not include them in the report but you identified 
them.  Is there something I have said that you want to 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 107 of 255 
 
correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  No, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, no.  Okay, alright.  You understand? 
MR MOTHIBE:  I am attentive Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  I would have assumed that 
if in the first year of your term at SAA, auditing SAA, you 
picked up certain problems, including the failure by the SAA 
Management 
to 
give 
your 
files 
and 
whatever 
other 
documents and information that were important for you to do 
a proper job. 
10 
 
I would imagine that when you come the following year, 
you would look back and say, “what problems did we identify 
last year?  Have they fixed those problems now?   
 
Because if they fix them, then that is fine but if they 
have not fixed them that might be something to look at quite 
seriously to say, “but we told management last year that this 
needs to be fixed.  This here is still not fixed”. 
 
And then if in the third year you still have the same 
thing, you would not fail to see that they have not addressed 
it and by then it might be difficult to say, “why did you not 
20 
include it in your report because it is persisting year in and 
year out?” 
 
That is what I would like you to comment on.  That is 
what comes to my mind.  That one would expect that when 
you come the following year, having done the work the 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 108 of 255 
 
previous years, your starting point would be “what was wrong 
last year?.  Has it been fixed?  Blah-blah-blah”. 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, thank you for the question and I do 
understand where Chair is coming from.  Chair, as I have 
indicated, we performed the work and when it came to the 
...[indistinct] of the Audit Opinion there was significant time 
that had passed. 
 
And when we then ...[indistinct] opinions Chair, you then 
to go back and look at what... what had been identified, what 
is material and what is not material. 
10 
 
When we received the first draft of the Audit Opinion 
Chair, because we had delegated that... and as partners we 
reviewed that.  Nothing had been highlighted by our team to 
indicate that there were additional(?) issues that need to 
come to the Audit Opinion. 
 
Chair, 
we 
had 
...[indistinct] 
the 
matters 
in 
the 
management(?) 
report 
and 
in 
the 
Audit 
Committee 
documents.  And I do have to ...[indistinct] that once we 
have also gone back and also do that to ensure that 
everything has been included. 
20 
 
Chair, in the 2014 year, in the first year, those matters 
would at that stage ...[indistinct] Chair, we had... we had... 
based on our professional(?) judgment Chair and review, we 
had thought they were not material. 
 
And I do believe that could have also influenced the 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 109 of 255 
 
view in subsequent years to say this matters had appeared, 
they were deemed immaterial and therefore in subsequent 
years, unless ...[indistinct] Chair, then probably(?) the 
conclusion was they are not material. 
 
And that is Chair one of the things why that could have 
happened the way it happened Chair.  And Chair, and I 
think... I do believe I have touched on it earlier Chair, that 
we also had the benefit of having attending all Audit 
Committee meetings. 
 
A representative of the office of the auditor general who 
10 
also had access to all these reports and there is a summary 
that we did consult when there were difficult issues. 
 
For example, on the matter of the growing concern.  In 
fact, there were times where we did not necessarily agree 
because they felt... there was a view at some stage that we 
might be a little bit harsh. 
 
So when these matters came through Chair, we were 
also aware and they also did not... it did not come out from 
the former discussion that these matters... maybe we need to 
consider elevating them because they were also in a way a 
20 
soundboard for us when we performed this work Chair. 
 
I do understand where the Chair is coming from and it is 
correct that we would consider previous matters when you 
...[indistinct] for what. 
 
But Chair as I have indicated, when that report was put 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 110 of 255 
 
together, because for the first year we did not deem them as 
material.   
 
Incorrectly so, as I admitted Chair in subsequent years, 
because they were not material.  It probably(?) influenced 
the way the team would have thought about them.  And in 
applying a ...[indistinct] judgment Chair.  That is where we 
could have got it wrong Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you, Chair.  Mr Mothibe, I was going 
to pick it up earlier but then I have left it but you have made 
10 
the point again.  So I do just want to get clarity on this. 
 
You referenced twice the fact that at these Audit and 
Risk Committee meetings there was a representative of the 
auditor general’s office.  Is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Mr Mothibe, you do not give that evidence 
before the Commission to suggest that the auditor general is 
responsible for the errors in your audit report, do you? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, we are the appointed auditors as 
PricewaterhouseCoopers and Nkonki in the ...[indistinct] 
20 
opinion and therefore we are responsible for that.  I think 
that ...[indistinct]   
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Then I would like to go in your 
statement.  Oh, just before we move off your revised wording 
for the audit report.   
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 111 of 255 
 
 
I focused initially on the irregular expenditure and 
fruitless and wasteful expenditure but you also recognised 
that your statement in respect of compliance with legislation 
should have been different, correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, that is correct. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And you also identified in relation to your 
audit work on compliance with legislation that there were 
limitations placed on the scope of your work.  Is that 
correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
10 
MR MOTHIBE:  And as a consequence of that you say that 
you were unable to obtain sufficient and appropriate audit 
evidence.  That the SAA Group maintained an appropriate 
procurement and provisioning system which is fair, equitable, 
transparent, competitive and cost-effective.  Is that right? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair, that is correct. 
MR MOTHIBE:  But then I would like to go over the page, if 
we may, in your supplementary statement.  Chair, I am going 
to focus some attention on the language that Mr Mothibe 
uses.   
20 
 
So I suggest that it might be useful for you to have it in 
front of you.  You will find it in EXHIBIT DD19B which is in 
the first file.  
CHAIRPERSON:  B, yes? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 112 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay but ...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:  But that is the section that starts with page 
30.5.  So you will need... so I am just worried.  If you got B 
on the spine that is the second file.  You will need A on the 
spine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  But within it, you will go to page 30.5. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are not going to come back to this 
report? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  No. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  No.  
CHAIRPERSON:  You say here... you say B but ...[indistinct] 
...[intervenes] 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I know.  I know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...with A on the spine but it might be the 
correct one.  [laughs]  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Well, I need page 30.5.  Three zero point 
five. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me see.  It probably is the right file.  
20 
[laughs]  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Oh, excellent! 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have got 30.5. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Excellent. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 113 of 255 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  That is within Mr Mothibe’s supplementary 
statement Chair.  And we are looking... I want to focus on 
paragraph 11 Mr Mothibe because what you did in paragraph 
10, as I understand your supplementary statement is, you 
made the concessions about what the errors were in the 
previous audit reports for the three years. 
 
And you actually give us the language of what ought to 
have been reflected in those reports.  Is that correct? 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And then what you are doing in paragraph 
10 
11 as I read it, it effectively sum up the impact of the 
concessions that you have made about those errors. 
 
And what you say there and I will read it into the record, 
is: 
“In view of the failure to comply with the directive 
issue in terms of the PPAA, I have indicated, 
however, that IRBA, my preparedness to accept the 
proposed consent order in relation to the first three 
draft charges. 
The matter is currently with Urban(?).  I am advised 
20 
that the proposed consent order will be tabled at the 
next 
Urban(?) 
Disciplinary 
Advisory 
Committee 
Meeting...” 
 
So that is, first of all, telling us what is going to happen 
next and then this is the part where I say you sort of capture 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 114 of 255 
 
the conclusion as I read it.  You say that: 
“However, I remain of the view that despite these 
omissions, 
the 
financial 
statements 
for 
those 
financial years were in terms of IFRS, (locally 
referred to as IFRiS), free of material statement and 
that...” 
 
And these are the words I want to focus on: 
“...sufficient 
audit 
work 
was 
performed 
and 
appropriate audit evidence was obtained to support 
the audit opinions...” 
10 
 
Do you see that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Do you stand by that statement? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, as I have indicated earlier that with 
respect to the numbers in the financial statements, we had 
done sufficient work.   
 
We obtained the necessary audit evidence and that the 
numbers, as far as they are disclosed in the financial 
statements, are free of material statement Chair. 
 
And the Audit Opinion in terms of those numbers Chair is 
20 
correct and I do stand by that Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  But there were numbers for irregular 
expenditure and fruitless and wasteful expenditure that you 
could not verify. 
MR 
MOTHIBE: 
 
Chair, 
the 
numbers 
in 
the 
financial 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 115 of 255 
 
statements relate to actual expenditure that has gone 
through Chair, and those numbers are correct.   
 
Hence, the statement that I made that I am of the view 
that despite the omissions, the financial statements fairly 
present or for those years, fairly present what happened at 
SAA ...[indistinct] statement and sufficient audit was done. 
 
With respect to irregular and fruitless expenditure there.  
Chair, it is more the... should I say... I hope it is the right 
word, is the quality of the numbers, not the quantum. 
 
So the fair presentation here is the quantum that... if we 
10 
say, for example Chair, if we only(?) said...  Let us say 
expenses ...[indistinct] or let us say for refreshments was 
R 2 million.  That fee of R 2 million is correct. 
 
When you talk about the irregular expenditure it is then 
whether or not those refreshment were required using the 
appropriate CM process. 
 
So the disclosure of that number as a... under fruitless 
and wasteful expenditure or irregular, might be... might not 
be correct but in your income statement, that disclose is 
correct. 
20 
 
Because Chair, the expenditure was incurred.  There 
were invoices for that.  They went through the appropriate 
payment processes and they were settled. 
 
So from origination to liquidation, they have gone 
through the necessary process.  Hence, I am able to... I am 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 116 of 255 
 
comfortable 
that 
my 
statement 
in 
my 
supplementary 
submission is correct Chair and I stand by it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now just to make sure.  So does that 
answer mean that you stand by this sentence as is or you 
are qualifying what is written here? 
MR MOTHIBE:  No, Chair.  As I said that I stand by the 
statement that I have made. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As is? 
MR MOTHIBE:  As it is Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Mr Mothibe, I am going to come back to 
the amount of irregular expenditure that needs to be 
disclosed in the financial statements but the words in the 
sentence I want to focus on is.  You say you are satisfied 
that sufficient audit work was performed.  
 
I 
think 
you 
have 
already 
conceded 
before 
the 
Commission that sufficient audit work was not performed 
because there was a final step in the process that you did 
not complete.  Is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, I respectfully disagree with what Ms 
20 
Hofmeyr is saying.  As I do explain Chair.  The work we 
performed on the numbers in terms of that we... ISIS and in 
compliance with IFRS, International Financial Reporting 
Standards, that was adequate.   
 
The numbers that I disclosed in the financial statements 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 117 of 255 
 
are correct.  The work that we do around procurement and 
supply chain management and all irregular and fruitless 
expenditure.   
 
Chair, that is on the compliance side and it relates to the 
quality of the numbers.  But on the quantum of the numbers 
Chair, I stand by my statement I have made ...[indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Now, you did explain the... you begin to 
explain the difference between the quantum of numbers and 
the quality of numbers but I do not think I got a full picture.   
 
You made the example about the amounts spent on 
10 
drinks and you said if... you said R 2 million or... was spent 
on things.   
 
The statement that R 2 million was spent on drinks 
remains valid, okay?  Now would that be the quality of 
numbers? 
MR MOTHIBE:  It is the quantum Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the quantum? 
MR MOTHIBE:  And that is what ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  And the quality? 
MR MOTHIBE:  The quality is... then the question that you 
20 
ask is, will you then address the compliance with a supply 
chain management Chair.  You say ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, that is where quality would...? 
MR 
MOTHIBE: 
 
Yes. 
 
How 
was 
it 
acquired 
in 
the 
...[indistinct] process. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 118 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOTHIBE:  Even if you did not follow due process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOTHIBE:  You might find that of the R 2 million... let us 
say half a million ...[indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOTHIBE:  And therefore, you will then disclose half a 
million under irregular expenditure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MOTHIBE:  But the fact that the money was spent on 
10 
refreshments that will change.  If you still spend on that, 
there was a service provider who delivered.   
 
You have got the invoice.  You paid them.  It has gone 
through the ...[indistinct] of the payment process.  There is 
going ...[indistinct] [coughing] authorisations and it has been 
paid. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
H’m. 
 
But 
if... 
with 
reference 
to 
procurement.  You do not do enough work for you to state 
that the entity has been put at the risk of being sued for 
millions of rands. 
20 
 
You do not say that because you did not do enough work 
to be able to say that, whether it is because files were not 
given to you or because you were focussing on something 
else. 
 
Then that would go to the quantity of work.  Where 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 119 of 255 
 
would that fit in? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, those are... that ...[indistinct] Chair 
that it is on the supply chain. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Supply chain. 
MR MOTHIBE:  Supply Chain. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOTHIBE:  It ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, in regard to supply chain.  That you 
said [laughs] supply chain a section of the work you were 
supposed to do.  Did you accept that in regard to that you 
10 
did not sufficient work? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Chair, we said that we had done sufficient 
work. 
 
We 
reported 
to 
the Audit 
Committee 
and 
to 
Management but we did not report to the shareholders. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  H’m. 
MR MOTHIBE:  So... and I think that we should clarify Chair.  
We did sufficient work.  The error that we made Chair is in 
the report... on the reporting side Chair.  And I do not know if 
Chair ...[indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No, do not go back ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR MOTHIBE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think your point is.  We did the work but 
we did not do the leg relating to reporting. 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that we did not do the leg relating to 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 120 of 255 
 
reporting, does not make the work that we did insufficient. 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the point you are making. 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Mr Mothibe, I have traversed that with you 
yesterday.  So I am not going to go over it again.  And I 
stress the importance of that last step.  But it is not possible 
to redo it today. 
 
So what I would like to just get your point on is.  Section 
10 
55(2) of the PMFA makes it a requirement that the financial 
statements of a public entity must include the particulars of 
any 
irregular 
expenditure 
and 
fruitless 
and 
wasteful 
expenditure. 
 
Now as I understand it.  Part of an auditor’s job is to 
determine 
whether 
the 
disclosed 
amounts 
of 
irregular 
expenditure and fruitless and wasteful expenditure are 
accurate.  Have I understood that correctly? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Right.  And your changes to what your 
20 
report should have said previously, concede that you were 
unable to perform that task because you had insufficient 
appropriate audit evidence.  Is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes.  So then why do you say in the 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 121 of 255 
 
sentence we are focussing on that you are satisfied that you 
had appropriate audit evidence?  Do you see those words? 
MR MOTHIBE:  I do see those words.  And Chair, maybe if I 
read this sentence again.   
“However, I remain of the view that despite these 
omissions, the annual financial statements for those 
financial years in terms of IFRS are free of material 
statement 
and 
that 
sufficient 
audit 
work 
was 
performed 
and 
appropriate 
audit 
evidence 
was 
obtained to support the audit opinions...” 
10 
 
So Chair, I do not know if I am repeating myself Chair, 
but I hear where Ms Hofmeyr is coming from but those areas 
Chair that she is talking to are not areas of ...[indistinct] of 
the IFRS of the ISIS. 
 
Those are areas of compliance with law and regulations.  
They do not impact your balance sheet, your income 
statement and your statement of cash-flows. 
 
And hence I am saying Chair, the ...[indistinct]... the 
numbers were correct in ...[indistinct] statement Chair.   
 
And 
I 
consider 
that 
irrespective(?) 
of 
irregular 
20 
expenditure and wasteful expenditure the... that portion of 
the Audit Opinion should have read differently. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And should it have been qualified your 
Audit Opinions for those three years? 
MR MOTHIBE:  Only with respect to fruitless and wasteful 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 122 of 255 
 
expenditure Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  But we looked at ...[intervenes]  
MR MOTHIBE:  And irregular expenditure. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Because we looked at the requirements for 
a qualified audit and we went through them previously.  I 
think it is ISIS 705. 
 
And one of the requirements for giving a qualified audit 
is.  When you have insufficient appropriate audit evidence, 
the consequence of which is, that there is a limitation of 
scope.   
10 
 
And you have accepted that both in relation to 
compliance with legislation and in relation with irregular 
expenditure and fruitless and wasteful expenditure, you had 
difficulties in the audit work, correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, the limitation of scope as it was 
does – was not in relation to the numbers disclosed in the 
financial statements.  It related to – specifically to the area 
of irregular and fruitless expenditure.  So on that basis, 
Chair, the whole set of financial statements would not be 
qualified in that regard then. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, I understand you fairly, Mr Mothibe, 
to say it required qualification in respect of the areas of 
fruitless, wasteful expenditure and irregular expenditure 
and in the area of compliance with legislation, is that 
correct? 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 123 of 255 
 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right.  So I understand the emphasis 
you place in paragraph 11 on IFRS and its standards and 
its focus but you have no difficulty accepting that there 
ought to have been a qualified opportunity  in relation to 
those areas that you make the concessions on, correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, it is also important note that whilst 
– I understand where Ms Hofmeyr is coming from, Chair, 
one then needs to assess the materiality of that in relation 
to the financial statements as a whole.  So by just taking 
10 
them as a whole, Chair, cannot be qualified, Chair, on the 
basis of those two matters. 
 
Chair, if I look at the audit opinion of the AG, Chair, 
if you will just give me a second?  I just wanted to look at 
they have worded this, Chair, because in line with how I 
have worded my opinion.  Chair, when you qualify financial 
statements it is based on the fair representation or whether 
there is a material misstatement on the numbers as a 
whole.  So if on a whole the financial statements are not 
materially misstated, Chair, then it is not qualifying, we 
20 
might qualify an aspect of it.   
 
This statement, Chair, I make here, I stand by it, I 
do not believe that what I – that on the numbers is 
incorrect, Chair.  I am comfortable that those numbers 
were fairly stated and that, as I indicate in my summary 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 124 of 255 
 
statement, that on irregular and fruitless expenditure, I did 
not – there were limitations and therefore I would not have 
been able to give the opinion that I initially gave, Chair.  I 
should have said – indicated that I was not able to obtain 
sufficient evidence because of the fact that SAA did not 
have in place sufficient controls to determine fruitless and 
wasteful expenditure. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So is it your evidence that the extent to 
which limitations of scope – limitations were placed on the 
scope of your audit in relation to irregular expenditure and 
10 
in relation to compliance with legislation, those were not 
material enough for you to have qualified the audit? 
MR MOTHIBE:   No, there were never [indistinct] 03.27 
qualified whole audit, Chair, no. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   How do you …[intervenes] 
MR MOTHIBE:   Not on their own, Chair, no. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And how do you make that conclusion or 
judgment, give that judgment today without having properly 
assessed 
the 
extent 
to 
which 
those 
failures 
and 
insufficiency 
of 
the 
appropriate 
audit 
evidence 
you 
20 
obtained what the materiality of them were?  How do you 
manage to do that today? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, as I indicated, when I explained the 
difference between the qualitative and quantitative, say on 
the quantities that are included in the financial statements 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 125 of 255 
 
are correct.  We did sufficient work on that, we obtained 
sufficient audit evidence, Chair.   
It is the – the quantities matters on supply chain 
management, that is where there were challenges, Chair.  
So that, Chair, that on its own, can never lead to the 
qualification of the audit opinion unless you say – unless 
on the numbers included in the financial statements there 
were areas where there was limitation and ones that are 
not able to obtain sufficient evidence and importantly, 
Chair, whether it is pervasive or it is material or not and 
10 
whether it is limited to specific areas, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Mr Mothibe, the other aspect that the 
PFMA requires you to consider is the quality of internal 
controls 
in 
the 
state-owned 
enterprise 
that 
you 
are 
auditing, is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct, Chair.  
ADV HOFMEYR:  And in the three years 2014 to 2016 your 
audit reports indicated that the internal controls were 
adequate, is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, I make a reference to my audit 
20 
opinion, if you...  Chair, as I did mention earlier that 
importantly, one will never give assurance on internal 
controls because we do not audit internal controls – well, 
audit all controls for the entity, then we only comment on 
the internal controls that are relevant and to the audit and 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 126 of 255 
 
ones that we have tested and in the opinion we see that we 
did not identify any deficiencies in internal controls that we 
considered significantly or significant for inclusion in the 
report.  So, Chair, it is important to say we are not giving 
assurance and we are not saying that there were no 
internal control [indistinct] but then when we give the 
opinion, we said we [indistinct] that were sufficiently 
significant for inclusion, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So you may have found some but what 
you conveyed to the reader of your audit report is that you 
10 
did not identify deficiencies in internal control that were 
sufficiently significant.  Is that a fair statement? 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is a fair statement, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Now, were you aware – do you know who 
Mr Siyakhula Vilakazi is? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Yes, I do know Mr Vilakazi. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you recall what position he held at 
SAA? 
MR MOTHIBE:   He was the Chief Audit Executive, pardon, 
let me call it, the Head of Internal Audit, Chair. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right. 
MR MOTHIBE:   And do you know that there was a tender 
for dry snacks which was initially awarded to Mantelli’s 
Biscuits in 2014 but subsequently cancelled? 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct, Chair. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 127 of 255 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And you are aware that that tender was 
irregularly 
cancelled? 
 
That 
award 
was 
irregularly 
cancelled is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, I am aware of the issues around 
that tender and what transpired. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And are you aware that there were 
complaints lodged with IRBA and with the Internal Audit 
Regulatory bodies as a consequence of the irregularity in 
that tender award? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, I am aware of complaints that were 
10 
made to IRBA in that regard. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And so you do not have knowledge of 
the Internal Audit Regulatory body, is that right? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Yes, I am also aware of that, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You are aware. 
MR MOTHIBE:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Good because in that process Mr 
Vilakazi provided an affidavit to the Institute of Internal 
Auditors of South Africa in which he gave an account of the 
state of internal auditing at SAA.  Are you aware of that 
20 
affidavit? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, I am aware that there were issues 
in there, Chair, but I am trying to recall if I had seen that, 
Chair, but I am aware that there was investigation there, 
Chair. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 128 of 255 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You see because Mr Vilakazi’s – and the 
competency of the internal audit function at SAA was 
raised in this complaint and in response to the complaint 
he produced and affidavit which we have subsequently 
obtained as the Commission and what that account that Mr 
Vilakazi, the head of internal audit at SAA discloses, is the 
following.  I am going to summarise for you in the interest 
of time but if you would like me to go to the affidavit you 
can request that, Mr Mothibe. 
What Mr Vilakazi says in that affidavit is that during 
10 
April 2014 the SAA internal audit department was only one 
year and nine months old and most of its processes were 
still being formalised.  He said that in that affidavit that 
general documentation and filing processes regarding all 
the audits were far from perfect. 
He explains that towards the end of 2014 and 
independent 
audit 
firm 
was 
appointed 
to 
do 
quality 
assurance on the internal audit work at SAA.  Were you 
aware of that firm that was appointed to do that assurance 
work? 
20 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, I am aware that there was 
assurance done on internal audit department SAA. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Did you call for that report of that 
independent audit firm? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, that report was discussed at one of 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 129 of 255 
 
the audit committees. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And then were you were aware that they 
had found significant weaknesses in the audit working 
papers, documentation and filing? 
MR MOTHIBE:   It was discussed at the audit committees, 
yes, Chair. 
ADV 
HOFMEYR: 
 
 And 
that 
was 
attributed 
to 
the 
inexperience of staff and the failure of more senior 
members within internal audit to take full accountability for 
their work.  Were you aware of that? 
10 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   To the outside observer, Mr Mothibe, I 
am putting myself in that category, that does not sound like 
an internal audit department that is functioning well.  Is 
that a fair observation for me to make? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, as Ms Hofmeyr had mentioned 
earlier, it was a fairly new internal audit department and it 
was in a developing stage.  So, Chair, I would not 
categorise 
as 
not 
necessarily 
functioning 
well 
but 
obviously because it was new, developing, there would 
20 
significantly have been room for improvement in a lot of 
areas, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do did you regard it as your job to then 
check each year whether it was improving? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, that is not within the scope of 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 130 of 255 
 
external audit, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So when you state positively at the end 
of 2016 that you were not able to identify any deficiencies 
in internal control is that because you did not look at it?  
Because you did look at it and you did not identify any 
deficiencies. 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, internal audit, first of all, Chair, if 
one looks at the control environment that we have looked 
at for audit purposes, Chair, it is the business processes 
and the management processes.  Internal audit  is an 
10 
assurance provider not to dissimilar from what we provide, 
Chair.  So when it comes to internal controls, Chair, they 
do not necessarily form the core of internal controls in the 
business, we look at the work that internal audit has 
performed which helps us identify areas that we needed to 
focus on from a risk perspective, Chair, but as an actual 
control, Chair, on its own, internal control, Chair, it is not 
the sole indicator, Chair, if I can say that, of strong 
internal controls.  It is management, it is best processes 
that has been documented and like us, there are assurance 
20 
providers and they look at that, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Mr Mothibe, we have looked at the 
provisions of the PFMA previously.  Do you accept that 
under Section 51 of the PFMA 1(a)(i) it is a requirement 
that the accounting authority of a public entity such as SAA 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 131 of 255 
 
must ensure that it has and maintained internal control.  
You do not have a difficulty with that, do you? 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And that it is also required to have and 
maintain a system of internal audit under the control and 
direction of an audit committee complying and operating in 
accordance with the regulations prescribed in terms of 
Section 76 and 77, is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And because you are required to 
10 
consider the internal control environment in the state-
owned enterprises that you audit it forms an item in your 
audit report, is that not correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Can I ask you to repeat that, Chair? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, you see, your answers to these 
questions about internal control, Mr Mothibe, as I am  
understanding, tends to suggest that internal control is not 
really something you are required to look at in the course 
of your auditing of a state owned enterprise which has 
PFMA obligations to maintain and have internal control 
20 
systems in place.  Have I – am I unfair to you in your 
evidence that you are trying to suggest that is not a 
requirement of your obligations? 
MR MOTHIBE:   I think you are being unfair because that 
is definitely not what I am suggesting.  
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 132 of 255 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay, so you accept that you do have to 
look at internal controls? 
MR MOTHIBE:   I accept that we look at internal controls 
and 
that 
we 
comment 
where 
we 
identify 
significant 
weaknesses but importantly, Chair, as I mentioned, that we 
do not give assurance for internal controls. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Mr Mothibe, I accept you do not give 
assurance on those controls but you include a positive 
statement in your audit report for three consecutive years 
that you did not identify any deficiencies in internal 
10 
control.  Do you accept that? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, the statement say we did not 
identify any sufficiently significant to report, Chair, not to 
say 
we 
did 
not 
identify 
any 
[inaudible 
– 
speaking 
simultaneously] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, I can read you the words.  It says: 
“We did not identify any…” 
Oh, I see. 
“We did not identify any deficiencies in internal 
control that were considered sufficiently significant 
20 
for inclusion in the report.” 
I accept that.  So you looked at them and you did not 
identify any that were sufficiently significant to include, 
correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is what we said, Chair. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 133 of 255 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And then I put you but in 2014 that 
system at the admission of Mr Vilakazi seems to have been 
inadequate and I understood your answer to be it was in its 
infancy and it was improving, is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And then did you trust that it was 
improving in the consecutive years for 2015 and 2016? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, as I indicated we do receive reports 
of internal auditor, we do have sight of them and they 
assist us in identifying areas of risk and what we can focus 
10 
on and certainly, Chair, if one looks at the reports of 
internal audit  over the years, Chair, the quality thereof, 
there was an improvement, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You see, the reason why I asked 
whether you were tracking the improvement is because you 
finish in 2016, the Auditor-General comes in in 2017 and 
the 
Auditor-General 
found 
significant 
internal 
control 
deficiencies.  Is that because the whole environment had 
changed within a year? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, again, it is difficult for me to 
20 
comment on environment that the Auditor-General found 
versus when we were there, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay, so let me ask whether you found 
any of the significant internal control deficiencies that the 
Auditor-General spent many, many paragraphs of his audit 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 134 of 255 
 
report 
recording. 
 
Under 
leadership 
there 
had 
been 
instability experienced in the entity which resulted in 
suspensions and resignations in key leadership positions, 
instability in leadership contributing to the overall decline 
in the internal control environment.  Did you not encounter 
any of that in your years? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, if I reflect, we had the same CFO 
from the time I became audit partner who left at the end of 
2015 replaced by one individual who was there when we 
left.  Chair, the positions –the other positions, Chair, the 
10 
position of CEO was filled at all times when we were there.  
The positions of Chief Commercial Officer was filled when 
we were there.  Even, Chair, the important positions of 
head of procurement, they were not taken, there were 
persons occupying those positions and, Chair, what was 
important to us was their ability to deliver and, Chair, we 
did not find challenges in that regard. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And did you find that leadership had 
adequately established policies and procedures to enable 
and support the understanding in execution of internal 
20 
audit objectives, processes and responsibilities? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, there were documented policies and 
procedures at SAA. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And that the audit and risk committee 
had mandated implementing various IT aspects which then 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 135 of 255 
 
were not adequately put in place.  You had no difficulties 
with that? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, in our mentioned reports and report 
to audit committee, whilst we identified we did have issues 
in the IT space but there was a head of IT who was I would 
like to think competent, Chair, and attended all audit 
committee meetings and reported back at every meeting, 
Chair, and audits that they were running and how they 
were tracking, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And unlike the Auditor-General you did 
10 
not find that leadership had failed to implement effective 
processes to ensure that sufficiently skilled individuals 
were held accountable for non-performance? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, as I indicated, all the key positions 
that were [indistinct]  those offices were occupied at all 
times when we were at South African Airways.  Issues were 
raised and in the audit committee meetings, as far as I can 
remember, Chair, there were questions asked of them to 
understand why matters have not been dealt with, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   But not enough for you to regard them 
20 
as significant departures from the requirements for internal 
control, is that correct? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Chair, I did indicate earlier that when we 
determined our audit approach for South African Airways 
we did a risk assessment, we looked at the company, the 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 136 of 255 
 
structure, its complexity to understand how everything fits 
together, Chair, and at a stage we determined that we were 
going to adopt substantive audit approach because we 
were not going to fully rely on controls, Chair.  So I do not 
know if that answers Ms Hofmeyr’s question. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   That is fine for my purposes, Mr 
Mothibe.  Chair, that brings me to the end of my questions 
unless there are further from you.  You will recall that we 
were going to ask just for a bit time before the next 
witness to get everything ready. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now looking back at the years that PIC 
(sic) was involved in auditing SAA those particular years 
and 
looking 
at 
the 
AG’s 
report 
and 
looking 
at 
Mr 
Sokombela’s evidence and remembering what I said, my 
reaction was to the evidence about SAA namely how could 
the auditors who preceded the AG during those years, 
namely Pricewaterhouse and Nkonki, how could they not 
have picked up all of these serious problems?  
As you sit there are you able to say, looking back 
and knowing what I know now, I accept that we should 
20 
have picked up those problems and we felt shocked insofar 
as we did not pick them up, those that we did not pick up 
or those that we picked up but did not include in the report 
which we should have included, we accept we fell short in 
that regard.   
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 137 of 255 
 
Or is your position that maybe my reaction is simply 
because I am not an auditor and that there is no need to 
be alarmed at how Pricewaterhouse and Nkonki could not 
have picked these things up which the AG was able to pick 
up?  What are you able to say knowing what you know 
now? 
MR MOTHIBE:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair, I think for 
starters, from PwC’s side and I do think it probably applies 
the same for Nkonki that we would never on an assignment 
that we are not able to deliver on and that we are 
10 
competent to deliver on.  Chair, we did work, we identified 
deficiencies, we raised them with management, we also 
raised them with the audit committee and we have 
conceded that we should have elevated them in the audit 
report because I think, Chair, if they were elevated the 
report would have had the same as the AG’s report reads.   
So I am confident, Chair, that both firms have done 
the work.  The work was done, definitely, Chair.  There was 
fairly delivered.  What we had erred in was not elevating 
those last elements as I said including into the audit 
20 
opinion. 
 
Chair, in as far as whether we should have seen 
some of these ones that we did not see, Chair, there is an 
inherent limitation, Chair, of audit sampling where – and I 
think I alluded to it earlier that this was the approach from 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 138 of 255 
 
the – the ones that we saw we did report.  The ones that 
we did not see, because of audit sampling, Chair, there are 
important issues, had we seen them we would have 
definitely, Chair, followed the – in short that they are 
reported appropriately, Chair.  So I do not know if that 
covers the question, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine.  Unless there is 
anything, there is nothing? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Mothibe, thank you very much for 
10 
coming to give evidence, we appreciate it.  You are now 
excused. 
MR MOTHIBE:   Thank you very much, Chair, for your 
indulgence, thank you for the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Ms Hofmeyr, you would like 
about five minutes? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Maybe ten, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ten, ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Because we just have to check the 
communication with our next witness. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And we do not want to call you in and 
then have it… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Could I do it on this basis, as soon as I 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 139 of 255 
 
have been given the green light we can indicate to your 
registrar. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, that is fine. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you so much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you Chair, if I can just indicate to 
Mr Mkwanazi and your attorney Mr Mkhwanazi, we have 
10 
commenced 
the 
session 
and 
I 
am 
going 
to 
do 
an 
introduction and then I am going to hand over to my 
learned friend with your leave Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair the next witness we intend to call 
is Mr Mafika Mkwanazi, his evidence is important and 
spans two State owned enterprises as well as the topic of 
the New Age, which is an aspect that we have been looking 
at in some detail in the Commission.    
 
Chair as I indicated the evidence will be presented 
20 
by my learned, Ms Amy Armstrong.   Mr Mkwanazi will be 
giving evidence today via video link from a location within 
South Africa and Chair he will be visible to us on the 
screen on my right, your left.   He will be able to see Ms 
Armstrong and to the extent that he wishes to you we have 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 140 of 255 
 
indicated to him he should get a device to stream the 
proceedings.    
 
Oh, apologies, there has actually been another 
device set up so he can see both you on his screen as well 
as Ms Armstrong, and Chair just to remind ourselves of Mr 
Mkwanazi’s evidence is going to fit in, Mr Mkwanazi was a 
member of the so-called old Eskom Board, that was the 
Board before the change in 2014 and it was the Board who 
had to deal with the TNA contract that the former Chief 
Executive Officer, Mr Majila, had entered into for 43million, 
10 
when that contract was flagged as a reportable irregularity 
by the auditors of Eskom.    
 
Now 
the 
Commission 
has 
previously 
received 
evidence from Mr Pamensky as one of the new Board 
members who ultimately had to take the decision to ratify 
that contract.   It has also heard the evidence of Mr Tsotsi, 
who was the Chairman of the Eskom Board and so who 
transitioned from the old Board to the new Board, but what 
we haven’t yet heard is a representative of the position of 
the old board, and it is Mr Mkwanazi who fills that position 
20 
for us today, and so there will be some aspects of his 
approach to the TNA contract while an old Board member 
of Eskom that will be probed. 
 
Mr Mkwanazi was also at Transnet when as his 
statement indicate he was approached for a meeting with a 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 141 of 255 
 
member of the Gupta Family regarding advertising spend 
with the New Age, and Chair Ms Armstrong will spend some 
time probing that because that meeting happened at a time 
and in circumstances that bear a number of similarities to 
other accounts that this Commission has received in 
evidence about those interactions in early 2011 and late 
2010.    
 
Chair three Rule 33 Notices were issued in respect 
of Mr Mkwanazi’s statement that was way back earlier this 
year, because Mr Mkwanazi had been waiting expectantly 
10 
to give his evidence before the Commission.   
 
There has only been one response Chair and that is 
from Mr Malusi Gigaba, it is not an application to cross-
examine Mr Mkwanazi, he supplies an affidavit setting out 
his version and as we have done previously when we have 
been fortunate enough on our timing to receive an affidavit 
before a witness gives evidence Ms Armstrong will traverse 
pertinent aspects of Mr Gigaba’s version with Mr Mkwanazi 
this afternoon. 
 
Chair Mr Mkwanazi is one of those witnesses whose 
20 
evidence, relevant to the Commission, spans more than will 
be addressed with him today.   As we have had to do 
previously with our focus on TNA withstands a number of 
SOE’s we focused in on the TNA aspects, we focused in 
with any associated meetings, we will look at TNA in 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 142 of 255 
 
Transnet and in Eskom, with Mr Mkwanazi but other 
aspects where he may have relevant evidence, particularly 
in relation to Transnet will be left for the Transnet work 
stream to deal with. 
 
Chair the last point from me before I hand over to 
Ms Armstrong is to request that Mr Mkwanazi’s statement 
be entered as Exhibit MM7, it should be directly in front of 
you. 
 
Now Chair it is a very short statement, which is 
then accompanied by ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   That will be together with its annexures, 
is that right? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It actually doesn’t have annexures, it is 
so short and sweet that it comprises only two pages. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, what about the A, B and C that 
...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, so let me explain that is in what we 
have previously been calling the other document section 
and it comprises the affidavit from Mr Gigaba, which is 
going to be put to Mr Mkwanazi today, and so those are the 
20 
attachments to Mr Gigaba’s affidavit, and then certain 
additional documents. 
 
Chair 
my 
learned 
friend 
was 
mindful 
of 
the 
approach you took yesterday to want him to separately to 
identify the documents, so what we are going to suggest 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 143 of 255 
 
for today is we enter as Exhibit MM7 the statement of Mr 
Mkwanazi and then for referencing purposes, and that will 
be A, it will be MM7A will be the statement and then as Ms 
Armstrong leads you through today she will use primarily 
the pagination number to get to you to the right page but 
then she will give an exhibit number to each of the 
documents, because there are only a few and so she can 
do that actually while she is giving – asking the questions, 
if that is suitable to you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja no that is fine.   Mr Mkwanazi’s 
10 
statement is it a statement or affidavit? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It is actually a statement, it is only 
signed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Excuse me – will be admitted and 
marked as Exhibit MM7, is that right? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you so much, I am just going to 
quickly sterilise because I am about to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Before you do that we haven’t done this 
20 
before other than when we – when I heard evidence from 
the international experts right at the beginning of the 
hearings in August 2018, so it is necessary that we don’t 
confuse the public about what we do and what we don’t do. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, of course, yes. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 144 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I understand that Mr Mkwanazi made a 
request ...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   He did indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That his evidence be heard via Zoom or 
is it Zoom or is it ...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   It is actually Zoom today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.   I have allowed, I have 
granted leave to that, I understand and you must just tell 
me your understanding, I understand that he had concerns 
about travelling because of Covid-19. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, there is a concern about him falling 
into a risk category and with the escalating infection rate 
at the moment his request to the Commission was that he 
remain at his home as I understand where he is currently 
located and give the evidence from there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It was particularly related to health 
concerns. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but you indicated that for a long 
time he has been available and ready to come and 
20 
...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes indeed, since February Mr Mkwanazi 
was sitting here many days. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so it is the Commission that has not 
been able to give him the opportunity so I have decided to 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 145 of 255 
 
allow that we – I hear his evidence in this way on condition 
that at a certain time when maybe the Covid-19 situation 
has subsided sufficiently he would be able to come before 
the Commission in person and confirm under oath in front 
of me the evidence that will have been transcribed by then. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So can I confirm that the recording will 
be fine, we will get a transcript. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   We have confirmed that and that 
stipulation Chair has been communicated to Mr Mkwanazi. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and he said ...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:  And he is comfortable with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He is comfortable. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Mkwanazi do you understand all of 
that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman I do, thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay no thank you very much, and 
thank you for making yourself  available to give evidence 
to the Commission. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   The last just procedural aspect that I 
always forget is Mr Mkwanazi is legally represented, his 
legal representatives did introduce themselves to you way 
back 
when, 
but 
I 
wonder 
if 
they 
could 
just 
place 
themselves on record, they are also on the Zoom platform. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 146 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.   Is he with Mr Mkhwanazi or 
is he somewhere else? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   He is not with him, he is at a separate 
location, you will see him second from the end on the top 
row of – second from the left hand side, so Mr Mkwanazi 
comes in the frame on the left and then next to him is also 
Mr 
Mkhwanazi 
but 
spelt 
with 
an 
H, 
as 
is 
legal 
representative. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS HOFMEYR:   Mr Mkhwanazi can I ask you to place 
10 
yourself on record. 
ADV MKHWANAZI:   Good afternoon Chair, good afternoon 
colleagues.  Thank you very much for affording us this 
opportunity finally to appear before the Chair we are here 
with one sole purposes, which is to help the Commission to 
achieve its objectives in terms of the investigations and 
also to mention to you Chair and specifically to thank you 
for your indulgence in allowing us to appear before you on 
this medium, which clearly is becoming a permanent 
feature of our going forward, so thank you very much for 
20 
that indulgence, and also to state Chair that the reason 
that as my – the advocate just mentioned now, our 
statement is so short and sweet the words she used, it is 
because of the amount of time we have spent consulting 
with the Commission, starting initially with the forensic 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 147 of 255 
 
investigators and of course subsequent to that with the 
legal team and the Commission.  We specifically initially 
requested that we be given questions that we should focus 
on, and as we went through the motions we kept on you 
know correcting and making our statement much more user 
friendly and it is for that reason it is as short as it is, but I 
must also mention Chair that with regards to Transnet in 
particular there were a number of requests that we had 
made to the previous Company Secretary at Transnet to 
see if we could access any Board information that were 
10 
being referred to by the Commission and unfortunately we 
could not get any information from Transnet.   I believe 
that Company Secretary is no longer there and there is a 
change of guard and so forth. 
 
But I also want to confirm Chair that the issues in 
the main that Mr Mkwanazi will be talking to today, both in 
terms of Transnet and of Eskom, are issues specifically 
relating to the TNA and of course you would recall Chair 
that both the Transnet and of course Eskom, and many 
other institutions had agreements there and of course Mr 
20 
Mkwanazi is ready, willing and able to cooperate with you, 
so thank you very much Chair and we spent the whole day 
waiting for you, so we have discussed as much as we could 
with Mr Mkwanazi so I will just give you know give him the 
floor 
obviously 
through 
you 
and 
you 
Chair 
will 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 148 of 255 
 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No thank you very much Mr Mkhwanazi. 
ADV MKHWANAZI:   If I have a question, I will just raise 
my hand, so thank you very much Chair and colleagues.  
CHAIRPERSON:   No thank you very much. 
ADV 
MKHWANAZI: 
 
 
Oh 
and 
my 
name 
is 
Ronnie 
Mkhwanazi 
and 
I 
am 
the 
Director 
at 
Mkhwanazi 
Incorporated.   Mr Mkwanazi and I are in the same building 
but of course he is in the boardroom and I am in another 
office, just to make sure we observe all protocols relating 
10 
to Çovid 19, so thank you very much Chair and also just to 
ask for your indulgence in advance, that in the event, and 
you will guide us Chair in terms of the procedures of the 
Commission, if we are allowed to in fact request for some 
time out, if I need to discuss something with Mr Mkwanazi 
we will be entirely in your hands in that regard Chair, so 
thank you very much for being here today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no that is fine, no thank you 
very much.   I do hope that nothing will happen that we 
require that we interrupt Mr Mkwanazi’s evidence for 
20 
anything but if something does arise, we will deal with it at 
that stage.    
I do want to say you mentioned you made reference 
to Transnet and Mr Mkwanazi the fact that he has tried to 
obtain some documents, or you have tried to get some 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 149 of 255 
 
documents.   I do know that soon the Commission will be 
communicating with Mr Mkwanazi with regard to some of 
the issues at Transnet and there are some documents that 
the Commission has asked for and obtained from Transnet, 
so there may be others that you may have wanted and you 
didn’t get or you did get, but I just thought I must just let 
you know that I am aware that the Commission will be in 
communication with Mr Mkwanazi in regard to some of the 
Transnet issues, and I am happy that his commitment to 
cooperate 
with 
the 
Commission 
and 
to 
assist 
the 
10 
Commission has been reiterated by you as well. 
 
Okay, thank you. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair, if I may then hand over 
to my learned friend, Ms Armstrong. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes thank you. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I must just say that we will have an oath 
or affirmation administered to Mr Mkwanazi even though at 
some stage in the future he will take an oath in person 
here but we will do one today as well.    
20 
 
Thank you very much, I think then if we can have Mr 
Mkwanazi the witness appearing now on the screen.  
Where is the person who is controlling, oh, okay, so it 
might not be as quick as one thinks. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Mr Mkwanazi can you – could you just 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 150 of 255 
 
– thank you, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Is that fine? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, if you can rise and then either an 
oath or an affirmation will be administered, I think you can 
just listen. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Mafika Edmund Mkwanazi. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objections in taking the 
prescribed affirmation? 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   I do not have any objection. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you solemnly affirm that the evidence 
you give shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing 
else but the truth, if so please raise your right hand and 
say I truly affirm. 
MR MKWANAZI:   I truly affirm. 
MR MAFIKA MKWANAZI:   [d.s.s.] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, you may be 
seated. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Okay, alright, thanks. 
20 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes Ms Armstrong? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want to properly place yourself 
on record for the first time? 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 151 of 255 
 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Yes thank you Chair, indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Chair so I am Amy Armstrong, I am 
part of the legal team of the Commission, and before we 
get started given the nature of the medium if there are 
means to pin Mr Mkwanazi – there you go – I would just 
like to confirm three things with Mr Mkwanazi about where 
he is given that we are using this medium.  The first thing I 
wanted to confirm is indeed as we heard from his legal 
representative, can you confirm Mr Mkwanazi that you are 
10 
by yourself in the room? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes it is only myself, nobody else. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Okay.  And can you confirm that you 
will not be receiving any messages during your testimony 
and if you do receive messages to please bring it to the 
attention of the Chair. 
MR MKWANAZI:   No I will not be receiving messages, 
naturally except for the documents that you forwarded to 
me. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Indeed, and that is the third thing I 
20 
would like you to confirm is just that you will only be 
looking at the documents and exhibits that have been 
provided to you and no other documentation, can you 
confirm that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 152 of 255 
 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you very much Mr Mkwanazi.   
So just to orientate Chair you and Mr Mkwanazi about the 
exhibits and files we will be using, so the first and the 
main 
will 
be 
Mr 
Mkwanazi’s 
statements 
and 
other 
documents in MM7.  Then we will be turning to two other 
files, only two other files, one being EXHIBIT MM3, which 
was Mr Pamensky’s evidence and the other one will be 
MM6 
which 
was 
Mr 
Tsotsi’s 
evidence 
before 
the 
Commission and Mr Mkwanazi you have all three of those 
files with you, is that correct? 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Okay.  As my learned friend, Ms 
Hofmeyr, indicated I have created a list of the different 
documents in the order that they appear in this file, and I 
have given them labels, and I will not necessarily be 
referring to them in the order in which they appear in here 
but as I go to them I will read what the label is into the 
record as to what the exhibit is called. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes, 
we 
have 
already 
done 
Mr 
Mkwanazi’s statement but for any other documents as and 
20 
when you have to refer to them you will have to deal with 
them at that stage. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you Chair, so we call the first 
one MM7, could I correct that just to call it MM7A, this 
statement on page 1 and 2. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 153 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well we said MM7, is that because you 
intend to make the others MM7B and onwards? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, we will then amend what I said 
earlier on, Mr Mkwanazi’s statement will be Exhibit MM7A, 
okay. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you Chairman.  So before we 
begin Mr Mkwanazi could you just explain what your 
qualifications are? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I have two university degrees, one from 
10 
the University of Zululand which is a BSC in Mathematics 
and Applied Mathematics and the second one is a degree 
from the University of Natal in Electrical Engineering, and 
then I do have a couple of diplomas from – it is from Wits 
University etcetera, but those are short duration diplomas. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well on a lighter note I don’t know about 
you Ms Armstrong but I went to the same two universities 
too 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   My goodness, yes, that is interesting 
Chair.  So then Mr Mkwanazi if you could explain, you’re 
20 
obviously as was stated earlier you are going to be going 
to be giving testimony in your capacity, your involvement in 
both Transnet and Eskom.    
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   But let us just begin with Transnet.  
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 154 of 255 
 
Could you just explain your role at Transnet? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Advocate Amy you – I have been with 
Transnet maybe 19 or 20 years because I started there in 
1996 as an Executive Director, then I left in 2003 being a 
Group CEO.  Then I rejoined Transnet in December 2010 
and I left in December 2014, so I have had different types 
of roles the latest one being that of being non-executive 
Chairman from 2010 to 2014. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you Mr Mkwanazi, so can I just 
take you in this MM7 bundle, I would like to take you to 
10 
page 27. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That would be MM027? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   That is correct. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Am I correct, okay.  Okay, I have got a 
computer in front of me, scrolling down, let me see I am on 
page 25, 27, yes I am there. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you Mr Mkwanazi.  The 
purpose of this is just to indicate Chair this has been 
labelled in my file which we will ensure is in all the files, 
this is Exhibit MM7D. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is this letter an exhibit on its own or is it 
an attachment? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Indeed, it is an exhibit on its own 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you would like it to be admitted as 
Exhibit MM7D. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 155 of 255 
 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  7D, that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it dated 16 ...[intervenes]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:   December 2010, indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The letter on Transnet letterhead 
appearing at page 27 is it a letter or just a note. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  It is an announcement by Transnet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is a statement? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, the statement on Transnet letterhead 
appearing at page 27 will be admitted as Exhibit MM7D, is 
10 
that right? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   It is MM7D. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, that’s fine.    
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you and Mr Mkwanazi the 
purpose of showing that to you is just as a reminder that 
this is an announcement from Transnet on 16 December 
2016 saying that a new Chairman was to – and that would 
be 
you 
Mr 
Mkwanazi, 
is 
to 
assume 
executive 
responsibilities until a permanent CEO is appointed.   And 
then it states ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   ...in the first paragraph: 
“You 
will 
be 
tasked 
with 
that 
additional 
responsibility of Group Chief Executive with effect 
from 16 December 2010.” 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 156 of 255 
 
Is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Okay and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry, just to connect this with 
something else, would it be correct Mr Mkwanazi to say 
when you became a non-executive director, chairman of 
the board in 2010, you were coming in together with a new 
board of Transnet? 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay, thank you. 
10 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   So just to confirm Mr Mkwanazi you 
are a non-executive Chairman of the Board from December 
2010 to 2014, but you have a brief period from December 
2010 as being the – an Executive, Acting Executive of the 
Chief – Group Chief Executive is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   And then ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry, the proper title would have 
been 
Acting 
Chief 
Executive 
or 
Acting 
Group 
Chief 
Executive? 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   Acting Group Chief Executive. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Acting Group Chief Executive, thank 
you.  I am indebted.  And then in 16 February 2011 I 
believe that a Mr Brian Molefe was appointed, does that 
accord with your memory as the Group Chief? 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 157 of 255 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja, it is that time yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Okay so it is just in that period from 
December to February 2011 that you were serving as the 
Group Chief Executive. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Okay, thank you.   And then Mr 
Mkwanazi just your role at Eskom. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   What was that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I was non-Executive Director, I had been 
10 
there before by the way in the late nineties, I was on the 
Board of the Eskom Council then, they were called Eskom 
Council, it could have been 1995 or 1996, it was for a brief 
period, maybe two years.  Then in 2011, June  - ja 2011, 
around June, the Minister appointed me to the Board of 
Eskom as a non-Executive Director. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   And do you recall the end of your 
tenure on the Board, the date? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I think it was December 2014. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   That is my understanding, thank you 
20 
Mr Mkwanazi.  So let us begin then with your evidence 
regarding Transnet and that is – let’s go back to your 
statement which is page 1 of that bundle that you are 
looking at. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 158 of 255 
 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   That is MM7A, Exhibit.  And then Mr 
Mkwanazi can you just turn to the second page where your 
signature appears  
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Can you just confirm that that is your 
signature? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes it is my signature. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Okay and then Mr Mkwanazi I see at 
the top of the beginning of the statement your surname is 
spelt incorrectly, it has got an “h” in it, just the very first 
10 
page, Mkhwanazi, so I take it that is incorrect? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   We must just correct that. 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, no that is incorrect, there is no “h”. 
ADV 
ARMSTRONG: 
 
 
Great, 
and 
then 
besides 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But just out of curiosity is the position 
that whether it is written with an h or without an h it is the 
same people, so in other words ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   It is the same family Chair, because in 
20 
my family there are four children, two of the children have 
an “h”, two of the children do not have an “h”, it was the 
Home Affairs that decided what. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I was about to ask whether it was a 
Home Affairs error.  Okay, alright. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 159 of 255 
 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you Mr Mkwanazi so besides 
that correction do you have any other corrections at the 
outset you would like to make to this statement? 
MR MKWANAZI:   No 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Okay so then do you confirm that 
under oath that this statement is true and correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   It is yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you.  Okay so as my learned 
friend, Ms Hofmeyr explained any meeting with a member 
of the Gupta Family is of great interest to the Commission 
10 
and we would like to just expand upon the – what you – the 
content of this statement and make sure that that we 
understand in detail everything that happened on each of 
the two meetings that you deal with in this statement, so I 
am going to be taking you through those events step by 
step. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Okay. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   And of course, Mr Mkwanazi I know 
this was a long time ago, the statements starts in January 
2011, but just if you could give us as much detail as you 
20 
can recall we would appreciate that.  So ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well maybe let us say Mr Mkwanazi did 
you ever meet with the Guptas? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes I have Chairperson. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 160 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, do you remember how many times 
you met with them? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja, I have Chairman, I met them twice 
around that time when they were talking me going to their 
house, then when we say Guptas it is an interesting family, 
yes I met them that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, interesting family. 
MR MKWANAZI:   But then I met them at some of their 
events, if I can call them like at the TNA breakfasts, I met 
their employees, not necessarily the Gupta Family.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, let’s talk about the times 
when you met them in their house, in their residence. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Tell us about the first visit to their house, 
if you visited their house, tell us how it came about and give 
me as much information about what you discussed with them 
as possible. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I got a call in January 2011 from a 
Mr Tony Gupta who indicated to me that he had got my cell 
phone number from Minister Gigaba and requested to see 
20 
me.  I agreed to see him or – and then they gave me 
details of where they stayed and I – we agreed on a date, I 
don’t recall the date exactly and I went to visit them at 
their house somewhere in Saxonwold if I recall, and yes on 
arrival at that gate we met the security, then I come 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 161 of 255 
 
through the gate and then I drive through something like a 
drive through where I then stop the car, told to stop the car 
in front of an entrance, get out of the car, then walk up the 
stairs because the protocol there seemingly was you drive 
your car in, then they drive the car to where they park it.   
You don’t know where exactly they park it. 
 
So then I got into the house and there was another 
protocol, I recall I think I had to take off my shoes and then 
went to this venue where this meeting was going to be held.  
And in that room, I then got introduced to the people I was 
10 
going to meet.  One of them was Tony Gupta and the other 
was Duduzane Zuma.  Upon meeting them we had what I 
would call general discussions or pleasantries.  They 
introduced themselves told me that they were involved in 
mining, computers.  They employed well over 10 000 people 
in the country in terms of whatever they were doing and of 
course I had reciprocate I told them that no I am an 
entrepreneur and at that time I was working on a project to 
try and do something in KZN which was an ambitious project 
of property development and therefore we shared that and 
20 
then we came to the main purpose of the discussion which 
was – they made me aware that they are friends of 
President Zuma which is fine and then they made me aware 
that they are aware that Transnet has a marketing budget of 
R1 billion.  I am not sure where they got that from and they 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 162 of 255 
 
therefore wanted to be allocated 30 – 50% of that marketing 
budget.  And of course, I told them that Transnet has got a 
method 
of 
procuring 
anything 
through 
a 
procurement 
manual.  They issue RFI’s, RFQ’s and RFP’s – request for 
proposals etcetera before they take decisions on things like 
those as a matter of principle.  But also, me as an 
individual even though I was seeing them at that time you 
need to understand I might have been acting GCE but I did 
not behave like an acting GCE I behaved like a non-
executive Chairman.  So I made them aware that hold it you 
10 
are actually talking to the wrong person.  Because I am 
non-executive chairman.  People who get involved in 
procurement matters are executives and in that case 
whatever their levels are but it is executives in the various 
areas of the organisation.  And of course they then went 
about telling me how close they are to the President.  They 
– they meet him once a week.  He comes to their social 
functions and yes also as he comes to their social function 
you could see that these people are deep friends with the 
President.  They even shared that at virtually a week he 
20 
visits their house etcetera, etcetera.  And therefore, in 
terms of the – they entertaining that they do they claim that 
occasionally the President sings for them Umshini Wami, 
Umshini Wami.  Naturally whatever they were saying I – well 
did not go down well with me.  I felt they were abusing their 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 163 of 255 
 
friendship with the President and – but I did ask Duduzane 
to confirm if these people are actually friends of your father 
and he did confirm.  And that in a nutshell would be how we 
met but it did not – the meeting did not end on a good note 
because they – they were too boisterous as if they control a 
lot of things that I knew they were lying about ja.  So yes 
that was my first meeting with them on that first occasion.  
Then post that meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe .. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Because the – let me pause. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay ja maybe let us deal with that first 
meeting and finish before we move to the next meeting. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Armstrong. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you Chair.  So just a few details I 
would like you just orientate us in times.  So this is January 
2011 which means you have just been appointed as a Non-
Executive Chair you are acting Group Chief Executive and 
this is just after that and you arrive at – first of all you get a 
phone call.  I just want to confirm.  Do you recall exactly 
20 
what Mr Tony Gupta said to you in that call? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Ja he confirmed that you are Mr Mkwanazi 
etcetera, etcetera.  I said ja.  And he said we have been 
given your number by Mr Mahlusi Gigaba and we would like 
to meet you.  Then I said okay fine I can meet you.  It is not 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 164 of 255 
 
a big issue.  Ja. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Had you heard of Mr Gupta before this 
phone call? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes I had read about them in terms some 
of their involvement with the some of the black business 
people in the country around that time.  Yes I had read about 
them. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  So why did you … 
MR MKWANAZI:  But I did not know which one in terms of – 
it was just like the Gupta family who deal with various people 
10 
at the time. Some big names in the BEE space if I can use 
the word. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you.  And why did you agree to 
attend this meeting?  I mean for so – there are summoning 
you to – to their home and is – was that normal?  Why did 
you feel that you should attend that meeting? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Do not forget I felt I should attend this 
meeting because you cannot quote my Minister and then I do 
not respond in a particular way.  So yes I felt I should attend 
that meeting because somehow, I already knew that these 
20 
are important people.  I read about some of the investments 
that they had done in the country.  So yes I felt I had to meet 
them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you proceed Ms Armstrong.  You 
said that Mr Gupta – Tony Gupta said he got your cell phone 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 165 of 255 
 
number from… 
MR MKWANAZI:  My details. 
CHAIRPERSON:  From your – your details from Minister 
Gigaba, is that right? 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it true that at that time Minister Gigaba 
was Minister of Public Enterprises? 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Under 
which 
Transnet 
fell? 
 
Public 
Enterprises. 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes Chair.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And Transnet fell under Public Enterprises 
Department, is that right? 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct Chair.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Now had you given Mr Gigaba your 
cell phone number before? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Tony Gupta. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Mr Chairman I had. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You had given it to him. 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:  Because I had met Mr Gigaba around 
October of that year.  I had known Mr Gigaba while he was in 
the ANC Youth League. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  So yes. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 166 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  You had given him your number. 
MR MKWANAZI:  He has got my numbers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  That – my numbers for – yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay alright. And you were speaking 
to Mr Tony Gupta as far as you know for the first time when 
he called you on this occasion or you had had some 
interactions with him before? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No I had never spoken to him before. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before.  Okay thank you. 
10 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Armstrong. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  And I just want to talk a bit about what 
the house in Saxonwold looked like to you.  So from the 
outside when you approached it do you have any memory of 
what it looked like to you? 
MR MKWANAZI:  All I recall I think it was a white painted 
house or light grey.  It had big gates with very high pillars on 
both sides and I think it had a guard house as well 
somewhere in there.  And naturally I only saw a portion of 
20 
the house maybe 5% of the house.  I did not see the rest of 
it because all I saw was how to get in, drive to the entrance 
that is basically it.  In the house and then into the meeting 
room. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you.  And Mr Mkwanazi when you 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 167 of 255 
 
– you got out the car and you handed over your keys to the 
valet were there any other security protocols that took 
place? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Not too many but all I can indicate it 
looked like a highly guarded home.  Because even as you 
entered there was maybe two security at the gate – two 
security personnel.  And of course, you entered but what was 
interesting about just a strange observation I do not think I 
saw a black security guard and I do not think I saw a black 
worker inside who gave tea or things like those.  So yes that 
10 
is how I remember the house.  And then I went inside and 
went into that board room where we were offered Coke Cola 
to drink etcetera.  Ja but that is it. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you.   And Mr Mkwanazi did you 
keep your cell phone on you at all times? 
MR MKWANAZI:  My cell phone was on me at all times.  
They did not demand it or something like that ja. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you.  And when you walked into 
the meeting room – so – could you just explain.  You get to 
the entrance of the house and then how do you – how does it 
20 
look when you walk in the door? 
MR MKWANAZI:  That was how many years ago.  Chair I am 
not sure now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  About ten years ago. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Frankly… 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 168 of 255 
 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed 10 years. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MR MKWANAZI:  You are asking me a difficult question. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  No indeed. 
MR MKWANAZI:  The next thing you will ask me was there a 
portrait, what was the colour of the wall?  How many corners 
were there when you turned right or turned left?  I do not 
recall. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
10 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed Mr Mkwanazi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us ask you another question.  At this 
meeting apart from Mr Tony Gupta and Mr Duduzane Zuma 
and yourself was there anybody else? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No there was nobody and it was just the 
three of us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay alright.  You have already told 
me up to a certain point that you exchanged pleasantries. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or – general discussion but then Mr Tony 
20 
Gupta then raised the issue of – or said that they were 
aware of Transnet’s marketing budget, is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of R1 billion.  That is what they said, is 
that right? 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 169 of 255 
 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was it factually correct that that was the 
marketing billion – marketing budget of Transnet at the time? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chair – I did not know then but that was so 
incorrect and false.  Why I would know because at some 
stage I was on the South African Airways board and the 
entity within Transnet at the time that spent a lot of money 
on marketing was actually SAA.  And in 2010 or 2011 SAA 
was out of Transnet by that time so this figure of R1 billion 
was a thumb suck. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that is quite interesting because with 
regard to GCIS I heard evidence last year I think it was or it 
might have been towards the end of 2018 that from Mr 
Themba Maseko who was Chief Executive Officer of GCIS at 
a certain stage that when he met with Ajay Gupta in 
Saxonwold in 2010 Ajay Gupta told him exactly the correct 
amount budget that his department namely GCIS had and he 
was surprised at that.  But I think you are saying that certain 
what Tony Gupta said was not the correct budget for 
Transnet? 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman it would not have been even 
though I – at that time I had not even checked what amount 
the budget was.  But my knowledge of that entity was deep 
enough to know that this figure of R1 billion is just a thumb 
suck.  
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 170 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Yes.  Now.. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Sorry Chair just on that issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  May I just direct Mr Mkwanazi to an 
affidavit that we have procured at page 37 of the bundle and 
that is from Mr Livhumhuwami Makhode. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry page 37? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  34. 
CHAIRPERSON:  34? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  That is correct. 34. 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:  Is that MM? 
CHAIRPERSON:  MM34. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  MM34 of that same bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You will find that most of the time Mr 
Mkwanazi we will not mention MM we will just say 34 but we 
will be meaning MM34. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  I am on that page yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
20 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you.  And Chair this is an 
affidavit that does not seem to be contentious but we seek it 
to be provisionally admitted.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes this would be Exhibit. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  This is Exhibit MM7E. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 171 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  The affidavit of Livhumhuwami Tommy 
Makhode, L-i-v-h-u-m-h-u-w-a-m-i Tommy Makhode, M-a-k-h-
o-d-e which appears at page 34 will be admitted and marked 
as Exhibit MM20 – no. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  MM7 
CHAIRPERSON:  MM7 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  E. 
CHAIRPERSON:  E.  Okay thank you. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  And Mr Mkwanazi if you turn to the next 
page the budgets are set out there for Transnet’s marketing 
and advertising and you will see that in 2010 the total 
marketing budget was R27 005 399.00 and in 2011 the total 
spend marketing budget was R95 530 394.00.  So you were 
correct to be sceptical about those figures.  They are off by 
a factor of at least 10 in 2011 and by more than that for 
2010. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MKWANAZI:  Thank you for that clarification. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ms Armstrong. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On that first meeting do you still have 
questions? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Mkwanazi I just 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 172 of 255 
 
want to ask if when you entered the room and Mr Duduzane 
Zuma 
and 
Mr 
Gupta 
were 
there 
did 
they 
introduce 
themselves and did you know who they were before you 
entered that room from Mr Zuma in particular as you 
indicated you had not heard from Mr Gupta before? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Duduzane I knew the name but we had 
never met. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Okay thank you. 
MR MKWANAZI:  So yes I met him and Tony Gupta I heard 
the names – even right now they – that two of them I am not 
10 
sure what their names are but one is light complexion, the 
other one is a little bit darker.  So yes I met Tony Gupta then 
and that is it. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you. 
MR MKWANAZI:  And of course, I did meet Duduzane again 
at a different second meeting. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you.  And did they – when they 
were – when Mr Gupta was speaking about his relationship 
to President Zuma did, he mention any other relationship to 
members of Parliament or Cabinet, anything else about his 
20 
influence? 
MR MKWANAZI:  They did try to – to indicate that they are 
friends with cabinet Ministers and members of Parliament 
etcetera, etcetera and ja but in my view they were like trying 
to portray a figure of, we are these important people that we 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 173 of 255 
 
are friends with your cabinet Ministers.  It did not intimidate 
me or anything.  Even when they said they are friends with 
the President I was not at all intimidated. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  And when you mentioned your business 
development in KZN did you – did they indicate that they 
were interested at all in investing in that business? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Sort of – they said they would like to look 
into it but not that they would invest.  Ja they – he said they 
would like to know more about it but that whole thing did not 
get off the ground whatever I was trying to do in KZN. 
10 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  And when they asked you about the 
marketing budget of Transnet and they asked to have – I 
think you said 30 – 50% allocated to the New Age 
Newspaper. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes to them ja. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Was this – what was the tone this?  
Was this a request?  Something they expected?  How did you 
interpret it? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Do not forget in my interpretation of their 
approach they had no clue about how business works – zero 
20 
clue.  They behaved as if Transnet is like a spaza shop who 
when somebody comes and say give me 30% of this we just 
give.  So they had no clue about business protocols, how to 
run businesses.  So which is why then even when they came 
with that figure of R1 billion they asked for this 30 – 50% I 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 174 of 255 
 
could see that for some reason these people have never 
been in business and now I must educate them that this is 
how an organisation like Transnet procures for services 
whatever services they are.  And of course, I did indicate to 
them that we – Transnet procures in a particular way 
following a – a procurement manual. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  And did you suggest during the course 
of the meeting or at the end that you wanted to have a 
second meeting? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes I did because from where I sat I felt 
10 
that the loop is not properly closed.  I personally wanted that 
somebody from within the Department be present to hear 
what I call these dreamers talking about R1 billion marketing 
budget and asking for 30 – 50% of that.  So I did say I would 
like to have a second meeting with you guys. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Okay thank you Mr Mkwanazi.  So after 
that meeting so you want… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before… 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Yes certainly Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before we move onto the next meeting you 
20 
– did you say that they said that Mr Zuma who was President 
at the time used to visit their house once a week? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Almost weekly yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Almost weekly? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Ja. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 175 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is what they said. 
MR MKWANAZI:  They said that yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Now in terms of the discussion there 
you have been using they I think most of the time. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Oh it is one guy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was it both of them. 
MR MKWANAZI:  It is Tony. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was it both of them speaking namely to … 
MR MKWANAZI:  No, no.  Duduzane never uttered a word. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He never uttered a word? 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:  Never uttered a word. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it was Tony Gupta who was talking? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Tony Gupta was talking.  At some stage I 
had to ask Duduzane are these people telling the truth about 
their relationship with your father.  That is the only time he 
opened his mouth and he confirmed it that they are friends 
with the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Well that is interesting that you say 
that because I have had quite a few – I have heard evidence 
from quite a few people who said they had been to meetings 
20 
with the Tony – Mr Tony Gupta and Mr Duduzane Zuma at the 
Gupta residence and most if not all of whom have said 
during the discussions that they had at such meetings Mr 
Duduzane Zuma was silent and did not say much.  One of 
such witnesses was Mr Jonas who said he had a meeting 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 176 of 255 
 
with Duduzane Zuma and of course in his case there was 
also Mr Hlongwane and on his version that is Mr Jonas’ 
version there was also a Gupta brother there.  He could not 
say which one but it would appear that if there was – well 
actually I think Mr Duduzane Zuma and Mr Hlongwane said 
that on the occasion when they met with Mr Jonas Tony 
Gupta was the only Gupta brother who was around.  So Mr 
Jonas said during his meeting with them Mr Duduzane Zuma 
did not say much.  Mr Dukwana a former MEC from the Free 
State also gave evidence of a meeting which he said he had 
10 
at the Gupta residence with Mr Tony Gupta and Mr Duduzane 
Zuma.  He too said Mr Duduzane Zuma did not say much in 
that meeting.  There must – I think there is another third 
person maybe even fourth who have given evidence along 
the same lines also that at these meetings Mr Duduzane 
Zuma would be very quiet and Mr Tony Gupta would be the 
one doing the talking.  So you are giving evidence to the 
same effect about Mr Duduzane Zuma.  Is that right? 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct Chair.  He was abnormally 
silent. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Now one of the things that you have 
said and you must just confirm in case I did not understand.  
Did you say that they and I assume now I must say Mr Tony 
Gupta because you say Mr Duduzane Zuma was quiet most 
of the time. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 177 of 255 
 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say Mr Tony Gupta said that 
sometimes when Mr Zuma would be in their house they 
would ask him to sing Umshini Wami for them, is that what 
you say he said? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes I said so that when I say in their 
house, at their functions.  I do not know what functions that 
there is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh at their functions ja.  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  It is like maybe they entertain a lot, call 
10 
people to a hall or gatherings, yes he did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay thank you. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We can move then to the second meeting.  
Tell me about the second meeting that you had with them? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Thank you Chair.  Naturally as I indicated 
post this meeting when I got the request then to that second 
meeting, I did brief Advocate – the good advocate Mhlangu 
that Mahlangu look I have been – I have a first meeting with 
Tony and I want you to be present because… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  But tell us who? 
MR MKWANAZI:  I want you to – I want to have a witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just tell us who Advocate Mahlangu was? 
MR MKWANAZI:  He was the advisor to Minister Gigaba. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright and before you proceed just 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 178 of 255 
 
tell us once again – tell me once again how the second 
meeting came about?  I seemed to hear earlier on that you 
were saying you asked for the second – another meeting?  
So just tell me how it came about. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes the first meeting Chair did not go very 
well 
because 
somehow, 
I 
got 
angry 
when 
– 
in 
my 
interpretation 
they 
were 
beginning 
to 
denigrate 
my 
President.  So I got very agitated.  So the first meeting did 
not go very well.  Then they suggested that we meet again 
and I agreed because in my mind then I knew that I wanted 
10 
to bring a witness to see these types of business people.  So 
I did brief Advocate Mahlangu that there is a meeting I want 
you to come to it to be a witness at – so that you see how 
some people behave under the guise of being sent by – or 
being – having got my phone numbers from Minister Gigaba.  
So yes he agreed to join me at that particular date. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Sorry Mr Mkwanazi you say in your 
statement I was contacted for a second meeting.  So did 
somebody call you just to… 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes they did.  They did and I said I am 
20 
coming and I am going to bring a witness with. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  And who was that that called you? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Tony Gupta. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you.  Thank you Chair.  So you 
took the Minister’s special advisor with you.   
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 179 of 255 
 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Yes.  Why did you not speak to Minister 
– former Minister Gigaba about this directly? 
MR MKWANAZI:  You know maybe I am a strange individual.  
I do not elevate what I can call nonsensical stories to the 
Minister.  To me these people were talking nonsensical 
stories which is why I just needed somebody.  It could have 
been another person as long as maybe that somebody was at 
Public Enterprises.  If in case it is true that the Minister gave 
these people my number so that is why then I asked 
10 
Mahlangu – Advocate Mahlangu to accompany me. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  And then at the second meeting did you 
drive together with Mr Mahlangu? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No, no.  We – no we did not drive together.  
I used my car and most probably used his as well.  Because 
we would not have come from the same direction. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  So did he do – thank you.  Did he join 
you at the beginning of the meeting? 
MR MKWANAZI:  I am not sure if I found him there or if he 
found me there but we were both at that meeting at around 
20 
about that time that was set for the meeting.  And then we – 
ja. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Was that attended again by the same 
people or different people? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No, no Tony Gupta and Duduzane Zuma. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 180 of 255 
 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you.  And – so what was the 
content of this meeting?  What did you discuss? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No it is a follow up and I explained why 
Advocate was there so that in front of an official of the 
Department who works for the Minister I am explaining to 
you guys as whatever the company TNA or Sahara whatever 
they are called that this is how Transnet procures.  They did 
repeat their request that they are requesting this 30 – 50% 
of the marketing. 
BREAK IN RECORDING – WITNESS INAUDIBLE 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:  [Indistinct]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Sorry, Mr Mkhwanazi.  You say in our 
statement “I was contacted for a second meeting”.  So did 
somebody call you just to confirm that? 
MR MKWANAZI:  [Indistinct]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  And who was that who called you? 
MR MKWANAZI:  [Indistinct]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you.  Thank you, Chair.  So you 
took the minister’s special advisor with you.  Why did you 
not ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR MKWANAZI:  [Indistinct]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Yes.  Why did you not speak to 
minister... former Minister Gigaba about this directly? 
MR MKWANAZI:  [Indistinct]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  And then at the second meeting, did 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 181 of 255 
 
you drive together with Mr Mahlangu? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No, no.  [Indistinct]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  So did he ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:  [Indistinct]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you.  Did he join you at the 
beginning of the meeting? 
MR MKWANAZI:  I am not sure ...[indistinct]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  And with...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:  [Indistinct]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Was that attended again by the same 
10 
people or different people? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No, no, no. [Indistinct]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you.  And so what was the 
contents of this meeting?  What did you discuss? 
MR MKWANAZI:  [Indistinct]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Did you mention again about the 
relationship with President Zuma? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Not in so much detail but he did confirm 
that, yes. [Indistinct]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  And what was Mr Mahlangu’s reaction 
20 
to this? 
MR MKWANAZI:  [Indistinct]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  So once again, Mr Mkhwanazi, you are 
saying that Mr Duduzane Zuma remained silent throughout 
the meeting? 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 182 of 255 
 
MR MKWANAZI:  [Indistinct]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  And ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  And... and ...[intervenes]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  When you say no comment, you mean 
there was no comment from him?  You are not saying you are 
not commenting to the question? [laughs]  
MR MKWANAZI:  [laughs]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  [laughs]  No, Chair. 
MR MKWANAZI:  [laughs]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] You say there was no comment 
from him during the meeting? 
MR MKWANAZI:  [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  Alright. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was the purpose of the second meeting 
well-know to both sides, namely yourself and Tony and Mr 
Duduzane Zuma?  Did you have a common purpose as to 
what the purpose of the...  
 
Did you have a common understanding as to what the 
20 
purpose of the meeting was?  Or is the position that 
arrangements were made to meet and then we met and we 
talked what we discussed? 
MR MKWANAZI:  [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay, okay. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 183 of 255 
 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  And... Thank you, Chair.  And Mr 
Mkhwanazi, what was your response again to the request? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No, same response that all that, now it is 
four of us.  It is myself, it is Advocate Mashala, Duduzane 
and Tony.  That this is how... of course, I did not know the 
marketing budget of Transnet net or even in the first 
meeting. 
 
I did not know because I am only here at Transnet 
maybe two months.  Then I have got to know all these 
budgets, et cetera, et cetera.  It is impractical. 
10 
 
So I still made them aware that frankly I do not know 
how big that budget is.  Also, the process is you follow a 
RFP, RFI or RFQ through executives in the company.  Not 
through a non-executive chairman. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  And what was their reaction to this?  
What was Mr Gupta’s reaction to this? 
MR MKWANAZI:  That they accepted my explanation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the first meeting, how did Mr Tony Gupta 
take your response to their request? 
MR MKWANAZI:  I do not think they took it well in the first 
20 
meeting.  That is why then the suggestion was we need to 
meet again.  But even myself, their approach, I did not take 
it well because they were waving the flag of being friends of 
the president rather than talking what they want to talk and I 
was terrible annoyed, ja.  
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 184 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  Okay. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you, Chairman.  Out of this 
meeting, did you again speak to the minister about what had 
meeting at this meeting? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No, [laughs] I did not.  As I indicate, I am 
not a person who speak to the minister every week or every 
month.  I do not do that.  I have an agenda and a meeting 
scheduled if I need to speak to the minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the outcome of the second meeting was 
simply that, at least to you, it appeared that they accepted 
10 
namely Tony to... Tony Gupta and Mr Duduzane Zuma, they 
accepted that you could not be of assistance to them? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes, sort of.  But at least I achieved 
something as well in terms of the fact that I now brought 
somebody who is close to government, who has explained to 
these gentlemen that that is not how state-owned entities 
operate. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Did Mr Siyabonga Mhlango... It was 
Siyabonga Mhlango?  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes, yes.  It is so, ja. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did he confirm to them that how Transnet 
procures goods or services, was exactly the way you had 
stated? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman, I do not think you would have 
confirmed anything because I doubt if he would have known 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 185 of 255 
 
himself to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay.  Okay.   
MR MKWANAZI:  In terms of how things are done. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
MR MKWANAZI:  Because he is an outsider. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.   
MR MKWANAZI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But he was there.  He observed.  He 
witnesses what was discussed. 
MR MKWANAZI:  He did observe, yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  He did not say much himself.  And the 
meeting ended. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Ja.  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you.  And Mr Mkhwanazi, did you 
note any change in your relationship with Minister Gigaba 
after this meeting? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No, there was no change because the 
things that we do... there are certain meetings that we hold, 
almost like quarterly meetings with him or once in six months 
20 
meeting with him under certain conditions.  Those meetings 
went ahead.  I did not see any change whatsoever in him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say earlier on before you became 
a non-executive chairman of the Transnet Board, you had 
known Minister Gigaba for quite some time and you had 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 186 of 255 
 
known him quite well? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you knew him quite well?  Reasonably 
well? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Maybe not quite well Chair but I knew him, 
yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you knew him?  Ja, okay. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you, Chair.  And just before I 
move to another page.  Mr Mkhwanazi, that second meeting, 
how long after the first meeting was it? 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:  Maybe two weeks. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you.  Then Mr Mkhwanazi, I just 
want to direct you to a news article and that is on page 
MM37. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Okay.  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Chair, this MM37, I would like to label 
EXHIBIT MM7F. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  It is not just labelling. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  I would like to enter it into the record. 
[laughs]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
You 
must 
ask 
that 
it 
be 
admitted 
...[intervenes]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Admitted as an exhibit ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  ... as an exhibit MM7... 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  MM7F.  Thank you, Chair. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 187 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  EXHIBIT MM7... What is the letter? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  F, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  F for fool? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  That is indeed so. [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay.  The Business Day article at 
page 37 will be admitted as EXHIBIT MM7F. 
ARTICLE IN BUSINESS DAY NEWSPAPER IS HANDED UP 
AND MARKED AS EXHIBIT MM7F 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  So Mr Mkhwanazi, this is dated the 
9t h of June 2011 in the Business Day and the headline is... 
and it is written by Peter Bruce.  The headline is “Chairman 
of Transnet, Eskom and Denel to go.”  Are you familiar with 
this article? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes, I am. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Did you read it when it came out in the 
Business Day? 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:  [laughs] To read it is an understatement.  It 
was a shocker.   
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Okay. [laughs]  
MR MKWANAZI:  Ja, it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs]  Well, before we proceed.  Ms 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 188 of 255 
 
Armstrong, I cannot read a word. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Oh, okay.  Well, Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  In this... in this... on this page. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Okay.  I think Chair, then we will have 
this replaced I think in the record but I have... I can read out 
the relevant portions on the record if that might be helpful 
now? 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine. Do that but see if it is 
possible later on to ...[intervenes]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  To be replaced. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...get a clearly legible article in and obtain 
that ...[intervenes]   
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed, Chair.  Indeed.  We will do that 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay.  So I will rely on you to tell me 
what the relevant parts says. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  [laughs] Thank you, Chair.  So Mr 
Mkhwanazi, it starts by saying: 
“The chairmen of three of South Africa’s most 
...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Before you do that.  Just 
identify the article.  What date, Business Day?  What date 
and so on? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  So that is the 9t h of June 2011 in 
Business Day. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 189 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright.  Continue. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  And... thank you, Chair.  And it states in 
the first paragraph: 
“The chairmen of three of South Africa’s most 
powerful state-owned companies, Transnet, Eskom 
and Denel, are to be removed soon in a dramatic 
show of force by Public Enterprises Minister Malusi 
Gigaba...: 
 
Then it says: 
“The changes were approved at a Cabinet meeting in 
10 
Cape Town yesterday...” 
 
So that would be on the 8t h of June 2011.   
“Business Day understands that Transnet’s Chairman, 
Mafika Mkhwanazi will be invited to move to the 
Board of Eskom as an ordinary member...” 
 
And then I am just skipping to the last paragraph in the 
article on that page because the rest is about the other 
SOE’s.   
 
We turn to the next page in MM37(1), where the article 
is finalised.  It is just the end of it and it reads: 
20 
“It is understood, nevertheless, that Mr Gigaba did 
not have it all his own way at the Cabinet meeting 
yesterday.   
His proposal to replace Mr Mkhwanazi at Transnet 
with Iqbal “Rafiq” Sharma was shot down and a new 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 190 of 255 
 
candidate will have to be found...” 
 
Do you recall this article?  Sorry, this conclusion and 
your reaction to this when you read this? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes, I do recall that article and the 
conclusion.  And also, my understanding was that somehow 
some of the cabinet members were not privy to that plan.  
And they only read about it on the day of that meeting 
whatever Cabinet meeting it was.  So they felt that it should 
have been discussed in more detail, some Cabinet ministers.   
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed.  Because Mr Mkhwanazi, how I 
10 
understand this is... what I understand the article to be 
saying is that Mr Gigaba recommended your removal as 
Chair of the Board of Transnet and that you would be 
replaced with Mr Sharma but while he was successful in the 
Cabinet meeting at removing you, he was not successful in 
replacing you with Mr Sharma.  Is that also how you 
understand this article? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Hold it.  I am not sure if he was successful 
in removing me because I was not removed at Transnet. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  No, indeed.  I am saying what the 
20 
article says, not what in fact happened.  Sorry, if I just can 
remind you. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Ja, okay. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Armstrong, did you mean successful in 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 191 of 255 
 
getting the approval of Cabinet? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed.  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So you want to repeat your question 
and repeat it ...[intervenes]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed.  So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  ...with regard to that. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  So Mr Mkhwanazi, my understanding of 
this 
article, 
not 
what 
happened 
in 
reality, 
that 
my 
understanding of what the Business Day is saying is that Mr 
Gigaba attempted to have you removed and recommended 
10 
this to Cabinet and that he was successful in having you 
removed but not in having you replaced with Mr Sharma.  
That is my understanding of this article. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, I am... we may be at cross-purposes.  I 
think Mr Mkhwanazi is going to still give you the same 
answer.  As I understand what he is saying.  He is saying, he 
does not think that Mr Gigaba succeeded in having him 
removed because he was not removed. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But what I thought what you intended to 
20 
say is that the article suggests that Mr Gigaba succeeded in 
...[intervenes]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ... in getting approval ...[intervenes]  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed Chair. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 192 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...he be removed. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Whether or not he was actually removed is 
another matter. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed Chair.  So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Exactly.  And I am just pointing out.  Mr 
Mkhwanazi, that you would have read this. 
MR MKWANAZI:  I would have. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  [laughs] And would have been... it 
10 
would have been quite a reaction because, as you point out, 
in reality you were not removed.  The cabinet did not 
approve that recommendation.  Is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe let us... just tell me what you 
understood the article to be saying and what your reaction 
was? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chair, I understood what the article was 
saying, particularly the headline.  Chairman of Transnet, 
Eskom and Denel to go. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR MKWANAZI:  And naturally why somehow it was a big 
shock.  This has never been discussed with me that I would 
leave Transnet.  But other things in various meetings with 
the minister and other key ministers, we had discussed in my 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 193 of 255 
 
presence the question of SOC Board Chairman sitting in 
various state-owned entity boards for certain collaborations 
by state-owned entities.   
 
So I was not surprised that I was going to be proposed 
to go Eskom but what surprised me was that then I was 
going to be fired from Transnet and yet at a strategy 
discussion that we would have had a few months before, we 
did discuss these issues of Chairman of SOC Boards. 
 
So that you said you get certain collaborations owning 
between certain types of SOC’s.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So prior to this article appearing, there had 
been discussions in which you had participated where the 
idea that chairpersons of the boards of various SOE’s could 
have a forum where they could discuss matters of mutual 
interest.  Is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct, Chair.  We did have a 
forum like that.  And the two key ministers who used to 
attend 
was 
Minister 
Gigaba 
and 
Minister 
Patel 
and 
20 
occasionally two other Cabinet Ministers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. And these discussions that you are 
talking about where this issue was discussed, did Minister 
Gigaba attend some of those discussions? 
MR MKWANAZI:  He was the chairman of those meetings, 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 194 of 255 
 
Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of those meetings.  Yes.  So, but what was 
new to you when you read this article was that you were 
going to be removed as Chairperson of Transnet Board. 
MR MKWANAZI:  That was new, Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Okay. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you.  And... so Mr Mkhwanazi, let 
me take you to the cabinet recommendation.  The memo that 
10 
was sent to Cabinet by Mr Gigaba.  And that you will find the 
following page which is page MM38. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You want that to be admitted? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed Chair.  As MM7G. 
MR MKWANAZI:  MM38.  I have got that. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you so much. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That will be the letter or the memorandum 
dated 25 May 2011, on the letterheads of the Ministry of 
Public Enterprises appearing at page 38 will be admitted... it 
20 
is written “Cabinet Memorandum Number 4 of 2011” will be 
admitted as EXHIBIT MM7G. 
CABINET MEMORANDUM NUMBER 4 OF 2011 IS HANDED 
UP AND MARKED AS EXHIBIT MM7G 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you, Chair.  So Mr Mkhwanazi, 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 195 of 255 
 
paragraph 2.2 indeed does say: 
“Further for Cabinet to concur with the appointment 
of Mr Iqbal Sharma as Chairperson, a non-executive 
Director of the Transnet Board...” 
 
So that was the recommendation regarding the chair 
position of Transnet.  And then in paragraph 3.2 which is on 
the following page, page MM39: 
“In 
addition, 
it 
is 
recommended 
that 
two 
non-
executive Directors of the Transnet Board not be 
reappointed 
at 
the 
Annual 
General 
Meeting 
of 
10 
Transnet to be held on the 24t h of June, and in their 
place 
two 
nominees 
are 
recommended 
to 
be 
considered 
for 
appointed 
to 
Transnet 
as 
non-
executive Directors. 
Furthermore, 
it 
is 
recommended 
that 
Mr 
Iqbal 
Sharma, a current member of the Transnet Board, be 
appointed 
as 
the 
chairperson, 
a 
non-executive 
Director of the Transnet Board to replace Mr Mafika 
Mkhwanazi, the current Chairperson...” 
 
So Mr Mkhwanazi, this was indeed the proposal for 
20 
Cabinet.  And Mr Mkhwanazi, do you recall... do you know 
what transpired at that meeting, what the outcome was? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which meeting? 
MR MKWANAZI:  [laughs] I have got no idea. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which meeting now? 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 196 of 255 
 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  This Cabinet meeting to deliberate on 
these recommendations? 
MR MKWANAZI:  [laughs] I have got no idea. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  And the outcome Mr Mkhwanazi for 
you?  The outcome of the meeting? 
MR MKWANAZI:  The outcome? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  No, the outcome.  I was not replaced. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Okay.  So ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did Mr Gigaba and you speak about this 
article after it had appeared in the Business Day? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman, we did talk about the article 
after it had appeared and his response was somebody had 
leaked something which was work in progress and therefore 
it was leaked in a wrong way. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:  We did discuss it.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you ask him whether it was true that 
he sought Cabinet approval for your removal from... as 
20 
Chairperson of the Board of Transnet?  Or maybe you did not 
put it like that but in effect, did you ask him to confirm 
whether that is true? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman, I did not ask him ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Directly? 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 197 of 255 
 
MR MKWANAZI:  ...as straightforward, as you say. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  But his response was there was work in 
progress within his department and it was leaked to the 
press. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did that response suggest that he was 
saying he had not as yet asked the Cabinet to approve your 
removal from Transnet?  I just want to make sure I 
understand 
clearly 
what 
he 
told 
you 
or 
what 
your 
understanding was of what he told you. 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chairman, what he told me is different to 
what had been submitted to Cabinet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  But I am not privy to the Cabinet debate 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course, yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  ...around the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  ...why Mr Iqbal Sharma should become 
chairman. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  But based on what he told you, 
was your understanding that he was saying he had not as yet 
asked Cabinet to approve your removal from... or is that 
something that ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:  No, Chairman. [laughs] 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 198 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR MKWANAZI:  No, Chair.  Because he had done it.  It is 
just that he did not get the approval of that resolution at 
Cabinet level.  He had already done it.  As I see in terms of 
this Cabinet memo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, I understand that.  And when you 
answer these questions, feel free to reflect properly because 
it is many years ago, so that when you answer you are 
comfortable with your answer.   
 
So leaving out what we know because we are looking at 
10 
these documents now but bearing in mind what the article in 
the Business Day had said. 
 
When you spoke to him, he did not say anything to 
suggest he had not made the approach to Cabinet that the 
Business Day article suggested in terms of what he told you 
and how you understood what he said? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Well, after this article had appeared...  I 
am not privy to... it is the first time I am see this document.  
Thank you very much.  This Cabinet memo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:  I have never seen it.  So post the article, 
because also other board members were now asking me 
questions that we have read that you have been fired.  So 
that is why then I had to go to him to try and find out but 
“Minister, what is this article about?” 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 199 of 255 
 
 
Then he said no... He did not sound as if he had already 
pushed through a Cab memo or something which then might 
have been rejected. 
 
He said no, maybe... it goes like, there was work in 
progress on changing boards inside the public enterprises 
and that then something got leaked, et cetera, et cetera. 
 
But I was aware there is a process within public 
enterprises to formulate this Strategy-U of chairman of 
various 
entities 
sittings 
elsewhere 
to 
get 
certain 
collaboration 
on 
various 
topics. 
 
Local 
manufacturing, 
10 
exporting, training... 
 
There were a few key strategy topics that we wanted to 
try and address by this sharing of board members in that 
particular forum, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you.  Ms Armstrong. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you, Chair.  So just to clarify.  Mr 
Mkhwanazi, but you were aware in this time in 2011 that 
Minister Gigaba had recommended your removal? 
MR MKWANAZI:  I was not aware.  It is only when I read is 
this article. 
20 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Did you at all attribute the attempts 
to... by Minister Gigaba to recommend to have you removed, 
to be related in any way to your meeting with Tony Gupta 
and Duduzane Zuma? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Not really but maybe there could be.  I do 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 200 of 255 
 
not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  I see. 
CHAIRPERSON:  When you read the article and when you 
spoke to Mr Gigaba insofar as in your mind you remained 
with the idea that if he might or Cabinet might be wishing 
you to be removed from Transnet, did you think that the 
reason might be... the forum that had been discussed or did 
you think it might be some other reason that you did know?  
Did you think about why would they want to remove me or 
10 
not really? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chair, I do not know but the forum where 
these things were discussed... we did not discuss in that 
detail ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  ...because it was more high-level strategy 
forum ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  ...of discussing these issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  Thank you. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you, Chair.  So when you were 
having these discussions with Minister Gigaba, did he 
indicate at all that Mr Mhlango had relayed anything about 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 201 of 255 
 
your meetings to him? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No, we did not discuss that. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  And did you speak to anybody else 
about the meetings with Mr Gupta and Mr Duduzane Zuma? 
MR MKWANAZI:  I would have discussed that with some 
board member or something like that but in passing.  Not in 
detail.  
ADV ARMSTRONG:  And then, can I take you to another 
article?  That is at page ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  But maybe before you do so Ms Armstrong. 
10 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As I understand it, this Business Day 
article was in June 2011.  Is that right? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that was ...[intervenes]  
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That means that you had been with the 
Transnet Board only for about six, seven months.  Is that 
right? 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct Chair.  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You had been a member of various boards 
over a long period in different companies by this time.  Is 
that not so? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And when you have been a member of a 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 202 of 255 
 
board of a company for six months it seems to me that it is 
quite a short time to be removed. 
MR MKWANAZI:   It is short. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you able to comment on that?  It is 
short. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Yes, okay, thank you. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you, Chair.  Then let us move 
to page MM23 of that bundle.   
ADV ARMSTRONG:   So Chair, again I ask that this be 
admitted as an exhibit as MM7C. 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:  You said 23? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   That is correct, Mr Mkwanazi.  
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I have got it, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is this document, just identity it, 
Ms Armstrong? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   So this document is an article from 
the Mail & Guardian entitled “Going off the rails” dated 4 
March 2011. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, the article from the Mail & Guardian 
20 
appearing at page 23 titled “Going off the Rails” will be 
admitted and marked as EXHIBIT MM7C. 
MAIL & GARDEN ARTICLE “GOING OFF THE RAILS” 
HANDED IN AS EXHIBIT MM7C 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you, Chair.  And, Chair, I have 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 203 of 255 
 
just been alerted that a larger and clearer copy of the 
Business Day article that we looked at has been prepared 
and will be brought up to be replaced in our files. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay.  Well, if it is with you right 
now? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Not yet, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, not yet? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   It is being prepared now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.   
ADV ARMSTRONG:   So, Mr Mkwanazi, then just turn 
10 
please to the next page in the article on page 24.  The 
portion that is highlighted. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes.   
ADV ARMSTRONG:   It says: 
“Mkwanazi, who drove the appointment process...” 
This is a reference to Mr Brian Molefe’s appointment. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:    
“...admits he has a personal relationship with the 
Guptas 
and 
has 
met 
them 
to 
discuss 
private 
20 
business interests but denied this influenced Mr 
Molefe’s appointment.” 
Mr Mkwanazi, did you have an opportunity to comment on 
this article?  Did you see it before it was published? 
MR MKWANAZI:   When I say to comment no, but meaning 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 204 of 255 
 
the fact that they wrote what they wrote, I must have 
spoken to them based on the questions that they were 
asking, Yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   So this description of you having a 
personal relationship with the Guptas …[intervenes] 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want to first, Ms Armstrong, just 
read into the record the relevant part and then ask him?  
The highlighted parts. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Okay, sorry, Chair, I will read it 
10 
again. 
“Mkwanazi, who drove the appointment process 
admits he has a personal relationship with the 
Guptas 
and 
has 
met 
them 
to 
discuss 
private 
business interests but denied this influenced Mr 
Molefe’s appointment.” 
And so, Mr Mkwanazi, you described your relationship to 
Mail & Guardian as a personal relationship with the 
Guptas, is that correct?  
MR MKWANAZI:   I did describe it like that but to say is 
20 
that correct, it is correct that I met them on the day that I 
met them at the house but then, you know, the media is a 
strange animal because I would not like to discuss certain 
matters of how I run companies through the media, which 
is why I responded this way. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 205 of 255 
 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   But just to me, having met briefly on 
two occasions with the Guptas sounds... 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   A personal relationship sounds a bit 
of an overstatement to me. 
MR MKWANAZI:   It is a strong word, yes, I must say, yes.  
ADV ARMSTRONG:   But there was no – there is no 
additional relationship that you had except for those two 
meetings? 
MR MKWANAZI:   No.  No. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let us deal with this head-on.  So 
you admit that you did say to the journalist who wrote the 
article or whoever may have spoken to you from Mail & 
Guardian that you had a personal relationship with the 
Guptas, is that right? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I met them, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  You – as we speak today, do you 
stand 
by 
that 
description 
that 
you 
had 
a 
personal 
relationship with the Guptas or do you not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, personal relationship is too 
20 
strong a word for two meetings I had which maybe lasted 
an hour and a half in total, both of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But why did you use those words? 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, at the time I used it because I 
wanted to dismiss the media off my back.  They were onto 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 206 of 255 
 
too many issues, if I can use the word. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But that does not sound right that you 
would say you have personal relationship with them to 
dismiss the media if in fact you did not have a personal 
relationship with them.  What do you say to that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, you know, the use of the 
English language when you are a Zulu-speaking person 
gets a little bit tricky.  But yes, I did have two meetings 
with them and I did say that I had a personal relationship 
with them. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright.  Ms Armstrong? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you, Chair.  The article goes 
on to say: 
“Asked 
what 
the 
business 
interests 
were 
and 
whether they were disclosed to the board Transnet 
said:  All our board members are required to 
disclose their private interests at each and every 
board meeting.  Mr Mkwanazi has no existing has 
no 
existing 
business 
interests 
with 
the 
Gupta 
family.  The discussions he has with them were 
20 
exploratory and did not result in a partnership.” 
So again, Mr Mkwanazi, your testimony was that there was 
a brief mention in the general discussions in your meeting. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   About a property development you 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 207 of 255 
 
had in KZN, is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Sounds – exploratory discussions 
that did not result in a partnership, once again sounds like 
a more significant discussion on that topic than what you 
have mentioned. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, I am not sure why have that in - 
you know, as if it is a quotation but that matter was never 
ever touched on again of what I was trying to do there in 
KZN because it never happened, it fell through almost that 
10 
same week or two weeks later.  
ADV ARMSTRONG:   And so, Mr Mkwanazi , you have told 
the Mail & Guardian journalist that you had these meetings 
with the Guptas, is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   And that you spoke about private 
business interests, is that correct?  
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   But you do not seem to have – or did 
you mention anything about what Mr Tony Gupta had asked 
20 
you about …[intervenes] 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, I did not. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  About procurement and the allocation 
to the New Age? 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, I did not. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 208 of 255 
 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   And why not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   It is not in my nature to start discussing 
what I can call board issues or company issues with the 
media.  There are many of other issues, by the way, in the 
past 20 years, 21 years I have been at Transnet that I have 
never discussed with the media in terms of whatever they 
might have been. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Did you disclose what had been 
discussed with the board of Transnet? 
MR MKWANAZI:   What had been discussed? 
10 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  With Mr tony Gupta about the 
question of dedicating 30 to 50%? 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, I did not discuss that with the board. 
You need to understand one strange thing about state 
owned entities.  In a year when you are like a Chairman or 
Group Chief Executive you get hundred proposals or calls 
from people who want to procure something from your 
organisation.  It is so common and it includes everybody.  
At times it starts even with the President himself.. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the point you are making is you 
20 
cannot 
be 
telling 
the 
board 
about 
all 
of 
these 
…[intervenes] 
MR MKWANAZI:   Exactly, exactly, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   …many occasions when somebody or 
other has some discussion with you that does not end 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 209 of 255 
 
anywhere, that does not lead anywhere.  Is that the point 
you are making? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, Chair.  Just another  
example, at these TNA breakfasts, which  attended 8 to 10, 
whatever the number is, people would queue to talk to me 
and ask for business opportunities in Transnet.  Of course, 
as a civil servant I would stand in a queue, they would 
come or they want to talk.  This one goes, this one goes.  
Ja, it is part of my job. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   But, Mr Mkwanazi, what might 
10 
perhaps be a bit unusual was that your number in this case 
was provided to Mr Tony Gupta by the Minister himself. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, it was unusual, yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   And so that unusual aspect you did 
not mention that to the journalist at Mail & Guardian. 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, I did not. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Or to the Transnet board. 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, I did not. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   So even though that was unusual why 
did you decide not to include that information in your 
20 
statements to them? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Include which information? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   So even though it was – that aspect 
of the interactions was unusual, that they got your number 
from Minister Gigaba, why did you …[intervenes] 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 210 of 255 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, I did not.  I did not see a need to do 
that, ja.. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Why did you not see a need? 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, I did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He did not see a need – if you want to 
say …[intervenes] 
MR MKWANAZI:   You can see they are fishing.. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If – Ms Armstrong, if you think that there 
was – there were grounds for him to have seen a need you 
can explore those grounds. 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   I could have, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But otherwise… 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If he says he did not see a need, he did 
not see a need. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if you say what about this, what 
about this, what about this, did not all of this show you that  
there was need?  That is different, then you can do that. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you, Chair.  I think the 
20 
elements, the unusual element is of the Minister giving Mr 
Gupta your number is the only – is the aspect that I just 
wanted to probe further because, Mr Mkwanazi, your 
answer was that you did not feel the need to tell the board 
or the media about this meeting because you get many 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 211 of 255 
 
requests, they are very usual, and I was just probing that 
there was in fact an unusual aspect of it which was that the 
Minister had, according to Mr Gupta, connected you and 
put you in touch and that was – I was probing whether that 
that unusual aspect might have prompted you to treat it 
differently and perhaps alert somebody else.   
MR MKWANAZI:   No. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you.  Thank you, Mr Mkwanazi.  
And were you aware of other officials at the time? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I am sorry… 
10 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Mkwanazi, did you ever have 
occasion to ask Minister Gigaba whether Tony Gupta was 
correct in saying he got your details from him? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, we have never discussed that 
matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You have never discussed, yes.  Okay. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Even today or – we have never 
discussed that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, thank you. 
20 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   And did you hear at the time about 
any other people or officials being approached in this way 
by members of the Gupta family to have a meeting? 
MR MKWANAZI:   No, I was not aware of any – I only 
became aware of these approaches once the Commission 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 212 of 255 
 
was set up and Maseko and others and a lot of other 
people did come to the Commission to make inputs.  Then 
to my mine it was – this thing was quite common at the 
time, ja.   I did not know. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   And did you, before you approached 
by the Commission to give evidence, did you feel the need 
to come forward and disclose the meetings that you had? 
MR MKWANAZI:   No. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   And why not? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Do not forget – maybe let me put it 
10 
differently, the answer is no because at some stage, if you 
recall, the Secretary General of the ruling party did ask 
people to come to Luthuli House, etcetera, etcetera.  I felt 
that these people are not honest.  They themselves know 
what is happening, so I did not even go there. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you, Mr Mkwanazi. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I am going to ask you to just 
repeat.  I think what you are saying may be important.  You 
are saying the ruling party did invite people to go to the 
ruling party and disclose what they knew and you say you 
20 
felt that you were not going to go there.  I just want you to 
say once again why you felt like that? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, yes, I was not going go.  If I 
recall, maybe it is only Themba Maseko who went to see 
Mr Gwede Mantashe at the time but I felt that whatever the 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 213 of 255 
 
Gupta family is doing, it is a well-known thing within the 
ruling party. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you, Chair.  Then, Mr 
Mkwanazi, I am not going to ask you too much about the 
New Age breakfasts, we have already heard extensive 
evidence about those, but you do say in your statement 
that you attended a number of these breakfasts , is that 
correct, the New Age breakfasts ? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
10 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   And in your statement you indicate 
that you do not have any idea of how much was spent in 
respect of those breakfasts. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   But of course – so we have had 
testimony, so for example from Mr Phatlane has explained 
that from 2012 to 2017 over R122 million was spent on the 
New Age breakfasts .  
Now, Mr Mkwanazi , in light of the fact that you 
were contacted and asked by Mr Tony Gupta to dedicate 
20 
between 30 and 50% of the Transnet advertising budget to 
the New Age breakfasts and we know – and you went to a 
number of those breakfasts. 
MR MKWANAZI:   I did, yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   And you saw that they were occurring 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 214 of 255 
 
and we know there were – so at that time were you at all 
concerned that what you had been asked in a way that did 
not comply with procurement procedures was now being in 
effect that you were attending these breakfasts that they 
were happening.  Did that not concern you? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No, it did concern me.  You somehow 
need to understand the procurement systems of state 
owned entities whereby they have various committees to 
procure things up to a certain amount and then up to the 
CEO level.  In this case it would have been Brian Molefe. 
10 
 
Brian Molefe had the full authority to procure 
certain things, whatever they might be, up to a certain limit 
and then above a certain amount of above a certain 
timeframe, then those things needed to be elevated to the 
board. 
 
The fact that, yes, I was now going to these 
breakfasts, yes, it is true but the CEO would have then 
applied his mind whether is it worth that - using his 
discretion and his delegated authority. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Oh dear, I think the screen has 
20 
frozen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Okay.  Sorry, Mr Mkwanazi, the 
screen is freezing so we are missing your …[intervenes] 
MR MKWANAZI:   I am not sure what… 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 215 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, the …[intervenes] 
MR MKWANAZI:   Did you pick that up? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Unfortunately, not, Mr Mkwanazi, we 
have missed now a portion of what you were saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, they are attending to it and then we 
will ask you to repeat what you said but they are just 
attending to it.   
MR MKWANAZI:   So can I repeat? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or just repeat.  . 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Yes, thank you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, repeat, ja. 
MR 
MKWANAZI: 
 
 
Advocate, 
can 
you 
repeat 
your 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The question. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Indeed. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Then I will respond again. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   So, Mr Mkwanazi, your testimony was 
that you were approached and you were asked by Mr Gupta 
to dedicate 30 to 50% of the Transnet advertising budget 
to the New Age.  You said this is an inappropriate way of 
20 
doing things, this is not how we do business.  But then you 
then attend yourself a number of these breakfasts so you 
see that in fact Transnet is spending budget on the New 
Age.  Did this not concern you given your previous 
approach by Mr Gupta? 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 216 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I think he said earlier on his 
response to the Guptas was you are talking to a wrong 
person. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You must go to management, executive 
management.  That is what he said. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
And 
therefore, 
if 
they 
went 
to 
management and management granted them whatever they 
wanted it would not necessarily be inconsistent with what 
10 
he said. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is my recollection.  Is that what you 
said, Mr Mkwanazi? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct, Chair, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Okay.  So, Mr Mkwanazi, you were 
not concerned, if I understand you correctly, because you 
imagined that they had – you assumed they had gone 
through those correct channels. 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   They had followed the processes, yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you, Mr Mkwanazi.  Then, 
Chair, I see that the time is already five o’clock. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, we should try and finish because 
Mr Mkwanazi has waited for this time for a long time. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 217 of 255 
 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I think - certainly from my side I 
think we can finish.  I assume that we should not be more 
than 30 minutes more or am I too ambitious? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Unfortunately, chair, I just need to 
deal with …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   How much time do you think we need? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   I think approximately an hour, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   About an hour? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   We have to deal with the Eskom 
10 
evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Mkwanazi , from your side you are 
happy for us to continue? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman, I am happy to continue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let us …[intervenes] 
MR MKHWANAZI:   I can confirm, Chair, just to put it on 
record that we are prepared and ready to continue, Chair, 
thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much.  Then let us 
continue, I am hoping it will not take an hour. 
20 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But let us continue. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   I will certainly do my best, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Okay.  So just to …[intervenes] 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 218 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   We may or may not – we may at some 
stage need a short break.  What time did we start?  How 
long have we been…? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   About quarter past three I believe we 
began. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So we are close to two hours. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe it might be the convenient time to 
take a short break. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
We 
will 
take 
a 
short 
break, 
Mr 
Mkwanazi, and then we are going to resume.  Ten minutes 
should be okay? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We will take ten minutes.  My watch 
says it is ten past five.  So twenty past five we will resume.  
We adjourn. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you, Chair. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
20 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   So Mr Mkwanazi I just want to wrap 
up the feedback. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let’s get him to be settled.   Mr 
Mkwanazi are you settled, are you okay? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I am settled Chair. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 219 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you Chair.   So, in order to just 
finalise the Transnet evidence, I just want to put to you the 
essential points that Mr Gigaba has raised in his affidavit 
in response to our Rule 33 notice and that is in the file, in 
MM7 at page 8. 
MR MKWANAZI:   When you say page 8 can you use the 
MM’s is it MM8? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   MM08. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Okay. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Whenever she says page 8 or page 
whatever without mentioning MM you must know it’s still 
MM. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Ja I’ve got it. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you Chair.  So, there are just 
three main aspects of what Mr Gigaba has said in response 
to your statement that I’d just like to put to you so you 
have an opportunity to respond Mr Mkwanazi. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   The first thing that Mr Gigaba says is 
20 
that he did not provide Mr Tony Gupta with your number, do 
you have a comment? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I’ve got no comment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry just repeat that Ms Armstrong I 
didn’t hear the question? 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 220 of 255 
 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Mr Gigaba says that he never 
provided Mr Tony Gupta with Mr Mkwanazi’s cell phone 
number. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes I guess when you say you have no 
comment, Mr Mkwanazi, you mean you actually don’t know 
whether what Tony Gupta told you is true but what you 
have 
told 
me 
is, 
you 
had 
given 
Mr 
Gigaba 
your…[intervenes].  
MR MKWANAZI:   I said – Chairman I said no comment 
because I don’t know whether it’s true or not true. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no, that’s what I’m saying that’s 
the reason why you’re saying, no comment but what you 
have said is Mr Gigaba did have your contact details, you 
had given him them to him, your contact details.  Let me 
repeat that, what you have said to me is that you had given 
Mr Gigaba your contact details is, that right? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Oh yes, man years ago Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, prior to this – ja prior to this call by 
Tony Gupta. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   And the second main point there Mr 
Gigaba makes is he says that he was – that you never 
spoke to him about the meetings which accords with your 
testimony today but that he’s surprised, because if you 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 221 of 255 
 
were not comfortable you could have spoken to him about 
the first or second meeting and you chose not to, do you 
have any comments to that statement? 
MR MKWANAZI:   No comment still, because I’m not the 
type of person who reports almost minor things to a 
Minister, to me that was minor. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay it can’t be no comment because 
you do have comment which you have just made, is that 
right?  You are providing a reason why you would not have 
raised the issue with him, is that right? 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so what I’m saying is, when you 
say, no comment it means you have nothing to say about 
his version but from what you have said I think you do 
have something to say and what you have to say, is you 
have an explanation why you did not raise the issue with 
him and that is, you are not the type of person who would 
raise this kind of issue with the Minister, is that right? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja okay. 
20 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you Chair for that and the final 
point that Mr Gigaba makes that I’d like to raise with you is 
that he says, he was not aware that Mr Siyabonga 
Mahlangu, his special advisor, attended the meeting with 
you and Mr Gupta, do you agree or disagree with that 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 222 of 255 
 
statement? 
MR MKWANAZI: I don’t know but I didn’t tell the Minister 
that I’m taking Siyabonga to that meeting it was something 
I raised between myself and Siyabonga.  
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you Chair, Chair I apologise I 
didn’t enter that as an Exhibit,  so Chair would it be 
possible to admit from page MM4 to the end of that 
affidavit which is MM22 as Exhibit MM7B? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Does it have Annexures?  
ADV ARMSTRONG:   It does. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   It does? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Yes, so the affidavit that begins at 
page 4, MM4 and the Annexures end at page MM22. 
CHAIRPERSON: Well tell me where the Annexures start 
first.   
ADV ARMSTRONG:   The Annexures begin from page 
MM17 
– 
sorry 
I 
beg 
your 
pardon 
that’s 
another 
affidavit…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What’s 15? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   It’s MM14 is the end, so MM15 you’re 
20 
correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s a confirmatory affidavit and then 
there is Annexure B and Annexure C, we’ll have to say the 
statement 
by 
Mr 
Malusi 
Knowledge 
Nkanyezi 
Gigaba 
appearing at page four – oh that’s the notice, that at page 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 223 of 255 
 
four, the actual statements starts at page six but the notice 
and the statement will be admitted and marked as Exhibit 
MM7 – what’s the letter? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   That is B. 
CHAIRPERSON:   B and that is the statement plus it’s 
Annexures. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Indeed Chair, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you Chair.  Chair that 
concludes the evidence on Transnet, so Mr Mkwanazi I’d 
10 
just like to move to the evidence about your time at Eskom 
on the Board which was – which began on June 2011 and 
came to an end in December 2014 and in particular I’d like 
to ask you about that end part of your tenure on the Board, 
so November/December of 2014 and in particular I’d like to 
ask you about this contract that Eskom had concluded with 
the New Age and that was a contract for R43million, do you 
have any memory of that Mr Mkwanazi? 
MR 
MKWANAZI: 
 
 
Yes, 
and 
I, 
in 
terms 
of 
the 
documentation is there something I must open up? 
20 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Not yet. 
MR MKWANAZI:   Of the three documents? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Not yet Mr Mkwanazi. 
MR MKWANAZI:   No we can talk off the cuff ja. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Yes, yes. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 224 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Maybe 
before 
you 
proceed 
Ms 
Armstrong, from what date did you become a Director, a 
non-Executive Director of Eskom to what date? 
MR MKWANAZI:   I think it was June 2011 to December 
2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so going back to that Business 
Day article you did join the Board – you did join the Eskom 
Board as a non-Executive Director, the only difference is 
that you’re not removed from the Transnet Board? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct Chairman. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Indeed, thank you Chair.  So, the 
R43million rand contract between Eskom for advertising in 
the New Age – so you indicate you were aware of that 
contract? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct Advocate. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   And do you recall that towards the 
end, in November and December of your tenure 2014, on 
the Eskom Board you were considering that contract, do 
you recall that? 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct after the people – the 
forensic people had finished their work, yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   That’s quite right and that is a report 
by SNG, there was a forensic report done on this particular 
contract, is that what you’re referring to Mr Mkwanazi? 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 225 of 255 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct Chairman. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Do you recall, in general terms what 
that report concluded about the contract? 
MR MKWANAZI:   At the high level Chair it concluded on 
two issues or two individuals  it concluded that the 
R43million contract was irregular and it concluded that the 
clause – the exit clause that was supposed to be there 
which was removed by somebody, that was wrong of that 
somebody to do that and it concluded that the acting CEO 
at the time did not have the authority to conclude that 
10 
contract because there was no budget and they also – 
there was not proper approval because such contracts, 
above say R3million, was supposed to be approved by the 
EXCO of Eskom and that was not done. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you, so that Chief Executive 
that was Mr Colin Matjila, is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct Chair, ja. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   And the other individual you referred 
to is that Mr Choeu? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, it’s Chose Choeu, that is correct 
20 
Chair. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you Mr Mkwanazi and so then 
I’d just like to move to – there were three Board meetings 
that then took place towards the end of that year at which 
this issue was discussed.  I’d just like to take you, Mr 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 226 of 255 
 
Mkwanazi to the very last minute and that will require us to 
go to file – to leave our file MM7 and to move to Exhibit 
MM3 and that was the Exhibit in respect of Mr Mark 
Pamensky’s evidence.   
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes, what page Chair. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   I’ll just make sure that the Chair has 
that file. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I don’t think he heard, so you must tell 
him again what Exhibit. 
ADV 
ARMSTRONG: 
 
 
Okay 
that’s 
MM3, 
Mr 
Mark 
10 
Pamensky’s evidence, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you going to come back to this or 
not? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   No Chair, thank you.  Then if we 
could just turn to page 349 of this bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say 349? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  349 that’s correct Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  349?  
ADV ARMSTRONG:   That’s right, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When you are looking away from me I 
20 
won’t hear you properly. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   My apologies Chair, that’s correct, 
349, thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   So, here are the minutes of a 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 227 of 255 
 
meeting of the 8 t h of December 2014, now this must have 
been, Mr Mkwanazi, right before the end of your – this 
must have been one of the last Board meetings you 
attended, is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That’s correct Chair. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you and I confirm that you 
were at this meeting, it says you were present, is that 
correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Okay, and I just want to move to page 
10 
351 in the second last paragraph of that page it says, 
“The lawyers were of the opinion that Mr Matjila’s 
conduct constituted a wilfulness conduct in terms of 
the PFMA…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry where about on 351 are you 
reading? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Sorry Chair, it’s the second last 
paragraph. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   The first sentence okay so, 
20 
“The lawyers were of the opinion that Mr Matjila’s 
conduct constituted a wilfulness conduct in terms of 
the PFMA.  The National Treasury Regulations 
stated that if there were a financial misconduct by 
an employee then the Board must ensure that an 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 228 of 255 
 
investigation 
was 
conducted 
and 
relevant 
disciplinary action taken.  Furthermore, the Board 
had 
to 
advise 
the 
relevant 
Minister, 
National 
Treasury and Auditor General thereof.  In respect of 
a reportable irregularity is reported to external 
auditors and had to make a disclosure”, 
 
And 
then, 
Mr 
Mkwanazi 
you’ll 
see 
the 
next 
paragraph says, 
“With respect to the definition of fruitless and 
wasteful expenditure it was stated that the Board 
10 
had to take a view whether the contract had value 
or not”, 
 
So, let’s stop there and discuss that.  So, Mr 
Mkwanazi, you mentioned earlier that the forensic report 
had mentioned two key actors, that was Mr Matjila and Mr 
Choeu and so did you understand that…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just give the spelling for Mr Choeu for 
the convenience of the transcribers. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   That is C-H-O-E-U. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
20 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you Chair.  So, in light of this 
paragraph about – that Mr Matjila’s conduct constituted 
misconduct in terms of the PFMA, did you understand that 
the Board had an obligation to act on that information, Mr 
Mkwanazi?  
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 229 of 255 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   That’s my understanding yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   And that corrective action had to be 
taken in that regard? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is my understanding. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Now, Mr Matjila, after this, was no 
longer the Chief Executor of the Board but do you still 
understand that the – was the Board of Eskom of the view 
that action still had to be taken against Mr Matjila? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That’s my understanding because still he 
was within the scope, I think he reverted back to a non-
10 
Executive Director position. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   And then, Mr Choeu, he was, if I’m 
not mistaken, still an employee of Eskom is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   So, was it your understanding, as a 
member of the Board that disciplinary action was going to 
be taken against these parties? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That’s my understanding yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   The second point that I mentioned 
was fruitless and wasteful expenditure, what do you 
20 
understand that to mean? 
MR MKWANAZI:   You need to go back to the actual PFMA 
and in this case it was irregular yes because he exceeded 
the delegation they did not fall – had an exit clause 
etcetera.  Now, whether it was fruitless and wasteful, 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 230 of 255 
 
somebody else then – a specialist in analysis of what value 
did the company get out of that R43million needs to be 
done and then based on that then the Board can then 
define it as a fruitless and wasteful expenditure unless 
you’ve got somebody doing that analysis, at the time we 
had not done that analysis as a Board. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you Mr Mkwanazi, that’s very 
important.  So, at this time there had been no analysis into 
commercial value of the contract.   
MR MKWANAZI:   Yes. 
10 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   But did you understand that, that was 
still going to be done at some future date? 
MR MKWANAZI:   The irregularity is a given and the wrong 
clause is a given they shouldn’t have done that but 
whether then, as auditors and as an Audit Committee how 
do you then define this, you need to apply your mind.  Yes, 
it would have been irregular in a particular way unless 
regularised by a Board but then conditional regularisation 
on 
condition 
that 
you 
take 
action 
against 
the 
two 
Executives involved. 
20 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Okay I…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry, as I understand it, wasteful 
and fruitless expenditure is when an entity’s money is 
spent in vain as it were, the entity doesn’t derive any 
material value from that expenditure, would that be your 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 231 of 255 
 
understanding as well? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Chair that is my understanding, being 
a person – an Engineer, typically if you build a bridge and 
then you get the full payment and the bridge is not built or 
even one brick is laid, that’s fruitless and wasteful. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, or the bridge is built halfway so that 
it can’t be used, that would still be…[intervenes].  
MR MKWANAZI:   I agree Chair, yes that’s fruitless and 
wasteful. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, so you’re saying that what 
10 
you were sure about at this stage was that this was 
irregular expenditure because the necessary approvals had 
not been obtained? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct Chair, there was no 
budget. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But whether it was wasteful and fruitless 
was something that you could only arrive at after a certain 
exercise had been done and at that stage that exercise had 
not been done yet? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That’s correct Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you Chair, that’s very helpful 
for me.  So, Mr Mkwanazi, let’s then turn to the next page, 
it’s page 352.  So, in the first major paragraph, the first 
complete paragraph, we see here that the discussion is 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 232 of 255 
 
about a decision about Matjila’s guilt or innocence and 
there 
was 
a 
discussion 
about 
fruitless 
and 
wasteful 
expenditure and then we see the statement, halfway down 
the paragraph it starts with the sentence – it’s about six 
lines down, the sentence starts with, 
“The Chairman stated that the Board had to be 
convinced that the contract was not a bad one”, 
 
And then if you go on to the end of that paragraph it 
says, 
Ms Luthuli stated that the handover report had to 
10 
reflect the Board had considered whether or not the 
contract was a bad one and had concluded that the 
contract was not a good one at this time”,  
 
Could you just explain, what do you understand by 
a good or a bad contract meaning? 
MR 
MKWANAZI: 
 
 
I 
can’t 
explain 
that, 
also 
my 
understanding it would be difficult to – it was irregular 
that’s it, ja. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Okay, so when they talk about – when 
the Board talks about the minutes reflect that this was not 
20 
a good contract, we see it in a number of places, again in 
that same page on the second last paragraph, they were of 
the opinion that the contract was not a good contract, so 
are you saying, you’re not sure what that means? 
MR MKWANAZI:   To a certain extent I know, how can you 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 233 of 255 
 
have a contract with no exit clause, that’s a bad contract. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Okay, so…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you…[intervenes]. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That’s a bad contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You could have a contract without an 
exit clause, I’m now talking in general, let’s leave out this 
one provided when you look at its entire – you look at it in 
its entirety and the value you are going to derive from it is 
a party to that contract is good, the value you derive from 
it is good and you have built into the contract enough 
10 
checks 
and 
balances 
to 
safeguard 
your 
interests 
it 
happens all the time, does it not, for example that you – an 
employer has a fixed-term contract with an employee and 
normally what that kind of contract means is neither the 
employer nor the employee can get out of that contract 
before the expiry of the fixed period except if there’s a 
breach of the contract. In the case of an employee, except 
if the employee conducts – misconducts himself or herself 
but other than that you are stuck there, both of you but it 
may be that as an employer you say, this employee has got 
20 
very rare skills and he or she is in high demand they want 
him in other companies so I want to secure him or her for 
this period, are you more or less in agreement with that, 
that you can have that situation? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct Chair. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 234 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but you are saying in certain 
circumstances, you need an exit clause, that’s the point 
you’re making? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chair that is correct but in this instance, 
because there was an exit clause in a preliminary contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  
MR 
MKWANAZI: 
 
 
Then 
somewhere 
along 
the 
line 
somebody decided that, I don’t like this exit clause then 
you make it a bad contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
10 
MR MKWANAZI:   And also, he fact that there was no 
budget for this thing at all and at that time Eskom was 
experiencing financial problems and then you go out there 
with no budget and you try and spend R43million, that’s a 
bad contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course even with this kind of contract 
that I was talking about, that is my putting an exit clause 
even though I normally think it doesn’t make sense but 
sometimes they can do that but I think that from your point 
of view the point you are making is, an exit clause in this 
20 
type of contract would have given you – or gave Eskom in 
the in the one before, some comfort that they could get out 
of it if there was a problem. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And from your point of view, the moment 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 235 of 255 
 
the exit clause wasn’t there it was a bad contract apart 
from the fact…[intervenes]. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Also, because it was concluded when 
there was no budget for it, that’s another reason why you 
say it was a bad contract. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That’s correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, alright. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you so much Chair and Mr 
Mkwanazi you also raised the financial position that Eskom 
10 
was in at the time, you say, so when it concluded this 
contract what was its financial position? 
MR MKWANAZI:   Please, was not in a good position we 
were beginning to make losses if I recall also the 
Regulator was on our back about cutting down on expenses 
etcetera, etcetera. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   And this was R53million contract for 
advertising for a State-owned entity? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That’s correct Chair. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   So, in light of the financial position of 
20 
Eskom at the time could that be another reason why it was 
not a good contract at that time? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That is correct Chair, ja. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   And they emphasise that Mr Luthuli 
emphasises here that it must be in a handover report to the 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 236 of 255 
 
new Board, is that your recollection? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That’s my recollection because we were 
preparing to handover to the new Board and that is why 
she insisted that, that be captured. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   It was captured that it was a bad 
contract, it was not a good contract? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That’s correct ja. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Can I ask this, you have been in the 
Boards of a number of companies and you had been before 
10 
your time at Transnet and Eskom based on what you said 
earlier on from the mid 1980’s you were already involved 
..[intervenes].  
MR MKWANAZI:   Ja that’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now, do you know of any circumstances 
under which a contract which has got financial implications 
for a company which is concluded when there’s no budget 
for it would still be regarded as good?   
MR MKWANAZI:   Chair, you need to have a budget for 
every line expenditure in your organisation. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:   That’s why this, frankly, was not correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, if there’s no budget for it, it should 
be regarded as a bad contract? 
MR MKWANAZI:   That’s correct Chair. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 237 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   Thank you Chair.   
ADV MKHWANAZI:   Excuse me Chair, if I can just come in 
there, I’m still here, just to correct something that the 
counsel said before you intervened Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MKHWANAZI:   The – Ms Luthuli did not suggest that 
the Board should handover to the new Board to say that 
the contract was bad, her recommendation, rather was that 
the Board had conceded or not whether the contract was a 
10 
bad one.  I just wanted to make sure that we correct that 
Chair, so that you know, we don’t get confused in terms of 
what the recommendation was in this instance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Let’s read out the full statement.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja just read out the full statement. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:   So, on page 352 it says, 
“Mr Luthuli stated that the handover report had to 
reflect that the Board had considered whether or 
not the contract was a bad one and had concluded 
20 
that the contract was not good at this time”. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At least now it has been read in full, I 
think the next thing would be to just double check with Mr 
Mkwanazi, the witness, whether that changes anything in 
terms of the response that he has given. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 238 of 255 
 
MR MKWANAZI:   Chairman it does not change anything 
because this is a record of that last Board, which then 
would have been handed over to the new Board which 
started in January 2015 and there – in the resolution below 
on that there are clear statements that indicate that there 
are certain irregular things that did happen.  And whether 
but the contract was there – yes – but it is the technicality 
of irregular, no exit clause, no authority etcetera that must 
be handed over to the new board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I understand this statement too by Ms 
10 
Luthuli to mean that she was saying  
1. Let us make sure as a board that the report reflects 
that we as the board did consider this contract. 
2. Having considered this contract or the report must 
reflect 
that 
having 
considered 
this 
contract 
we 
concluded that this contract is not good at this time. 
That is my understanding of what she is saying.  Is that your 
understanding as well Mr Mkwanazi? 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is my understanding Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright thank you. 
20 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you Chair.  So then in summary 
Mr Mkwanazi as a member of the so-called old board before 
the new board had to make its decision you have said that – 
am I correct that the old board was not going to determine 
whether to ratify the contract or not? 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 239 of 255 
 
MR MKWANAZI:  At that particular meeting but do not forget 
if that old board had had one more meeting because that 
was an issue of the auditors as well putting pressure on us 
to fix this irregular expenditure.  So the old board in my 
interpretation having articulated what we had done would 
have ratified that contract conditionally to disciplinary action 
being taken against the two gentlemen who were basically 
the authors of this document.  But that old board did not get 
the time to – to actually come to that point because now it 
was handing over. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Okay 
I 
think 
Mr 
Mkwanazi 
your 
understanding of the concept of ratifying might be different 
from Ms Armstrong’s understanding.  Now when you – you 
say the old board if it had time would have ratified the 
contract by taking disciplinary action against the two persons 
concerned, is that right? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chair yes it would have been a conditional 
ratification because do not forget in the external auditors 
would have defined it fully as irregular – it has not been 
ratified.  So you ratify it that we understand it was irregular 
20 
etcetera and we have taken these steps so we now adopt it 
as board that this contract can continue to its termination. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Maybe – maybe I was wrong to 
think you have a different understanding but let me – let me 
tell you what I understand when you say the board – the old 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 240 of 255 
 
board was going to ratify the contract if – conditionally if it 
had had time. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now for me what that means is that you 
were going to approve the contract and of course you say 
conditionally.  We can talk about conditionally in due course. 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that what you mean?  Is that what you 
mean that you would not approve. 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Now how – how can you say the old 
board was going to approve the contract when you do not 
know or you did not know what the outcome was going to be 
of the exercise that you talked about of establishing whether 
Eskom would get value out of this or not? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chair in other words let me clarify. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In other words my understanding is you 
would want to first find out is this contract worth anything to 
Eskom when it is worth anything serious and if you 
concluded or the exercise concluded that Eskom is going to 
20 
get no value of this there is no way you would approve the 
contract.  That is what I think but you must tell me what it 
means. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chair these types of contracts particularly 
in the issue of marketing and marketing contracts.  The 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 241 of 255 
 
definition of value is quite difficult because you – you then 
need to quantify the number of hours that you got on 
exposure through television and you must quantify it in 
numbers that per flitting of an ad or anything and also you – 
at the time if you recall there was a special messaging that 
Eskom was going to the public with – in terms of trying to 
talk about the load shedding and all the other things and 
people saving electricity.  So there was an element of value 
but the issue is was that value worth R43 million that is the 
exercise that needed to be done.  But there was value in 
10 
Eskom trying to have this publicity in terms of what they 
were trying to achieve as an organisation.  Because they 
were talking about the advertisements that was flitted.  They 
will talk about illegal [indistinct 00:06:11] and all the other 
things that are wrong which are happening out there 
affecting Eskom infrastructure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But let us assume that the board undertook 
that exercise of establishing what value Eskom was going to 
derive from this contract of R43 million and the outcome of 
that exercise was that the value that Eskom was going to 
20 
derive from this contract was R3 million.  Is the position that 
that therefore the R40 million would be viewed as… 
MR 
MKWANAZI: 
 
Could 
have 
been 
defined 
as 
mismanagement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As fruitless and wasteful expenditure, is 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 242 of 255 
 
that right?  You agree? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Ja.  No, not fruit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So my question then is, how do you 
approve the contract – how was the board going to approve 
the contract before doing that exercise rather than do that 
exercise first depending on the outcome you might approve? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chair there are two issues here.  One is 
the irregular contract that the board would have ratified.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  But the fruitless and wasteful part of it 
10 
would have required more work. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  To determine if there was any value that 
Eskom got out of that contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Now if you approve the contract 
before you know how much value you are going to derive 
from the contract and whether it commensurates with R43 
million or even close to it what happens if later on you find 
that the value is negligible are you not in trouble for having 
approved it already? 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chair there are two issues here maybe you 
are confusing the issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja please help me. 
MR MKWANAZI:  There was a board that ended its term in 
December. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 243 of 255 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  We are talking about that board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  I was part of that board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Then there – there is a new board that took 
over in January it was chaired by Zola. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Tsotsi. 
MR MKWANAZI:  By Zola. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Zola Tsotsi. 
10 
MR MKWANAZI:  And the – subsequent to that there was on 
the board chaired by Doctor Ben Ngubane. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  It is those two boards that then took a 
different view on what to do with this contract.  This board 
that I was part of was still evaluating the options. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MKWANAZI:  It did not execute the ratification. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  That I understand. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think my questions arise from your 
statement earlier on that if your – if the board of which you 
were part had had enough time it would have approved. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  This contract conditionally.  I think that is 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 244 of 255 
 
where – that is where my questions come from.  So I am 
saying. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How do you – how do you say this board 
was going to approve conditionally before that exercise is 
done? 
MR MKWANAZI:  No there are two approvals Chair that are 
needed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  On a contract like this.  The one approval 
10 
is the irregular that we could have done because then… 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is the processional one. 
MR MKWANAZI:  You avoid … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the processional affect. 
MR MKWANAZI:  This board – my board could have done 
that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  But the approval of fruitless and wasteful 
even my board would not have been able to get it until a 
different report would have come out on what value did you 
20 
get out of this contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I understand the two issues and 
maybe we – maybe we will not go further but if I was in a 
board such as the one in which you were in December – is it 
2016? 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 245 of 255 
 
MR MKWANAZI:  2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:  2014 I would say well before we – we 
approve anything on this contract I want to know fully about 
it.  What – why are we getting into this contract?  What are 
we going to get as Eskom?  That is where my questions are 
because I would want to say, this board must have nothing to 
do with this contract if I am satisfied that there is no value.  I 
would not even want to – to say I approve the – I condone 
the irregularity about procedure.  I would want to say, this 
board has got nothing to do with this contract.  The person 
10 
who entered into it without authority must face the music.  
Do you think I was going to be too harsh? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chair you are not too harsh but at the 
time… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I must just understand certain things. 
MR MKWANAZI:  I am thinking [indistinct 00:11:41] things 
the – they get caught up with the certain processes.  The 
external auditors were putting pressure on us because they 
wanted to finalise their annual financial statements. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
20 
MR MKWANAZI:  So for that to fix the irregularity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Would have been helpful. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  But mentioning that there is potential 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 246 of 255 
 
fruitless and wasteful expenditure coming. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  And it is normal in companies that it 
actually comes after – almost at the conclusion because of 
the project. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  You then say, hold it this project – this is 
the value I was supposed to get but I only get this value. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  So the difference is that yes there would 
10 
have been a fruitless and wasteful expenditure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  In another board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  In another audit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  To say that matter you fix the irregularity 
but fruitless and wasteful expenditure yes it is recognise it 
because it is something carefully wants you to articulate 
would have done that. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay.  But ordinarily when say a 
Group CEO approaches the board about a contract that 
might need to be signed one of the things that the board 
would look at is, what value will our entity get from this, is 
that right?  At – even at that stage. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 247 of 255 
 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay thank you.  Ms Armstrong. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you Chair.  So then Mr Mkwanazi 
so I understand then to summarise that the board at that 
point had reserved its judgment on ratification.  It was still 
exploring options that was your testimony. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There I think – I think his testimony is on 
the irregular [indistinct 00:13:35] board. 
MR MKWANAZI:  If I – handover board. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja on the irregular expenditure he says 
they were going to approve that. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Yes.  We could have. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  They could have. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Yes you could have. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They could have if they had time. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But they did not because of time. 
20 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But the other one was still going to be 
investigated about fruitless and wasteful expenditure. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 248 of 255 
 
MR MKWANAZI:  The fruitless and wasteful would have been 
dealt with following that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Okay.  Thank you.  And then finally the 
issue of the corrective action or the disciplinary action 
against Mr Cheou and Mr Matjila that is also something you 
expected the new board to deal with. 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Okay.  And with all these very important 
things for the new board to consider and an emphasis in the 
10 
minutes about at the very least the fact that this was a – not 
a good contract being conveyed and then also you pointed 
out Mr Mkwanazi in the resolutions that Ledwaba Mazwai 
Attorneys and the company secretary were going to prepare 
a summary and final resolution on the discussions and the 
decisions around the New Age sponsorship contract for 
signing by the Chairman of the board, Chairman of the Audit 
and Risk Committee for inclusion handover report to the new 
board.  So all of these discussions were now going to be 
passed 
over 
in 
its 
handover 
report 
was 
that 
your 
20 
understanding? 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct yes. 
ADV 
ARMSTRONG: 
 
So 
with 
all 
of 
these 
important 
considerations would – would you have considered it good 
corporate governance to convene a live board meeting to 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 249 of 255 
 
discuss these issues before the board took further action? 
MR MKWANAZI:  We waited – which board now took … 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  The new board.  The new board. 
MR MKWANAZI:  My board or the new board? 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  The new board when they took over 
would you accept it to be good corporate governance for 
them to convene a meeting to discuss all of these issues. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chair if I – if I –  
ADV MKWANAZI:   If I may come in Chair and then… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Mr Mkwanazi the lawyer ja. 
10 
ADV MKWANAZI:  I think arising out of this is that the – the 
timelines between you know the vacating of office of the 
board at that time and the new incoming board was so slim 
that for someone who is not you know close to the process 
may actually think they were on the same board at the same 
time.  So it is just for clarity for example Chair.  Mr 
Pamensky was never on the same board with Mr Mkwanazi.  
In fact, he came in I think two or three months after that – 
after the board that Mr – the old board as he referred to it 
had already made the recommendations insofar as how the 
20 
irregularity and the expenditure should be dealt with in that 
regard.  So I think it would not be fair to you know ask a 
question of that nature to Mr Mkwanazi whose terms at the 
time had already expired.  So I think Chair it is important 
that we brought that line and make sure that Mr Mkwanazi 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 250 of 255 
 
only answers for the questions you know that relate to his 
term of office.  So whether or not it is good corporate 
governance for a board to have a Round Robin etcetera, 
etcetera I think that depends from board to board and 
organisations as well as the communications policy that that 
particular board had in that instance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MKWANAZI:  All I am asking for Chair is that let us – 
let us speak to the term of office of Mr Mkwanazi and 
anything beyond that would only be supposition Chair and 
10 
consequently with the [indistinct 00:17:25] taking the forum’s 
time.  Thank you Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you.  I think one concern I had 
with the question is you did not lay a basis for asking for Mr 
Mkwanazi’s 
opinion 
on 
whether 
it 
would 
be 
a 
good 
governance practice or not so if there is no basis that is laid 
there might be a problem with that. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed Chair and the basis that I was 
hoping to point out to Mr Mkwanazi was there were so many 
important issues that still needed to be determined by the 
20 
new board with respect to a large contract sponsorship of 
the New Age, with respect to disciplinary action that had to 
be taken with two of the employees, with identifying fruitless 
and wasteful expenditure and the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe – I am sorry.  Maybe – maybe your 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 251 of 255 
 
problem is the reference to good corporate governance. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe if you just ask a question. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed Chair.  What was the – what 
would have been Mr Mkwanazi your expectation perhaps of a 
member of the old board? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Hang on.  Mr Mkwanazi the lawyer – 
ja I think you understand maybe she is going to put the 
question in a different way. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Indeed Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:  We will give you indulgence Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes okay thank you. 
MR MKWANAZI:    [indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:    Can I respond? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR MKWANAZI:    It is an opinion.  Now the old board had 
two reports the Dedoro Muswayo [?] Report and the Gomoto 
Report [?] and those reports were clear.  Anybody who would 
20 
have taken those two reports and read them thoroughly now 
being the new board.  I am not sure how they have arrived at 
a different conclusion.  I am really not sure.  Now even in 
terms of say can you do this telecom or Round Robin firstly 
to read the two reports before you can commit to a telecom 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 252 of 255 
 
or a Round Robin on an important subject like this because it 
is 
not 
easy 
to 
discipline 
a 
Chief 
Executive 
of 
an 
organisation.  It is quite a process.  So yes they needed the 
two reports and the two conclusions before they would have 
taken the decision, they took in June 2015 to ratify a 
contract yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so you certainly can say they had an 
obligation to apply their minds to the issues that you had 
flagged as the – as the old board? 
MR MKWANAZI:  Chair may I yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you.  And of course, Mr 
Mkwanazi you would have expected a handover report to 
contain a summary of your discussions at these meetings as 
is included in this resolution, is that correct? 
MR MKWANAZI:  I think they were handed over.  That is 
correct Chair. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  So in the – I asked you earlier Mr 
Mkwanazi about this resolution and your last meeting which 
stated that there needs to be a summary prepared of what 
20 
had been discussed and that would be included in the 
handover report.  So what I am asking you – and you would 
have in addition to the two reports, the forensic and the legal 
reports would you have also expected that summary of your 
discussions in the board meetings, the opinion of the old 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 253 of 255 
 
board to be conveyed to the new board before voting on a 
contract? 
MR MKWANAZI:  That is correct.  That is correct Chair. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you Mr Mkwanazi.  Chair thank 
you.  Those are our questions about – from Eskom and from 
our side. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no thank you.  Thank you very much 
Mr Mkwanazi the witness and thank you very much to Mr 
Mkwanazi the lawyer.   
ADV MKWANAZI:  Thank you Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  It appears that we have reached the end of 
the proceedings for today.  Of course, I am – I have no doubt 
you will come back Mr Mkwanazi to assist the commission 
further on other matters but for now thank you very much to 
both of you and thank you for being able to stay until late.  
And thank you to the commission’s legal team and everybody 
who has stayed on so that we could at least finalise this part 
of Mr Mkwanazi’s evidence.  On Monday just in case the 
media are still here or are listening on Monday the 
commission will hear the evidence of a former Minister Ms 
20 
Nonvula 
Mokonyane 
in 
regard 
to 
allegations 
involving 
Bosasa and during the week we will also hear other persons 
who were implicated in Mr Agrizzi’s evidence and some of 
them are Magistrate Naya of Pretoria.  I think Mr Linda Mti 
who 
was 
Commissioner 
of 
Correctional 
Services 
is 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 254 of 255 
 
scheduled also to come next week.  There might be one or 
two others.  Mr Vincent Smith was meant to come but 
arrangements have been made – he has been released.  He 
will come some other time.  And I think on Friday we will 
hear the – I will hear evidence from Judge Makhubela of the 
High Court in relation to PRASA matters.  So I thought I must 
just indicate that so that where we are able to, we indicate 
which witnesses we will be having and which work streams 
we will be dealing with.  Okay. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you Chair. Sorry Chair could I 
10 
just hand up that Business Day clearly of the article. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you that our files are completed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you.  Mr Mkwanazi you would 
have had an electronic version. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much. 
MR MKWANAZI:  I have got an electronic one. 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
MR MKWANAZI:  Thank you very much I thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.  Okay we adjourn. 
ADV MKWANAZI:  Thank you Chair, thank you colleagues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  We adjourn. 
17 JULY 2020 – DAY 234 
 
Page 255 of 255 
 
ADV ARMSTRONG:  Thank you Chair. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 20 JULY 2020 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
