 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
17 OCTOBER 2019 
 
 
 
DAY 182 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 2 of 68 
 
PROCEEDINGS COMMENCE ON 17 OCTOBER 2019 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Good 
morning 
Ms 
Gcabashe, 
good 
morning 
everybody.  I am sorry we are starting 6 minutes late. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Good morning Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because of some urgent stuff I had to attend to.  Are 
you ready? 
ADV GCABASHE:  Yes, yes I am Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Good morning Ms Rockman. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Okay.  Let us continue. 
10 
ADV GCABASHE:  Thank – thank you.  Ms Rockman yesterday when 
we adjourned we were discussing what provision had been made for the 
payment of the 114 million to Estina as an implementing agent over the 
three year period that this 114 per annum had to be paid.  You were 
going to have a look at your documentation and just assist us in 
locating the form in which this allocation had been made for Estina. 
 
I just for convenience sake I actually did the exercise last 
night and I would point you to ER43 which is in HH13B at page 563.  
We have dealt with this letter before.  So it is ER43.  It is part of your 
original submission.  And I just actually thought that quite a few of the 
20 
numbers are – are very well summarised in ER43.  In any event for 
purposes of the record as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What page did you say it is? 
ADV GCABASHE:  It is page 563 Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 3 of 68 
 
ADV GCABASHE:  Of the original bundle.  But it is bundle B because it 
is annexure it is in bundle B. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I have got it. 
ADV GCABASHE:  And… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Have you found it Ms Rockman? Not yet? 
MS ROCKMAN:  Not yet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think it is Exhibit HH13B on the spine. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Apparently the three files that are on the table – 
yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you may have confused her by saying part of 
10 
her original submission.  I thought when you said that you meant the 
bundle which has got her main affidavit which is A not B.  So – so 
maybe she got confused because of that. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Chairman.  If those are the other [intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Have you found it? 
MS ROCKMAN:  I think so – 563? 
ADV GCABASHE:  Yes. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  It is Annexure ER43 at page 563. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes.  I am there. 
20 
ADV GCABASHE:  If those are the other bundles you might want to 
bring them a little closer.  I am not sure if those – that is A and C that 
you left. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  I think just bring them a little closer to the extent 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 4 of 68 
 
that we might need them.  Not too close but at least they should be 
somewhere where you can reach them without having to get up. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja maybe her chair is too far away from… 
ADV GCABASHE:  From those.  You might… 
CHAIRPERSON:  She might wish to bring it closer. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But do whatever makes you comfortable. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes the other Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh 
MS ROCKMAN:  The person is used as storage or [indistinct] we will 
10 
manage it is fine thanks. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Thank you.  And really at paragraph 6 and 7 is what 
I just wanted to bring to your attention.  That is ER 43 page 563 
paragraph 6 and 7. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  As you speak to the issues maybe you can just say 
that is a correct summary of what you are going to be dealing with.  
Then I also would like to just before you start point you to in very 
specific terms to paragraph 7 and confirm that the R12 million that is 
20 
recorded in paragraph 7 was going to be drawn from the Mohuma 
Mobung allocation, do you confirm that? 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes Chairperson that is correct. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Excellent.  Then what is – what actually happened 
in practice is recorded in that paragraph 7 of ER43.  The next point – 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 5 of 68 
 
really these are just points I am making in just summarising what I 
understood of your evidence yesterday.   
 
Smaller projects which were to be funded under the Mohuma 
Mobung allocation were sacrificed in order to fund the Vrede Dairy 
Farm Project.  Is that correct? 
MS ROCKMAN:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Thank you. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  So the 30 million that was paid to Estina on the 9 
July was drawn from the 35 million that had been allocated to Mohuma 
10 
Mobung from the MTF allocation of 2012/2013. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV GCABASHE:  And this is – this is actually just a link I would like 
to make.  When Ms Anna Fourie was here she told us that when the 
CFO of DARD approached her for the payment of the 30 million she 
informed her that all that was left in the Provincial Revenue Fund was 5 
million.  And I am really just trying to find out if the 5 million that Anna 
Fourie spoke of is the balance of this 30 or is it a totally different 
amount?  That is the only – I am just trying to understand the evidence. 
MS ROCKMAN:  No I think Ms Fourie would have made reference to the 
20 
cash available in the Provincial Revenue Fund. 
ADV GCABASHE:  I see. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Not necessarily available for this project or 
Agriculture. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Thanks.  That clears it up for me because then there 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 6 of 68 
 
is no link between the two. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  If there had been I would have asked a couple of 
other questions. 
MS ROCKMAN:   There was clearly no cash available to accommodate 
a request from any department over and above 5 million. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Yes.  Absolutely, thank you.  Then if you look at 
page 565 there you have a breakdown of the budgets.  I think I am 
going to allow you now to – and I am simply using ER43 as a reference 
document. 
10 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  So where you think the recording is not correct 
there for instance there is that table that tells us what was allocated.  
Please assist and tell us to correct that document as well as you give 
us the correct figures. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Okay. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Simply because I think ER43 is a very useful 
summary.  Thank you. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Thank you Chair.  I think you indicated yesterday the 
information is almost split between – there is a part in the main 
20 
affidavit and another part in the supplementary affidavit.  But 
essentially 
for 
2013/2014 
the 
funding 
was 
53.950 
from 
the 
Comprehensive Agricultural Support Grant, the CASP grant. 
ADV GCABASHE:  So under CASP? 
MS ROCKMAN:  There was 53.950. 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 7 of 68 
 
ADV GCABASHE:  [Indistinct] 53 – just over 53, correct? 
MS ROCKMAN:  Ja.  And then from infrastructure enhancement 
allocation that is the provincial fund it is 60 million.  Then at the time 
Agriculture Fishery and Forestry withheld the funding. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Yes. 
MS ROCKMAN:  24 million of that 53.9 was already spent.  So they 
effectively withheld 29.950 million then.  In the adjustment budget that 
year we reduced Agriculture’s overall allocation with 10.962 million.  
Then there was a separate submission made by Agriculture in 
December 2013. 
10 
ADV GCABASHE:  Yes. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Which was then authorised for payment by HOD 
Treasury and that funding was then appropriated in the special 
Adjustment Appropriation Act we provided for 25 million which came 
from all other uncommitted funds at the time and there was an internal 
reprioritisation within the Department of Agriculture that made up that 
balance of 4.9. 
ADV GCABASHE:  So just – I beg your pardon.  If you just repeat the 
last sentence then I will ask my question? 
MS ROCKMAN:  The 30 million that was authorised for payment in 
20 
December 2013 by the HOD it was then appropriated in the special 
Adjustment Appropriation Act.  The 4.950 million came from internal 
reprioritisation in Agriculture and 25 million was additional funding that 
we took from all other uncommitted funds and made available in that 
special Adjustment Appropriation Act. 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 8 of 68 
 
ADV GCABASHE:  Now can I just understand this clearly.  So the 25 
million you looked of it within the monies available to the Department of 
Agriculture and Rural Development. 
MS ROCKMAN:  No, no.  All departments in the province.  Everyone 
who had unspent funds.  That is our standard procedure come January.  
Because in the first adjustment – sorry – I think the first Adjustment 
Appropriation departments are defensive saying no we have committed 
the funds, you cannot take our fund.  So you give them the benefit of 
the doubt.  Come January we do not listen to anyone.  If it is not 
committed on the system your money goes.  It is all Treasury’s 
10 
unfortunately work like that. 
ADV GCABASHE:  That is fine.  But at least we know that in December 
representations were made, they were considered and you were able to 
find an additional 29.9. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Really 30 million. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Ja. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Okay. 
MS ROCKMAN:  20 – ja. 
ADV GCABASHE:  And this is in 2013/2014? 
20 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  So what were your totals that were available?  Were 
you able to meet the 114 million for the financial year 2013/2014? 
MS ROCKMAN:  I think more or less we did yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  The question I have is really related to the planning 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 9 of 68 
 
function of the department.  They obviously did not have this money.  
They had not – they had not asked for it originally in the 2013/2014 
allocation.  And I just want to understand the regularity of waiting for 
people to scramble around in December of 2013 looking for money.  
How responsible is that of an accounting officer or is the standard I am 
setting too high?  Does it happen in the normal course that people will 
be scrambling around to try and find money for somebody? 
MS ROCKMAN:  No.  At the start of 2013/2014 if you go back to the 
Annual Performance Plan and the Budget Vote Statement. They did 
provide for it.  The CASP funding of that 53.950 and the 60 million that 
10 
would give you almost the 113 million that was require for their 
commitment.   
ADV GCABASHE:  I see. 
MS ROCKMAN:  The crisis came when DOVE stopped the funding and 
there was that shortfall of the 29.5 so they had no option but in 
adjustment to come back to us to ask.  Guys we need to make up this 
shortfall because the CASP funding was withheld. 
ADV GCABASHE:  No I am satisfied I think I now understand clearly 
what did happen.  Can we then look at the next financial year 
2014/2015? 
20 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes the [intervenes]. 
ADV GCABASHE:  What provision was made? 
MS ROCKMAN:  From Infrastructure Enhancement Allocation we made 
provision for 35 million.  That was in the Budget Vote Statement.  Then 
going towards the Adjustment Appropriation there was 10 million in 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 10 of 68 
 
reprioritised funds and provincial own revenue that was made available.  
Infrastructure Enhancement Allocation we increased with that 10 million 
for farmer support and veterinary services was decreased with 4 
million.  But further in the Special Adjustment Appropriation Act we 
reduced the Infrastructure Enhancement Allocation with a further 3.803 
million. 
ADV GCABASHE:  So your short answer is provision was made and 
with the usual standard way of finding money that was applied even in 
2014/2015? 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes.  Although it was short of the - whatever 
10 
commitment they had.  What they had foreseen in the original 
agreement as structured. 
ADV GCABASHE:  No say that again?  I am sorry I did not – I did not 
quite understand that. 
MS ROCKMAN:  In – for example if you use 113 million was the 
commitment for 2013/2014. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Yes. 
MS ROCKMAN:  We could only make 35 million available in the next 
financial year. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Yes. 
20 
MS ROCKMAN:  For 2014//2015. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Yes. 
MS ROCKMAN:  So it was far short of – if it was supposed to be 113 
million it was far short of that. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Please stop there.  This is – this is precisely what I 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 11 of 68 
 
am trying to understand because I just have Section 38.2 in my mind 
and Section 38.2 of the PFMA says: 
“Do not commit a department to a liability that you 
have not provided for.” 
And I think what we are teasing out now is what does provided for mean 
in real terms.  So if you know you are only going to have 35 million 
from a particular source of funding does what the HOD signed up to on 
the 5 June and then again on the 5 July constitute providing for as set 
out in Section 38.2? 
MS ROCKMAN:  Not at the point of the first signature of the contract 
10 
that was then redone.  But when Treasury signed off ultimately when 
they asked for that first 30 million and part of the conditions was the 
contract must be reviewed and so forth I think the MEC signing off at 
that point fulfilled the requirements of the PFMA the Revenue Fund was 
then committed. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Okay.  That helps.  That does help.  I – I did not 
really want to go all the way to 2018 because I was more interested in 
what might have happened up to the time that the agreement with 
Estina was cancelled.  Unless there is something particularly important 
you want to bring to the Chairman’s attention in relation to the next few 
20 
years so 2015/2016, 2016/2017, 2017/2018 you may – you may wish to 
do so if you really think it is important for the Chairman to understand 
what – what was going on. 
MS ROCKMAN:  I think the details are set out in the – in the affidavits 
and the annexures except to say that from – at the time FDC was then 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 12 of 68 
 
appointed to take over the project there is a portion that went to the 
settlement of Estina but another portion then went to FDC for the 
ongoing project management of Vrede Dairy.  But I think those details 
are set out. 
ADV GCABASHE:  One the sections that I would like to cover this 
morning however briefly is the FDC appointment and monies that were 
paid to the FDC particularly because it is an issue that has come up at 
the hearings.  So when we get to that you may find a space somewhere 
in that. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Okay. 
10 
ADV GCABASHE:  In those questions to elaborate on this particular 
point. 
MS ROCKMAN:  That is fine. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Can I then go back to general questions?  I have – I 
have always wondered whether EXCO at any point and especially if you 
attended those meetings considered the fact that there were other 
projects that required funding – other dairy projects.  So we know about 
the Qwa-Qwa Project.  We know about the Setsoto Dairy Project 
because those were mentioned in that submission to the Premier.  The 
submission of the 28 February.  Did EXCO express a view at all on how 
20 
those would be funded if all the Mohuma Mobung money was 
essentially being channelled to the Vrede Dairy Project? 
MS ROCKMAN:  I think it was included in all of the departments’ 
presentations when we were doing the budget process.  So it would 
have been flagged.  But as much as we made provision for Mohuma 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 13 of 68 
 
Mobung then from initially it was set out that we would be 
supplementing from provincial funding and Vrede Dairy would be 
brought into the Conditional Grant Funding.  When DOVE stopped I 
think the reversed that most of the other project – other agricultural 
projects was funded through CASP and Ilima Letsema and our own 
funding focussed on accommodating Vrede Dairy.  So the other projects 
continued with the Conditional Grant Funding.   
ADV GCABASHE:  Yes I will accept that and interrogate that with Mr 
Thabethe because I am not sure about the voracity of what you are 
saying but that is fine.  That is your information on the issue.  I have 
10 
often wondered as well why the Glen Agricultural College was not 
requested quite early on to assist at the Vrede Dairy Farm Project.  
Because it would have been a cost saving and what they do at the Glen 
Agricultural College I know in part deals with what was happening at 
the Vrede Dairy Farm.  Do you know – do you have a view on this? 
MS ROCKMAN:  No I have no – I have no view. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Okay.  That is fine.  Then you know – the – a 
question the Chairman has asked a couple of witnesses is – can 
anybody explain the urgency in getting this particular project off the 
ground in the 2012/2013 financial year when monies had obviously not 
20 
been properly set out or provided for – for this particular project.  You 
deal with these matters at your paragraph 224, 2.2.4 to 2.2.13.  So we 
are at Volume A of your affidavit page 17 to 22.  And I would like you to 
just speak to those points but at the same time if you could find – have 
you found those pages? 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 14 of 68 
 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes.  Yes Chairman. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Now if you could also find Reference Bundle D – 
Reference Bundle D?  It must be – it may just be one that is up at the 
top because it is a reference bundle. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Oh okay. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Not an affidavit bundle.  So it is Reference Bundle – 
so it is Exhibit HH Reference Bundle D.  And the pages that correlate to 
what you are about to deal with are pages 1364, 136 – let me go slowly.   
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes I am there. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Are you there? 
10 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  So it is 1364 which is a letter by Mr Moses 
expressing certain concerns.  The next one is 1366 – page 1366 which 
is the letter from Advocate Ditira also expressing concerns and the last 
one is the more important one of the three.  It is a – it is an email from 
you to Mr Bertus Venter that will be found at 1367.  And I – I simply 
want without going into the detail of these want to say if you look at the 
very last line on your email you seem to believe there – you too seem 
to believe there is some urgency in getting this project off the ground.  
Can you just speak to these issues for us? 
20 
MS ROCKMAN:  I think we need to go back to the state of the province 
address of that year February 2012.  The project is announced.  Then it 
is taken up in the Provincial Budget Speech there is reference to it. 
Then the budget speech of the department there is reference to it.  Now 
that process concludes by March.  So in the new financial year you 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 15 of 68 
 
expect departments are beginning to implement.  Now we come to June.  
Nothing has happened.  So the first urgency is created in the EXCO 
decision to say that was the meeting of 13 June 2012 the one that we – 
the resolution is ER7 where it says we know now the budget provision 
that was made. We know what comes to EXCO was a request for 84 
million.  The resolution clearly says the matter must go to Treasury 
Committee as a matter of urgency.  I am then informed by Mr Venter on 
18 June that is after the EXCO meeting that he has received this 
request from Advocate Ditira he was at the time on leave.  They then 
see that but there is already an agreement concluded. There has to be 
10 
– they have to look at it and advice.  I then inform him  I have also 
been informed there is a Treasury Committee on the 19 June on – also 
on a Vrede Dairy matter.  Now when I joined that Treasury Committee 
meeting the - had my own meeting as DG so I was not there from the 
start.  So I joined them later.  So I – I am not able to say what was the 
extent of the discussions.  But at the time I joined it became very clear 
to me that Treasury was not in possession of the documents that even 
the state law advisors had.  They – they did not have enough 
information to make any kind of informed decision and we then had to 
go through that process to say let as Agriculture make available 
20 
information to all of us so that we can see what is it that you are 
talking about.  Because you are taking us by surprise but equally you 
are pressuring this thing must – must start being implemented.  Our 
communication then with Mr Venter is not the urgency to get the project 
implemented.  It is the urgency to get finality on can we get the 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 16 of 68 
 
framework documents in place so that we are able to report to the next 
EXCO?  Can we resolve the matter or not?  That was the urgency I was 
referring to him to.  You would – you would see that from the last email 
that you make reference to the one on 1367.  You could see I had to 
get clarity from the HOD Agriculture.  I also did not understand all the 
complexities to enable the state law advisors to say, as we start to try 
to figure out can we redraft and advise Treasury?  Are we able to get to 
some kind of clarity where we are?  And in terms of urgency let us try 
to finalise enable us to say yes we can proceed, no we are going to go 
back to EXCO to say we are not able to proceed.  But in terms of the 
10 
urgency of starting to implement if it has agricultural dynamics whether 
it was seasonal, whether it was agriculture will be better placed to give 
that opinion. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Yes because I think what is important as well about 
this email that you wrote is it is written on the 2 July before the second 
agreement was signed.  And after listening to your testimony yesterday 
I really wondered why you simply and when I say you, you as 
government would not have said to the Department of Agriculture and 
Rural Development scale back it is one of the options you gave 
yesterday as you describing what would happen or just postpone this.  
20 
And not sign the second agreement of the 5 t h and 7 t h July.  And hence 
my question relating to why you simply did not say as Moses had 
indicated in his email you have not provided, you cannot do this, stop 
it.  
MS ROCKMAN:  I think we are – we were all functioning the same 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 17 of 68 
 
environment at the time.  Now we have been through the budget 
process. We have been through Lekgotalas.  We know exactly what is 
in the budget.  Now days before knowing what the budget is there is a 
submission to EXCO to say, we want to upscale this project.  EXCO 
pronounces itself.  Now would it be realistic then to expect we would go 
back to say no scale down this thing you did not make budget provision 
for it.  Mr Moses shared his concerns but this does not rise to the level 
of issuing a written advice for a directive from executive authority 
having financial implications as provided for in the PFMA.  His 
concerns I think everyone was in agreement with him.  Everyone had 
10 
these concerns.  That the affordability of this we did not foresee at the 
time of compiling the budget for 2012/2013 nor the financial 
implications going forward given the broader fiscal framework within 
which we were operating.   
ADV GCABASHE:  No thank you.  Thanks for clarifying that.  I would 
like to move on I am trying to concertina matters this morning. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  To move onto the next aspect and that relates to the 
cancellation of the Estina contract.  Did you verify the amount that was 
claimed by Estina on cancellation of that contract? 
20 
MS ROCKMAN:  Provincial Treasury was not involved at all in the 
consultation process of reaching those funding – those provisions. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Again you say it is not an area of oversight that you 
would have been expected to discharge? 
MS ROCKMAN:  No.  We were just not involved.  We were not 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 18 of 68 
 
consulted to say this is where we are, this is going to be the financial 
implications arising from a cancellation.  We subsequently asked the 
state law advisors how did – when you arrived at these conclusions on 
the amounts owed what was the process?  And they – they confirmed 
that Agriculture confirmed to them that there were outstanding goods 
and services invoices and that they had verified it.  So we were not 
involved in the process of quantifying or verifying.  It was between 
Agriculture and the state law advisors. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Okay because from what we have seen of the – of 
the evidence and certainly what Mr Jankielsohn said as well this money 
10 
was not due.  This amount is not the amount that was due.  But if you 
say you had no oversight role in relation to the 280 million that was 
paid to Estina we will deal with it with Mr Thabethe because that is 
really where we are right now in the leading of his evidence.  I now 
would like to move onto the FDC. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  And the appointment of the FDC.  The FDC being 
the Free State Development Corporation.  I note that you state that just 
over R311 million was noted as possible irregular expenditure regarding 
Vrede Dairy in the financial year 2017/2018.  In the same year there 
20 
was irregular expenditure regarding implementing agents. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  That came to 815 million.  So if you go to your 
supplementary bundle page 4-1.  That is where you - you set out a 
table showing this irregular expenditure.  I - I give you these facts just 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 19 of 68 
 
for the sake of context.  We will come back to them; because those … 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is the page on the supplementary? 
ADV GCABASHE:  It is page 41 in the supplementary … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Document Chairman.  Now first the resolution of 
13 June 2012 makes reference to the FDC … 
MS ROCKMAN:  That is correct. 
ADV GCABASHE:  And the FDC participating somehow in this Vrede 
Dairy Project.  Then on cancellation there is a specific resolution 
passed by Exco.  That is in 2014 that says the FDC should take over.  
10 
You would have been part of the second decision.  I take it. 
MS ROCKMAN:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Please explain why the FDC would have been 
required to assist because as I understand matters their core 
competency is not agriculture. 
MS ROCKMAN:  That is correct Chair.  That is how the ex - the 
memorandum came to Exco with - with that recommendation.  I have no 
information about what specific capacity FDC would have had at that 
time to be able to take over that project on behalf of the Department of 
Agriculture but that is how the matter was concluded. 
20 
ADV GCABASHE:  You know I have actually looked at the Free State 
Development Corporation Act 6 of 1995 and I do not want to bother you 
about going to look at that and I have looked at the powers of Boards 
of Directors.  It is Chairman in the Legislative Bundle but there is no 
particular reason to - to pull it out right now and I have looked … 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 20 of 68 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But just to remember that some of its sessions are 
phrased very funnily. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Yes Chairman but at the end of the day it says 
nothing about running an agricultural project. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
ADV GCABASHE:  It says a lot about … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Assisting projects source funding. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  That is I think one of their core competencies. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV GCABASHE:  There may just be in the interpretation of these 
powers under Section 4A be powers to assist in managing a project but 
I would have liked to think that that management must be tied up with 
the core skill of the - of the FDC but you say you cannot assist us … 
MS ROCKMAN:  No.  I cannot. 
ADV GCABASHE:  In explaining? 
MS ROCKMAN:  In broader background many years before - I cannot 
even - I - I would be guessing if I have to put a date to it.  There used 
to be a - an entity called AgriEco in the Free State and that was an 
20 
agricultural development entity.  It focalised - it focused on specialising 
in agricultural projects. 
Through the years I think it got - it was - initially it was 
disbanded and broadly people were thinking one day it will - it will 
evolved possibly from FDC as a - one of their streams or business units 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 21 of 68 
 
but it was not - at the time FDC was appointed I am not aware that 
there was any specific agricultural expertise or development financing 
expertise in FDC that would make them suitable to take over this 
project. 
ADV GCABASHE:  This is - this really is the conclusion I have come to 
having looked at the documentation both in your doc - in your 
submissions and having looked at the Act.  I would like you to please 
just pick up ER13 which is in Volume A of what I have been calling your 
- your original submission.  It is page 4-1-4. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Is it page? 
10 
ADV GCABASHE:  4-1-4.  Have you found it? 
MS ROCKMAN:  I am at 4-1-4.  I hope it is the same 4-1-4. 
ADV GCABASHE:  I am sure it is.  Now that - if you look down at 
probably the fifth or sixth paragraph.  They speak here to the 
restructuring of the FDC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Does your 4-1-4 start with the word “Merger 
Projects”? 
ADV GCABASHE:  That is the correct page Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV GCABASHE:  So at paragraph - if I start with major and call that 
20 
paragraph the first … 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Paragraph.  It is one, two, three, four, five, six and I 
really would like you to speak to again the reason that Exco would have 
thought it prudent for the FDC which obviously had had its own 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 22 of 68 
 
difficulties and quite recent difficulties to become involved in the Vrede 
Dairy Project. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Thank you Chair.  As - as you indicated earlier I am 
not aware of the extent of consultations that there may have between - 
been between Agriculture and FDC at the onset of the project.  
Mr Ramaema at the time was the CEO of - of FDC.  By then he had left 
as HOD (indistinct).  He found himself in FDC. 
So I am not sure what the extent of the scope of discussions 
was.  Whether there were any discussions around FDC’s possible 
involvement but also the - the conclusion of Agriculture to make the 
10 
recommendation that FDC would be appropriate now to take over the 
project.  I do not know if there was specific consultations.  I am - I am 
not really able to give you more details than that. 
ADV GCABASHE:  That is fine.  What I thought I should also just - at 
least even if it is just for purposes of putting it on the record - is point 
to you ER1-0-7 at page 1-0-3.  I beg your pardon.  At page 1-3-0-5 to 
1-3-0-6.  So that would be Volume C - Volume C.  At page 1-3-0-5 to 
1-3-0-6. 
MS ROCKMAN:  1-3-0-5? 
ADV GCABASHE:  Yes.  The question is - I am looking at the very last 
20 
paragraph on page 1-3-0-5 and I wonder if you have information on 
whether the FDC was appointed as an implementing agent or as a 
managing agent or as both and I really would like you to have regard to 
the last paragraph of 1-3-0-5 as you respond going across to 1-3-0-6. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Chair I am not able to assist you … 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 23 of 68 
 
ADV GCABASHE:  Assist? 
MS ROCKMAN:  With - deal with clarity on that.  I am … 
ADV GCABASHE:  That is fine. 
MS ROCKMAN:  I just do not have enough information on … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS ROCKMAN:  How this arrangement was structured between … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Agriculture and FDC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Certainly I know FDC then subsequently appointed an 
10 
implementing or a Project Manager. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Yes. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Ja.  Let me not confuse it.  A Project Manager … 
ADV GCABASHE:  Hm. 
MS ROCKMAN:  To manage the dairy farm on its behalf.  That is as far 
as I can go. 
ADV GCABASHE:  You can go but can I ask you this generic question?  
Would the FDC be entitled to a management fee?  You know I am 
always trying to trace the monies that have been paid to institutions.  
That is part of what we have to do as the Commission and - and I want 
20 
to find justification for the payment of monies to a particular institution. 
MS ROCKMAN:  I think if they do manage a project on behalf of any 
other department.  Obviously they would have operational expenditure 
whether it is administration costs etcetera.  So I - I would think that yes 
they - they may be entitled to - to raise a management fee.  If it is 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 24 of 68 
 
intergovernmental like in this case it should obviously be a convenient 
fee to at least cover expenses they would not make money from it but 
at least to cover whatever operational expenditure - expenses they - 
they may incur. 
ADV GCABASHE:  So you really suggesting that I should take this 
particular matter up with Mr Thabethe? 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  He is the better person to answer? 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes.  I think the HOD and maybe the - the CEO of FDC 
will be able to … 
10 
ADV GCABASHE:  Respond? 
MS ROCKMAN:  To respond in more detail on the arrangement between 
them. 
ADV GCABASHE:  That is fair enough, but can I then take you back to 
that very first proposition I put to you about the irregular expenditure of 
311 million which you - you mention in your paragraph …? 
MS ROCKMAN:  Can you just repeat the reference to that paragraph? 
ADV GCABASHE:  It was your supplementary affidavit. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Oh, yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  On page 41 you have a table and I thought that was 
20 
rather concerning looking at those amounts because it is - essentially 
reflects for the financial year 2017/2018 irregular expenditure of over a 
billion Rand. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes Chairperson.  This extract comes from the annual 
financial statements for that particular financial year.  Now the possible 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 25 of 68 
 
irregular expenditure regarding implementing agents the 815.966 
million.  This has nothing to do with either Vrede Dairy or with FDC.  
These are implementing agents used by the Department of Agriculture 
to implement agricultural projects on behalf of beneficiaries. 
Mostly utilising the CONDITIONAL GRANT FUNDING of CASP 
and Ilima/Letsema.  So there is - there is no direct link there.  These 
implementing agents they were introduced in the 2011/2012 financial 
year after the department had realised and it was in the audit reports of 
the prior financial years that there were problems as the department 
was procuring on behalf of beneficiaries. 
10 
There were three financial years that the Auditor-General 
mentions that was under investigation.  The - the actual services or 
goods rendered, the beneficiaries did they exist?  Did they not exist?  
So the department brought in implementing agents as a mechanism or 
to improve efficiency.  They were appointed through a tender process 
and I know of - of three that were appointed for - there were three main 
implementing agents. 
There seemed to also have been then one or two other 
implementing agents in the years between 2011/2012 to 2017/2018 - 
2018/2019 and after the first tender period the contract period a second 
20 
tender was advertised and awarded but they have nothing - they - they 
deal with all other agricultural projects. 
Now these implementing agents the funding allocated for 
CASP and Ilima/Letsema Projects were already - 2011/2012 they were 
budgeted as transfer payments.  So when it came to Estina it was 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 26 of 68 
 
exactly the same arrangement.  That precedent has - had already been 
created that say implementing agent A is responsible for this 10 
projects. 
If it is 10 million we transfer the 10 million to them.  The 
agreements were structured in a way that the implementing agent was 
acting on behalf of the beneficiary.  So equally the moment the - the 
funds were transferred it became unrequited funds.  Ceased to be 
public money.  So no one followed in audit also - that audit trail. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Can I ask you to pause there because that is 
precisely where the problem sits for - for us as a Commission because 
10 
Provincial Treasury has an oversight role.  Provincial Treasury is 
responsible for ensuring that funds that have been allocated are used 
in a particular manner. 
I am really just giving - putting it as a general statement.  
You then come to a project such as the Vrede Dairy Project which is not 
on the same level.  You cannot draw parallels between that project and 
other projects where implementing agents were appointed.  Your 
general statement on implementing agents I really have no difficult with 
because there the beneficiary does play a part in appointing the 
implementing agent.  This is really your evidence.  Am I correct? 
20 
MS ROCKMAN:  (No audible reply). 
ADV GCABASHE:  The beneficiary or the farmer as Mr Thabethe calls 
them would be assisting in appointing the implementing agent. 
MS ROCKMAN:  To my knowledge that no - no role in the appointment 
of the implementing agent. 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 27 of 68 
 
ADV GCABASHE:  Well I know that Mr Thabethe’s view was certainly 
that the farmer or the beneficiary assists in the appointment but it was 
different with - with Estina.  With Estina there was no beneficiary.  So 
the implementing agent was appointed by the department.  So if the 
department has some supervisory role in making sure that monies 
transferred to the implementing agent I used for the purposes that 
those monies were transferred for. 
I would have thought that the watchdog Provincial Treasury 
would be checking to make sure that indeed this is what has happened.  
That is where you fit in for my purposes into this equation. 
10 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes.  In the sense did the department make provision 
for the budget?  Is the transfers that they have made within the 
projected - projected schedules that they would have provided to us 
and was the money transferred to the entity appointed but further than 
that what the implementing agent did with the money? 
How they handled the money, how they procured and so forth 
that is not Treasury’s role. 
ADV GCABASHE:  But do you not interrogate the annual financial 
plans, the annual performance plans, the annual financial statements 
that a particular department prepares? 
20 
MS ROCKMAN:  No.  Annual performance plans are drafted by the 
department. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Yes. 
MS ROCKMAN:  You go through normally a strategic planning session 
or some kind of strategy session.  You have your quarterly reviews.  It 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 28 of 68 
 
builds up.  Then you formulate your annual performance plan.  It gets 
tabled in the Legislature.  It never gets tabled in the Executive Council 
for example.  It - it gets tabled in the Legislature before the budget 
vote speech of a department. 
From there it gets referred to the relevant Portfolio 
Committee of the Legislature that considers it.  It reports and makes 
recommendations back to the Legislature.  Treasury does not play a 
role in that process.  The role we will play is to ensure that what is 
taken up in the annexures to the APP where you bring in and set out 
the details of your infrastructure projects that those projects then talk 
10 
to your table. 
Be five projects that is in the adjust - in the Appropriation Act 
or the Adjustment Appropriation Act. 
ADV GCABASHE:  You see the difficulty I have with your explanation is 
you also wear the hat of being a member of the Legislature.  So not 
only are you Head of Treasury - Provincial Treasury.  You also head - 
you also a member of the Legislature and when people come and place 
their budgets - I will call them that just in a general term - asking for 
monies or particular items that they have set out. 
You a member of the Legislature.  The impression I am left 
20 
with which you - you must please correct if it is wrong - is that the 
Legislature simply rubber stamps.  Does not make inquiry as to why 
monies that were set out in the previous year have got - how those 
were used and why people are coming back to ask for certain amounts. 
Why it is that implementing agents are performing the way 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 29 of 68 
 
they are performing?  Why it is that the Auditor-General is forever 
complaining about the manner in which monies are accounted for.  
What - what is the role of the Legislature in those circumstances? 
MS ROCKMAN:  Members of the Executive Council do not participate in 
Portfolio Committees.  They can attend and when they are invited to 
come and report.  For example Treasury would go and report to the 
Finance Committee or to Public Accounts Committee on expenditure 
trends, revenue, audit outcomes and so forth but in terms of separation 
of powers the members of the Legislature serving in a specific Portfolio 
Committee - from all parties obviously. 
10 
They do that detailed interrogation of the annual performance 
plan.  There would be reports that went back to the Legislature in - in a 
sitting of the Legislature that would have gotten adopted.  Those 
recommendations would have been communicated to the - to the 
Premier.  Then it gets disbursed to relevant departments. 
Each one deals with his or her - her own section.  We must 
again respond.  When it comes to the audit reports that belongs to the 
Public Accounts Committee.  So as you table your annual report with 
the audited financial statements it gets referred for consideration to the 
Public Accounts Committee. 
20 
All departments every year gets called in.  Auditor-General 
are part of those sessions.  Treasury is part of those sessions and they 
interrogate those reports.  Equally they formulate responses or the 
recommendations to the Legislature.  If the Legislature approves for 
example unauthorised expenditure. 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 30 of 68 
 
They may recommend it with funding or without funding.  If 
unauthorised expenditure is recommended with funding it means we 
have to find the money in the budget to fund.  It is authorised without 
funding the department must accommodate that funding from within its 
own budget. 
We then formalise that into a finance bill in any particular 
financial year but as we sit there I am not able to say the Portfolio 
Committee responsible for Agriculture said X, Y, Z about these APPs, 
about the execution of the project, about whether they conducted site 
visits and so forth. 
10 
There - there are people relevant in the Legislature the 
Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee and the Chairperson of the 
Public Accounts Committee.  They may be able to shed light on the 
Legislature’s handling or processing of matters related to agriculture 
including Vrede Dairy and implementing agents during the period. 
ADV GCABASHE:  So you are saying in your term as MEC at no stage 
did any of the relevant Portfolio Committees ask you to come in and 
address them on the issues they were picking up? 
MS ROCKMAN:  No.  I think I - I highlight in - it is either the main 
affidavit or the supplementary affidavit that I think is it towards 2018 I 
20 
was in - it was the first time we were invited to a committee meeting to 
come and explain and the date of that meeting coincided with a 
by-election in my constituency and we sent a report and we said 
officials will be able if they continue to go and present but I had 
responsibilities in the constituency for the by-election. 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 31 of 68 
 
I was later informed that that meeting was postponed.  So I 
do not - that was the only meeting - I am not talking about the normal 
Public Accounts Committee Meetings and Finance Committee Meetings 
where we - we would be reporting on Provincial Income and 
Expenditure - those things we would have reported but on Vrede Dairy 
specifically.  That is the only Portfolio Committee specifically that I was 
invited to. 
ADV GCABASHE:  And on that occasion you could not attend? 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes; and it was towards I think 20 - somewhere in 
2018. 
10 
ADV GCABASHE:  Maybe this is a - a good time because we are 
talking about the Auditor-General and the Public Accounts Committee.  
Maybe this is a good time just to - to help the Commission and the 
Chairman understand how transfer funds were intended to be reported 
and - and in particular in relation to implementing agents which is why I 
am just putting the two issues together. 
We have implementing agents who are given a lump sum.  
How do they account for that?  I know there has been a long debate.  
Just take us through that debate. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Thanks Chair.  That is the two year debate that we - 
20 
that we had on the accounting treatment of transfer payments.  As it 
appears now in all the - all the annual reports.  It is in the report of the 
Accounting Officer.  It gets disclosed as transfer payment to entities 
other than public entities. 
So anyone else that that you transferred money to whether it 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 32 of 68 
 
is universities, private business, sports clubs anyone else.  You declare 
it as such.  So in this case I - I have extracted the relevant sections 
from all those annual reports to say it was disclosed.  It is a transfer to 
Vrede Dairy. 
I think the first year it was to Estina and subsequently it was 
Vrede Dairy and the amount that was disclosed and the purpose and - 
the purpose would be project implementation and the amount would be 
reflected and it ends there.  There were no further details than that and 
that was what the AG was raising to say it is fine. 
You tell us say for example you have transferred 10 million.  
10 
He wanted to know what happened to the 10 million and because it was 
classified as a transfer payment there was no requirement to further set 
out the details of the10 million.  It was not broken down further into 
goods and services … 
ADV GCABASHE:  Hm, hm. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Or any other category of - of your standard chart of 
accounts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please just refresh my memory on how a transfer 
payment comes about.  Now let us go back to the basis.  What - what is 
a transfer payment?  How does it come about? 
20 
MS ROCKMAN:  We - we - essentially it is when you do not intend to 
procure goods and services yourself - on - for - by yourself as a 
department.  You do not go through your own tender process or a quote 
- process of quotations.  You take the 10 million and you have an 
agreement.  You transfer the money as is there.  So … 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 33 of 68 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  An agreement with whom?  With the person to whom 
you want to … 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Transfer the money? 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes.  Whether it is a private business you will say I am 
giving you 10 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS ROCKMAN:  There - these should be an SLA or a - some kind of 
con - contractual arrangement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MS ROCKMAN:  The transfer payments usually gets reflected as if it 
relates to infrastructure for example.  It would be infrastructure.  
Capital expenditure would be new infrastructure.  Capital expenditure 
current would be main - maintenance.  So there is a - I have set out in 
details … 
CHAIRPERSON:  In - in - ja, I know you … 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Dealt with - with the issue quite at length. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I did read - read that but I just - that was about 
20 
two days ago if not three, but what - what instrument makes provision 
for transfer payments in Government departments or in Treasury? 
MS ROCKMAN:  I think broadly provision is made in the PFMA, the 
Treasury Regulations, your standard chart of accounts.  It is provided 
for but obviously with certain conditions that has to be met when you 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 34 of 68 
 
make such transfer payments.  It is for example - yesterday I made 
reference to the transfer payments we make to non-profit organisations 
through social development. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That would be say for example you are Department of 
Social Development. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You need the post office or you need cash pay master 
services or you need some entity to play a role that will facilitate the 
execution of functions that you have to do as a department.  Is that a 
good example? 
10 
MS ROCKMAN:   Yes Chair I will rather use an example in our 
provincial context. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS ROCKMAN:   We have early childhood development centres that 
renders services, basically on behalf of government. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes what did you say, what centre? 
MS ROCKMAN:   Early childhood development centres [indistinct] for 
example or orphanages or children in distress.  So those are all 
transfer payments we – there’s a formula that’s set out in whatever 
relevant to say X amount per day per child you get to an amount so that 
20 
amount gets simply transferred to that non-profit organisation.  
Obviously they must be registered, they must comply with certain 
regulations and conditions but no one follows that money. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But don’t they have to account to you annually as to 
how they used the money you gave them before you give them another 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 35 of 68 
 
amount next year? 
MS ROCKMAN:   There would be a reporting mechanism to say they 
must submit reports to Social Development not to Treasury and in terms 
of NPO Act they would probably submit financial statements to the 
National Department of Social Development, so it’s regulated but it 
becomes impossible for us or the Auditor General to go – imagine how 
many of these small entities he would have to audit because now we’re 
talking hundreds of millions of rands.  So transfer payments as such is 
not a problem, it’s the utilisation thereof. It became a problem that I 
don’t think anyone foresaw that it is going to reach the stage where 
10 
questions would be asked on the utilisation and the procurement of 
implementing agents on behalf of beneficiaries and I think Advocate 
mentioned yesterday, it took us a significant period of time, two years 
basically to get to finality around classification and ultimately it 
affected the whole country it was not a Free State issue.  It affected 
everyone equally on how we’ve been dealing with classification of 
transfer payments. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well the example you make of early childhood 
centres would those entities be regarded as implementing agents or 
not, in other words do you associate transfer payments necessarily with 
20 
implementing agents or not necessarily? 
MS ROCKMAN:   Not necessarily only an implementing agent in the 
sense that we are dealing with it in agriculture but when they render a 
service on behalf of government. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is an implementing agent, it’s acting on behalf 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 36 of 68 
 
of Government? 
MS ROCKMAN:   Yes I think that would be broadly my understanding 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but in the example that you have given of early 
childhood centre you would not view the centre in that way would you? 
MS ROCKMAN:   They essentially render a service on behalf of 
government they are not necessarily implementing something on behalf 
of government. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes so – because I’m trying to see whether, when 
you make that transfer to an entity such as an early childhood centre 
10 
whether you are making a donation because they perform the kind of 
functions that you recognise are important in society and therefore, 
because you have made a donation maybe there might not be a need 
for certain things or are they implementing agents or is it none of the 
above? 
MS ROCKMAN:   The accounting treatment, Chair of donations and 
gifts is separate again.  Any donation/gift above R100 000 you need 
authorisation of the legislature it’s disclosed separately so we’re not 
giving them …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It’s not a donation? 
20 
MS ROCKMAN:   It’s not a donation no but ultimately at the conclusion 
of this process the transfer payments to – do we call them NPO’s  or in 
that sector was exempted from the classification. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just repeat what you have just said. 
MS ROCKMAN:   At the end of that process of this classification issue 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 37 of 68 
 
between transfer payments and goods and services for implementing 
agents, although we said we were of the opinion that the principle 
applied they were exempted from the classification that meant that they 
had to – all the departments had to re-classify from transfer payments 
to goods and services.  The social development sector was exempted 
from that, so there was a recognition it’s not exactly the same as an 
implementing agent. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Early childhood centres? 
MS ROCKMAN:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so they were exempted from that. 
10 
MS ROCKMAN:   They were, at the end of the process exempted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or did that make a particular instrument to 
be…[intervenes]. 
MS ROCKMAN:   I think that was in the final guidance issued by 
National Treasury it would have been included that the exemption 
applies to this, this and this categories. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes, so the concept of transfer payments, you say is 
provided for in the PFMA in other instruments? 
MS ROCKMAN:   Yes Treasury regulations, yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As such within government it’s accepted what did 
20 
cause some problem or debates was how it was utilised in certain 
circumstances which then gave rise to the two year debate or 
discussion that you talked about, is that right? 
MS ROCKMAN:   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, now with regard to implementing agents in – 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 38 of 68 
 
where you are dealing with an implementing agent you have to use 
transfer payments or is there another way of transferring money to 
them other than through the transfer payment mechanism? 
MS ROCKMAN:   In this context that we are dealing with, of agriculture 
that is how it was structured, the funding was transferred to them, they 
procured on behalf of beneficiaries and the argument then was that 
they did not need to follow…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Procurement procedures. 
MS ROCKMAN:   Procurement procedures or procurement policies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes but that was wrong was it not? 
10 
MS ROCKMAN:   I think the Auditor General consistently raised the 
issue for a number of years until the clarification was finalised to say, 
no they should use procurement processes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You must tell me what your own observations of – 
you were the MEC for finance or I’m not keeping up with when you were 
DG when you were MEC for finance but the impression I get from what I 
have been told about the implementing agents in the Vrede Dairy 
context gives me the impression that this was just a way of 
circumventing procurement procedures.  That’s the impression I have, 
it’s not the final impression, I’ll hear more evidence, maybe I’ll change 
20 
the way I’m thinking about it now but what can you say to me about 
that, if you are able to say anything? 
MS ROCKMAN:   I think because we have known this arrangement of 
implementing agents from before Estina at the time it was introduced it 
wasn’t new but we were very aware of the concerns raised by the 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 39 of 68 
 
Auditor General in terms of follow the money that you could not follow 
the money, when the transfer was made it was made.  There was no 
further trace and I think we did share his concerns about value for 
money with all implementing agents, not only the [indistinct] additional 
grants [indistinct] but also Estina.  It is a consistent pattern that we 
should be ensuring that these value for money that get’s transferred. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because somehow, apart from the question of 
whether a department like the Department of Agriculture shouldn’t – 
doesn’t have or didn’t have people with the relevant skills and 
qualifications to do what was necessary, leaving that aside and 
10 
assuming that they didn’t have.  If there’s an obligation on the 
Department of Agriculture to ensure that you know tax payers money 
allocated to it is used properly and that  - and they just appoint an 
implementing agent in the manner in which it seems to have been done 
here, it seems that, in effect you are taking tax payers money just 
giving it to somebody without being able to ensure that, that somebody 
will use that money properly and for what it is supposed to be used for, 
that’s the impression I have, I don’t know if you are able to comment on 
that? 
MS ROCKMAN:   Yes Chair, I think we had no other insight on how 
20 
Estina, specifically was identified as an implementing agent because 
there wasn’t a public process.  What was illustrated or provided to us 
to say it is a similar type of arrangement, they were on a much bigger 
scale, agriculture said to us we have partnership agreements, for 
example with VKB whatever it is that VKB does but that is how it was 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 40 of 68 
 
contextualised to say it is no different from other existing partnership 
agreements, though it might be at a bigger level but the concern was 
consistent that the way in which we deal with money for value issues 
relating to transfer payments has been a concern for the better part of 
at least seven/eight financial years. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you get to know, either at some stage during 
those years or after the Commission had started hearing evidence 
relating to Estina that Estina actually, as a company had nothing to do 
with farming and agriculture at the time it was appointed and that 
actually at the time it was appointed its finances on what we have been 
10 
told, I think it had 16 comma something rand in its account in 
circumstances where the agreement that was concluded with the 
Department of Agriculture required it to contribute millions into the 
project.  Did you get to know about that at some stage during those 
years or only when the Commission was hearing evidence? 
MS ROCKMAN:   No, no such information was made available to either 
myself as DG at the time, this project started or to Treasury in that 
Treasury Committee meeting and the exchange of documents there was 
nothing that suggested that a due diligence exercise would have 
provided us with this information.  I think that was relatively new to us 
20 
when such information was provided to the Commission, that was not 
known to us at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course what it does raise is the issue of oversight 
on the part of the Provincial Treasury we talked about that yesterday, 
we talked about the limitations and so on but it must be concerning or it 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 41 of 68 
 
must have concerned you quite a lot when you did hear that because 
you must have thought, well whatever limitations we must have, we may 
have had, there must be a way of picking up something like that in one 
way or another.  That’s my thinking now, what do you say to that? 
MS ROCKMAN:   Yes Chairperson I would agree that it raises concerns 
but at that time, this was before the introduction of the central supply 
data base system with National Treasury, so I think registering an entity 
on the data base was almost much easier than it is to register on CSD 
in terms of what was required.   So I think the introduction of CSD by 
National Treasury has brought in a lot of additional internal controls.  It 
10 
would have probably been wise to say if we undertake this kind of 
project, like in many other type of projects a tender would be 
advertised to say a service provider or a bidder must illustrate financial 
capacity with a bank account statement, he must have R10 in the bank.  
So I think the mechanisms existed it is in how we utilised them that 
exposed us to an unnecessary risk probably, in this case.  I think there 
were various other things that the department could have done to 
mitigate against possible risks, to embark on this project but as the 
Audit Committee itself of agriculture reflects in a number of audit 
reports, the risk component of the department was very new and very 
20 
under capacitated, I think both in terms of numbers and in terms of 
ability to execute.  There are obvious challenges with the public private 
partnership arrangements in government purely because they take – it’s 
a general perception that they take forever to get off the ground and to 
get projects moving.  So there’s always a reluctance against the PPP 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 42 of 68 
 
format when you want to start implementing a project but I would agree 
that there should have probably have been other ways to mitigate 
against the financial risks that the project brought with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would it be correct to say, had this been put to 
tender this would have – Estina, if it’s financial situation was the way it 
has been described to this Commission and if it had nothing to do with 
farming or agriculture it’s unlikely that it would have been appointed? 
MS ROCKMAN:   On its own without having the background, track 
record or capacity it would have been challenging to be appointed on 
its own though it could have gone into a special purpose kind of vehicle 
10 
through a joint venture or something like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But do you say the tender – if this had been 
subjected to a tender process these issues would have come out in 
terms of where – in which sector does it operate, what experience does 
it have, what is its financial muscle particularly if the agreement was 
going to require that whichever service provider is appointed would 
have to make a contribution of millions into the project? 
MS ROCKMAN:   Yes your bid specifications would have gone into far 
more details to say the type of bidder that we are looking for or the 
type of partner that we are looking for must have this certain level of 
20 
expertise, they must have proven financial muscle to a certain 
quantum, your bid specification process would have narrowed down and 
mitigated in itself against the risk that you would expose the 
department to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you would agree, would you not that even if we 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 43 of 68 
 
were dealing with circumstances which justified not putting this through 
a tender process any head of department ought to have done the 
necessary homework to make sure that they didn’t appoint a company 
that had R16 in its bank account and required to pay millions of rands 
into the project. 
MS ROCKMAN:   Chairperson I would say that is reasonable. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay thank you. 
ADV GCABASHE:   Chairperson just to add one little piece to what 
you’ve been dealing with now, the relevant section in the PFMA is 
section 381J that speaks to the things that you’re raising. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:   Before funds can be transferred certain things must 
be in place in the entity of the transfers…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To which transfer is being made yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:   Yes the other provision would be Treasury 
Regulation 8.4.1, so it’s section 381J read with Treasury Regulation 
8.4.1 which speaks to the checks and balances that you have been 
summarising. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV GCABASHE:   And the question then still remains as what is the 
20 
Provincial Treasury’s role in ensuring that these particular provisions 
are complied with. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:   Chairman I see that we have gone beyond quarter 
past, I don’t know if you want to push until twelve because if we do, we 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 44 of 68 
 
will be done or if you would rather take a short break now? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I think let’s take the short break so we might 
end up going to quarter past or there about. 
ADV GCABASHE:   I’ve taken note of your request yesterday Chairman 
and edited…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja as long as you don’t feel that there are issues 
that you are not able to do justice to, so important issues. 
ADV GCABASHE:   Not at all Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright we will take the tea adjournment now 
it’s twenty four minutes past we will come back at twenty to twelve, we 
10 
adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Rockman yesterday I was trying to have an idea 
about how much the Provincial Government was paying per day for the 
New Age must have seemed to have found that at the relevant time 
which would have been around or when it started around June 2010 it 
was a copy of the New Age was R3.50 which means – of course we – I 
do not know whether anybody has established exactly how many copies 
20 
were = the Provincial Government agreed to buy per day but if it was 
4000 that would be 4000 x R3.50 and leaving out 50 cents that means 
per day it would 3 x 4000 that is I think R120 000.00 a day.  Am I right?  
I think junior counsel is much more clued up on these things 
R120 000.00 a day in five days that would R600 000.00 Hm? 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 45 of 68 
 
ADV GCABASHE:  I am advised it would be R12 000.00 Chairman.  
Like you I did not do the maths on this one.  The brains had it.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I am not going to continue.  Just shows it was a 
good decision to take law not – not anything else.  So about 
R12 000.00.  So in five days that would what about R60 000.00 
ADV GCABASHE:  60. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or thereabout and so over a month you could be 
looking at about just under R200 000.00 or R180 000.00 or thereabout.  
That is what you could be looking at. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Per month. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  A month hm.  Okay.  You might be much better off 
with – with figures I am not sure. 
MS ROCKMAN:  The latter part Chairperson sounded more – more 
accurate but I think we did indicate yesterday we will extract that 
information. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You will extract – yes, yes. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Information and provide it to the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes, yes.  And it may be – it may be that it does 
already exist within the records of the commission because of the 
evidence about GCIS and Mr Manye and it may be that it exists but it 
20 
would be convenient if it could be extracted again.  Ja so – but it is not 
as much as the first figure that I mentioned.  Yes thank you. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Thank you Chairman.  Ms Rockman just one or two 
questions still related to transfer payments that I just want to either 
clarify or confirm with you.   
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 46 of 68 
 
1. Not all transfer payments contain conditions, is that correct?  
Some do other do not. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Chair I think in general there would be conditions 
whether it is a national conditional grant or whether it is like 
Infrastructure Enhancement Allocation that would also still come with 
conditions. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Okay so you say the general rule is that there would 
be conditions? 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Attached with it. 
10 
MS ROCKMAN:  Whether it is a national or a provincial type of grant 
and then between the relevant department and the service provider the 
conditions around particular transfer payment for particular purposes 
would be set out in a Service Level Agreement at the very least. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Hm okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One second.  I did not realise this was on. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Yes I was wondering if I should say so or not.  I 
learnt at my peril that… 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it is nothing concerning security.  Yes thank you. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Thank you.  Thank you Chairman. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I just have an appointment to keep which I see we – I 
am not – I will not be able to keep until – I thought we would finish by 
twelve but let us continue.   
ADV GCABASHE:  Then the next issue really is just to point out more 
for record purposes that the Free State Province Appropriation Act of 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 47 of 68 
 
2012/2013 that financial year defines transfers and subsidies as and I 
quote: 
“Any payments made by Provincial Department to 
another organ of state or any other person in respect 
of which the relevant department does not receive 
anything of similar value directly in return and 
includes the payment of conditional grants.” 
I just thought it is apposite to put that in for purposes of the record 
Chairman.  You are happy enough with that? 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes.  Thanks Chair. 
10 
ADV GCABASHE:  The question really would then be – I know this was 
the Appropriation Act of 2012/2013 but the definition would not change 
over the years? 
MS ROCKMAN:  That is correct Chair.  It would – there might be minor 
amendments but the essence of it would remain. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Thank you.  Next question.  Is it correct that where 
transfer of funds are not used for the intended purpose or whether is a 
failure to account for their use they can be reclaimed? 
MS ROCKMAN:  I think that would be that general rule. 
ADV GCABASHE:  It is the general rule? 
20 
MS ROCKMAN:  The general understanding ja. 
ADV GCABASHE:  But reclaimed by whom? 
MS ROCKMAN:  By the transferring department. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Again Provincial Treasury in this instance would not 
have a role – a direct role? 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 48 of 68 
 
MS ROCKMAN:  No. 
ADV GCABASHE:  In that reclaiming process. 
MS ROCKMAN:  No. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Then the last question really is really more of an 
observation.  And that is that the 2018 decision or guidelines from 
National Treasury have resolved how transfer payments should be 
classified where good and services are being procured that would 
generally fall within the – the Supply Chain Management processes and 
if not there is still a category for straightforward transfer payments? 
MS ROCKMAN:  That would be correct Chair.  And by implication it now 
10 
means that with the reclassification exercise the depart – all 
departments affected have to go back in time and start reclassifying 
and start clearing out whatever the issues were.  So if you had 
classified a transfer payment of 10 million you will have to reclassify 
now that 10 million and break it up into goods and services and you 
must provide your relevant documents – supporting documentation to 
justify the allocation of that 10 million accordingly. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Yes but it – the – the guide or the instruction was 
backdated to 2016 if I am not wrong.  So it is as of 2016? 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
20 
ADV GCABASHE:  They would have to go through that exercise. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Okay.  Can I then just bring you back to what 
started this discussion which was the schedule you had put on your 
supplementary affidavit page 41.  We were talking about irregular 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 49 of 68 
 
expenditure and the first one you then dealt with was possible irregular 
expenditure regarding implementing agents.  That was the 815 million 
just or almost 816 million and you explained that it did not necessarily 
mean it is only in relation to Vrede but it could be from anywhere else. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Chairperson yes I explained this was excluding Vrede. 
ADV GCABASHE:  It excluded Vrede? 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Good.  The one I am now interested in is the 
possible irregular expenditure regarding Vrede Dairy of 311 million.  
Now 311 million represents just that one financial year 2017 to 2018 or 
10 
does it go beyond that? 
MS ROCKMAN:  That is a level of detail I do not have access to at this 
stage.  This is a calculation done by the department.  It is audited by 
the AG so I would not here be able to say how that 311 million is 
broken down.  Whether it is only Estina, whether it includes even the 
transfer payments to FDC as well.  So that is a different level of details 
that I did not have at my disposal here. 
ADV GCABASHE:  I understand that and I would have assumed that it 
includes monies that were paid to FDC because they were appointed as 
of 2014. 
20 
MS ROCKMAN:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV GCABASHE:  But my question was that that figures represents 
irregular – possible irregular expenditure regarding Vrede Dairy in the 
financial year 2017/2018. 
MS ROCKMAN:  That is all irregular expenditure under investigation.  It 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 50 of 68 
 
might not be only for that particular financial year. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Ah so – are you sure about that because I mean 
when you look at this schedule top right hand corner it clearly says 
2017/2018?  Why would it include others years if the note here says 
2017/2018?  And if you look at your – your affidavit in fact you find that 
there are other irregularities that you have noted in the same affidavit.  
I just did not want to go into all that detail.  So this is page 41. 
MS ROCKMAN:  I am just trying to find the supporting document itself.  
It is disclosed 17/18 in this instance means it is disclosed as at the 
financial year ending 31 March 2018.   
10 
ADV GCABASHE:  Yes.  But it covers – all I want to establish is that it 
covers that 12 – preceding 12 month period or does it go beyond that?  
Is it a cumulative amount? 
MS ROCKMAN:  It might be a cumulative. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Over the years. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Amount ja. 
ADV GCABASHE:  It might be you say? 
MS ROCKMAN:  Ja. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Are you able to establish that for us and just send 
us the relevant documentation that supports what you are saying?  
20 
Because I will tell you why this is of interest certainly to us as evidence 
leaders is because if in one financial year there was irregular 
expenditure regarding Vrede Dairy only of R311 million that is a large 
sum of money. 
MS ROCKMAN:  That is why I am saying Chair that is – it is 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 51 of 68 
 
accumulative.  I know the irregular expenditure regarding implementing 
agents the disclosure of 815 is accumulative from the 2011/2012 
financial year. 
ADV GCABASHE:  I – I think that the commission would really 
appreciate literally a one pager if you would with supporting 
documentation so that we are left with the correct impression as to 
whether all this was spent in one year paying for services rendered at 
Vrede Dairy or if it was a cumulative amount going back to say 
2011/2012? 
MS ROCKMAN:  We will certainly be able to extract that Chair. 
10 
ADV GCABASHE:  The other – other irregularities really I do not think I 
want to touch on Chairman they are in the affidavit and they really 
concern largely failure to comply with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Supply Chain Management Procedures and the like. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja well if they are you know you would have heard me 
say to Ms Rockman yesterday part of my concern was that in her 
affidavit she did not seem to deal with the question of non-compliances 
and who did not comply with what.  So if there are – if they relate to 
non-compliances maybe you can just deal briefly with them. 
20 
ADV GCABASHE:  Certainly Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV GCABASHE:  In fact if I could just take you back to page 41 I just 
found it quite curious that the second item on that incident list the 
2017/2018 one second item reads: 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 52 of 68 
 
“Deviations approved by the Accounting Officer not accepted.” 
The impression I was left with and it probably is my fault not Mr 
Thabethe’s is that once an Accounting Officer has decided to deviate 
nobody can question it.  But it is obvious that when one reads this line 
item R2 million worth of money spent on a deviation that was approved 
by the Accounting Officer but not accepted is something that would be 
noted. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes that is correct Chair.  It – the decision is 
ultimately not absolute.  It is still subject to review.  It must be 
reasonable, the nature of the decision must reasonable, justifiable.  We 
10 
had a very long part of the engagements with the AG over probably a 
two period was the implications of auditing the discretion of an 
Accounting Officer. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Yes 
MS ROCKMAN:  But that discretion is not absolute.  I think we have – 
we reached common ground on that and I was informed by the state law 
advisors that a judgment of the constitutional court in Tasima also 
brought final clarity around what is an administrative act and how it 
remains in effect until it is set aside.  So I think all provincial, national 
government departments or the broader public sector has to internalise 
20 
the implications of that act and how it gets permeated through standard 
operating procedures that if something is found irregular how do we 
deal with it.  You cannot – it cannot be found irregular and it is just left 
that way.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I must confess that when I read your affidavit on 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 53 of 68 
 
this issue I was surprised that you and whoever from the National 
Treasury and Provincial Treasury, the National Treasury and I think the 
Account and General or I do not know whether the Auditor General as 
well were all concerned about whether this was administrative action or 
not and – I did not understand that because you people are not a court.  
You know it is a court that has to decide whether an administrative 
action is reasonable or justifiable or not.  You people are not courts.  
So your own role as I understand it would be different and I gain the 
impression and you must just feel free to make your observations are it 
seemed to me I gained the impression that somebody was just trying to 
10 
unjustifiably prevent people from scrutinising action that they are 
entitled to scrutinise. 
MS ROCKMAN:  I think Chairperson it was the basis for disclosing the 
expenditure as possible irregular or not.  I think that was the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but… 
MS ROCKMAN:  Where the matter started from. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but the question … 
MS ROCKMAN:  And certainly if – if the expenditure was declared 
irregular you would expect that someone… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Something must be done. 
20 
MS ROCKMAN:  Ja someone would have to go to court to set aside the 
agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well – well I do not know why you would necessarily 
think about going to court.  Because I mean you – you agreed 
yesterday that Provincial Treasury plays an oversight role – performs 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 54 of 68 
 
an oversight role.  There might be limitations but you – that is part of 
its function.  Now monitoring must mean you are checking whether 
things have been done properly or are being done properly.  And 
obviously there must be something you are able to do if you pick up 
that something is not being done properly.  And I would just be 
surprised if what it meant is that you must now go to court each time 
you pick up something in the exercise of your monitoring exercise.  
Each time you must go to court instead of sitting down with the Head of 
Department whoever and say, but this is not right.  And getting it sorted 
out.  I mean how much money will end up being used for going to court 
10 
if each time you pick up something that is – that is not being done 
properly you must go to court.  I think lawyers will be very rich. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes I think Chairperson if you – if you read through the 
audit and accounting treatment section I think we detailed the response 
of the HOD to the Auditor General that sets out that basis and if you 
remember correctly – where this started June 2012 when the matter 
first was brought to the Provincial Account and General she had already 
advised at that point that this may be irregular.  So it is not like it was 
not known.  But the responsibility in this case was with the Accounting 
Officer.  Notwithstanding many years of advisors to say both Auditor 
20 
Generals saying these are our audit findings. But he very firmly set out 
the grounds on which he disagrees with the Auditor Generals findings.  
Now there is no basis for Treasury to then say we are instructing you to 
declare this is irregular.  Ultimately. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no. 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 55 of 68 
 
MS ROCKMAN:  It is his action but in the broader context it should be 
the Accounting Officer then that reverses his own decision.  That would 
be the reasonable expectation.  It – I agree with you it should not be 
necessary for Treasury or anyone else to have to approach court.  It 
should be the Accounting Officer taking the corrective action.  But in 
this case there was no agreement that he – that he did not follow the 
correct procedure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But – but also I would have imagined that there would 
be mechanisms that can be – could be invoked if the right authority 
whether you say the right authority is the Auditor General or Provincial 
10 
Treasury says but this is not right.  We are given the obligation to 
monitor.  You are not given the obligation to monitor yourself. We are 
the ones who are given the obligation to monitor you.  We look at this, 
we say this is irregular.  If it is quite clear what should be done as far 
as Provincial Treasury is concerned and he disagrees there must be a 
mechanism.  I do not know whether it would include approaching the 
MEC, approaching the Premier or whatever but there should be – there 
should be a way in which somebody’s authority is accepted by that 
functionary to say well once this authority has said this should be 
changed then I must decide.  If I do not want to change it maybe I 
20 
should go.  If I feel so strongly about it but once the right authority 
says it is not right and they have heard my side they are not persuaded 
there should be finality.  So I am just sharing with you the impression I 
had when I read your – that part of your affidavit.  And Mr Thabethe is 
still coming back here and I will give him a chance to – to tell me what 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 56 of 68 
 
he thinks.  But that is the impression I got that somebody was just 
trying unjustifiably to protect his decision from scrutiny by authorities 
that are allowed to scrutinise that decision. 
MS ROCKMAN:  The way practically we also deal with it Chairperson is 
if these type of matters emerge whether it is during a financial year or 
during audit period we share with the Auditor General – ag ja we share 
with the Auditor General the advises issued.  Whether it was in a CFO 
forum, whether it was on an individual basis.  Often we – or let me say 
most of time we are in agreement with the Auditor General.  There is 
very seldom huge discrepancies. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS ROCKMAN:  That need interpretation.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MS ROCKMAN:  I think one of the positive developments is the Public 
Audit Amendment Act. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Hm. 
MS ROCKMAN:  That will enforce consequence management. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Because it does not help.  We have reached that 
stage. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS ROCKMAN:  When year and after year the same or similar findings 
are made. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS ROCKMAN:  And we go through the same processes. 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 57 of 68 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  H. 
MS ROCKMAN:  We issue the same advice and nothing changes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is ignored. 
MS ROCKMAN:  So I think the Public Audit Amendment Act and the 
Consequence Management that will come through as the ultimate last 
resort almost if all other mechanisms internally in government has 
failed.  I think that is going to make a substantial difference to the 
environment in which we work.  I mean there are basic other 
requirements if you sign off a deviation.  You are supposed to register 
it and send it to Treasury, send it to AG, send it here, send it there. 
10 
That does not necessarily mean… 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that was not done. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Anything happens to it.  We can say yes we have 
noted and we advise you that we are not in agreement with you.  And 
then what?  So I think the – in recent times there have been substantial 
developments like with the Public Audit Amendment Act that will 
significantly bring these things under control. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Than just leaving it and … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I hope they will but one continues to be 
20 
concerned about the fact that a public service, government has got lots 
of laws, lots of policies, lots of mechanisms for dealing with situations 
but they do not get used.  I mean I often say you know the way public 
service does not deal with issues of poor performance by staff and so 
on it is like people who work for government know that there will be no 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 58 of 68 
 
consequences unless I am guilty of fraud but even then I case they 
catch me which is unlikely.   
MS ROCKMAN:  Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  People just do not – many people just do not do their 
job that is why there are such problems about service delivery.  People 
are supposed to supervise other people who are supposed to do their 
job they do not supervise them.  And if they do not do their job there 
are no consequences.  That is why a lot of people complain about 
service deliveries.  Not like the mechanisms are not there, they are 
there but they do not get implemented and those who are supposed to 
10 
implement them and fail to implement them do not suffer any 
consequences year in, year out.  I know I am just – you might not be 
able to say anything I am just – yes.  Ms Gcabashe. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Thank you Chairman.  Chairman just for the record 
it might be useful when we get to reading out transcripts just to make a 
note of that particular judgment that did I think change the attitude of 
the Free State government and that is the Department of Transport and 
others versus Tasmina spelt T-a-s-m-i-n-a PTY Limited 2017 Volume 2 
SA 622CC Constitutional Court decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Thank you.  
20 
ADV GCABASHE:  Chairman I will very quickly just run through some 
of the other irregularities that I actually noted in the supplementary 
affidavit of … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Ms Rockman.  And if you do not mind me doing – 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 59 of 68 
 
going from back to front. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja that is fine. 
ADV GCABASHE:  At page 37 for the 2014/2015 year you have non-
compliance with SCM Policies the very issue you dealing with now at 
R17 708 000.00.  At page 36 for the 2013/2014 financial year again 
non-compliance with Supply Chain Management Procedures there the 
amount was R21 386 you will find that on page 36 of the supplementary 
affidavit Chairman.  And then for the 2013/2014 I think that is an – Ms 
Rockman I think that should be 2012/2013 I think that – because the 
last one we did just now was 2013/2014.  So I think this should actually 
10 
be 2012/2013 Chairman non-compliance with SCM Procedures was in 
the amount of R23 309 000.00.  So these are significant amounts 
especially if you look at them over the years and the comments you 
make about consequence manager – management and people taking 
responsibility for decisions that they take really feeds into these 
figures.  And how to implement what people in authority tell us to do 
certainly fits again into this paradigm.  Chairman I would like to just 
finish off with just a comment.  I just want to briefly go back to the MM 
– FDC and three issues there again arising from your affidavit and this 
time I looked at ER99.4 at page 1-1-4-1 that would be Bundle C, but 
20 
really the - and also ER98 page 1-1-1-0.  Again Volume C and those are 
really just comment, one from the Auditor-General.  The other relating 
to - from the department relating to monies that were paid to the FDC, 
Ms Rockman and it would appear that in 2017/2018 20 million was paid 
to the FDC and in prior years 51.2 million accumulatively would have 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 60 of 68 
 
been paid to the FDC. 
These are significant amounts and the question really is - 
which we will discuss with Mr Thabethe - is the extent to which these 
types of sums were accommodated in his provisioning system for the 
Vrede Dairy Project but the other comment I would like to make is I 
looked at your supplementary bundle and at tag 23A. 
So it is Annexure 23A - 23A in the supplementary - A in the 
supplementary bundle.  There is actually an interesting letter from the 
service provider appointed by the FDC to render services at the Vrede 
Dairy Farm Project and it is a - a letter from the attorneys where they - 
10 
they lament the fact that at paragraph 3 of that letter that they were not 
properly paid.  So they say: 
“Although there is no obligation to provide reasons 
for the cancellation …” 
Or cancelling their contract with FDC. 
“…our instructions are to record that the main 
reasons for terminating the agreement is due to 
your lack of cooperation; failure to provide our 
client with instructions (including but not limited to 
your failure to provide instruction with respect to 
20 
the turnaround strategy submitted to yourselves 
and despite several reminders over the past year) 
and above all failure to make payment of amounts 
due to our clients.  As a result our client has been 
unable to make payment to employees and other 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 61 of 68 
 
creditors.  The agreement will therefore come to an 
end on the 13 t h day following the date of delivery of 
this letter.” 
So this is E’tsho a service provider appointed by FDC writing 
to FDC and the reason I bring this to your attention and the Chairman’s 
attention is again it speaks to the competencies of the FDC.  Were they 
really the best entity to take over the running of the Vrede Dairy Farm?  
When one, we have already led evidence that they themselves were in 
trouble and were being restructured. 
We have dealt with that and at the tail end in 2018 there are 
10 
real difficulties that they seem not to be able to resolve.  I do not know 
if you want to comment on this. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Thank you Chair.  Just to say after the action taken to 
place the farm under a preservation order  
ADV GCABASHE:  (Indistinct). 
MS ROCKMAN:  Ja. 
ADV GCABASHE:  When the - when the curator was appointed? 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes.  The continuation of E’tsho was with the approval 
of the curator but we were consistently asked to intervene in the delay 
of payments between FDC and Agriculture.  So Agriculture would delay 
20 
pay - payments to FDC saying they require information.  FDC would say 
we have given you the information.  We want payment.  In the process 
no one paid E’tsho.  So E’tsho ended up almost carrying the costs of 
the Vrede Dairy Farm on its own in the hope that Government will now 
one day sort out whatever bureaucracy problems stood in the way of 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 62 of 68 
 
processing payments and I think at this stage they reached that point to 
say we will rather walk away and leave you to - to deal with the farm on 
your own.  Whether it is FDC on its own or FDC handing it back then to 
Agriculture. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV GCABASHE:  I - I think it is actually convenient just too again just 
solicit your view on even E’tsho itself.  Its competency to - to operate 
and run a dairy farm because as I understand their competencies.  It is 
in the construction, project management area.  Again there is no 
particular dairy or agricultural competence that sits in E’tsho.  I do not 
10 
know if you have a response to that. 
MS ROCKMAN:  I - I know E’tsho as a project management … 
ADV GCABASHE:  Hm. 
MS ROCKMAN:  In the - in other industries.  Not - not related to 
agriculture but I cannot comment on what capacity they had at that 
point in time to take up the - the appointment. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Then … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we almost there? 
20 
ADV GCABASHE:  Yes.  Yes Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV GCABASHE:  The last one really is Mr Dhlamini’s comment.  He 
suggested to the Chair that Vrede the Dairy Project should be shut 
down because it has brought nothing but angst and pain and discord to 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 63 of 68 
 
their community.  I do not know if you want to give the Chairman a view 
on that. 
MS ROCKMAN:  I - I have a lot of appreciation and empathy for the 
feelings and the sentiments of the intended beneficiaries who have 
gained nothing from this project.  I do not think it is too late.  I think 
the project to some extent is viable with the correct skills and 
knowledgeable people. 
Maybe not at the level that it was envisaged but certainly 
there is benefit.  There - there is inherent benefit to involve 
beneficiaries in the - on a project of this nature.  I do not think it 
10 
should simply be closed down completely.  I think three - there is still 
something that - that can be salvaged from the project and slowly built 
and to be expanded into a better - better income opportunities for 
knowledgeable people who have interest in agriculture. 
Not random people that - that does not have agriculture - a 
love for agriculture at heart. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Thank you.  The - the last area I want us to touch on 
is evidence given to this Commission by Mr Moremi who at - at the 
relevant time in 2012 was the Municipal Manager at Phumelela Local 
Municipality.  Do you know Mr Moremi? 
20 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes.  I do. 
ADV GCABASHE:  I - I - Mr Moremi of course in his statement deals 
with a telephone call he says you made to him advising him that an 
Indian delegation would be coming to the farm.  They were really 
negotiating around the lease of land by the Phumelela Local 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 64 of 68 
 
Municipality.  The issue here is he says he called you. 
I know you deal with this in your statement.  You dispute that.  
Please speak to that issue. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Thank you Chair.  I have - I have tried to clarify 
myself.  So I am not entirely sure if - if you are talking around the same 
incident but in - Mr Moremi’s initial evidence he was saying that a 
particular meeting was organised through the Mayor.  I think it was with 
Mr Narayan and a lawyer. 
In a supplementary statement he then says I think I called 
him.  What I remember is receiving the call from him saying that he is 
10 
under pressure to sign a certain agreement and he was relatively new 
in the Local Government environment and I said to him I would advise 
do not sign anything especially relating to municipal land because it - it 
is a - it is really a complex issue without getting legal advice. 
Talk to the State Law Advisors.  Phumelela is a very small 
municipality.  It does not have its own legal - internal legal capacity.  
So instead of getting a private law firm who will charge costs who may 
also not have the necessary expertise to deal with matters relating to 
municipal land. 
I thought it - it is - it would be the wiser thing to do to seek 
20 
advice from the State Law Advisors.  There was - there were 
conversations and that is subsequently what - what we did.  I think he 
also sent me an email that I forwarded to the State Law Advisors and I 
also spoke to Mr Venter to say can we please assist Phumelela 
because they - they are in a difficult position without having internal 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 65 of 68 
 
legal capacity. 
ADV GCABASHE:  As I recall his evidence these are two different 
incidence.  I am - I am quite happy with your account of the assistance 
you tried to give him in relation to the lease and - and the advice you 
gave him to speak to the State Law Advisors. 
That is consistent with what he said to the Commission but he 
also said to the Commission that the first time he heard about an Indian 
delegation coming down to Vrede to talk about the land and the farm 
was when he received a telephone call from you.  He then rushed and 
made sure he got to the meeting on time … 
10 
MS ROCKMAN:  I have … 
ADV GCABASHE:  And I have understood your version to be that he is 
the one who called you.  You did not tell him there is an Indian 
delegation that is coming to Vrede.  Make sure you are there to talk to 
them. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Thanks Chair.  I have no recollection of me calling him 
to say there is an Indian delegation coming.  The MEC was from 
Phumelela.  He is from Vrede.  The MEC would have made 
arrangements with the Mayor.  It would have been easier.  It would - it 
would not really make sense for them to come via me now back to 
20 
Phumelela. 
So he - he may have a different recollection but my 
recollection is definitely the phone call that I received from him that he 
was under pressure. 
ADV GCABASHE:  And when you speak of the Mayor you are talking 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 66 of 68 
 
about Mr John Motaung? 
MS ROCKMAN:  Yes.  That is correct. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Last question I think Chairman.  Mr Thabethe 
ultimately entered into a 99 year lease agreement in respect of that 
Vrede land with Estina and it was a renewable 99 year lease.  Did you 
know anything about this before that lease was signed? 
MS ROCKMAN:  (No audible reply). 
ADV GCABASHE:  Same question when did you hear about that 99 
year lease that had been signed between the department under the 
authority of the Mr Thabethe and Estina? 
10 
MS ROCKMAN:  I - I got to know about that 99 year lease agreement or 
the issues around the land at the time Mr Moremi called me initially and 
the State Law Advisors had advised to say how this thing should be 
structured … 
ADV GCABASHE:  Hm. 
MS ROCKMAN:  But we did not know prior to that process.  We knew in 
principle there is land.  Phumelela is going to make available land but 
the 99 year lease agreement was a separate matter and - and we did 
have concerns just in principle about the issue of 99 year lease 
agreements. 
20 
At that stage I was aware but I was aware because of 
Phumelela’s financial position that part of the little revenue that the 
municipality is able to get comes from existing lease agreements from 
municipal land that they were renting to farmers. 
ADV GCABASHE:  That is fine.  We will take the rest of the matter with 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 67 of 68 
 
Mr Thabethe.  I really just wanted to establish the extent to which you 
would have known that this lease was entered into with Estina or 
whether you would have facilitated the entering of that particular 99 
year lease with Estina.  Your short answer is no? 
MS ROCKMAN:  No. 
ADV GCABASHE:  I do not know if there are any other matters that you 
would like to bring to the Chairman’s  
MS ROCKMAN:  Not at this stage Chair. 
ADV GCABASHE:  Chairman those are the questions we have for this 
witness. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Thank you very much.  Thank you very 
much Ms Rockman for having come to give evidence and to share what 
you know about the Estina Project with the Commission.  If there is a 
need to ask you to come back the Commission will ask you to come 
back but thank you very much for having come to give evidence.  For 
now you are excused. 
MS ROCKMAN:  Thank you very much Chairperson and we will continue 
to cooperate as we have been doing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.  We are going to adjourn for 
the day.  There will be no hearing tomorrow.  Next week the former 
20 
President was scheduled to appear before the Commission for the 
whole week.  He is no longer going to appear next week.  He is lawyers 
have indicated that arising out of the judgment affecting him in the 
Pietermaritzburg High Court he and the lawyers are supposed to deal 
with certain matters next week. 
17 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 182 
 
Page 68 of 68 
 
So the hearing of his evidence next week has been opposed 
but he is still going to appear before the Commission from 11 November 
to the 15 t h.  He has agreed to appear before the Commission during 
that week.  So that week stands.  I will determine other dates when he 
will appear before the Commission other than the dates of the 11 t h to 
15 November and at the right time those will be made known to the 
public as well. 
As things stand there will be no hearing next week because 
of this change but should the Commission be able to make some 
arrangements for some witnesses to be called towards the end of the 
10 
week the public will be informed but at this stage there will be no 
hearing next week but there will be a hearing the week after.  We 
adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS SINE DIE 
 
