 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 
 
 
 
DAY 189 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 2 of 119 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 18 NOVEMBER 2019 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Pretorius, good morning everybody. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we ready? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes we are. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Chair the witness set down for today is Lord Peter 
Hain.  If I may just make a few introductory remarks before he takes the 
affirmation? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:  He is a member of the House of Lords in the United 
Kingdom and he will testify by way of introduction to his evidence of his 
origins and his relationship to South Africa and his interest in South 
Africa.  His special focus for present purposes is the manner in which 
domestic corruption is facilitated on the international stage by 
international actors particularly in the enabling of money laundering.  
And for present purposes that is the expatriation and concealment of 
the monetary fruits of corruption. 
 
It is important to emphasise from a procedural point of view 
Chair that although Lord Hain in his developing thesis in his remarks 
20 
today relies largely on information in the public domain as contained in 
the bundles before you.  
 
Notices in terms of Rule 3.3 have been issued as a 
precautionary measure to parties implicated even those in foreign 
jurisdictions.  There have been some responses and they will be dealt 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 3 of 119 
 
with in evidence. 
 
Much of the factual evidence as I have said relied upon by 
Lord Hain is already in the public domain or has been related to him as 
he will testify. 
 
The category of evidence dealt with is dealt with by the 
investigations in the commission by what we have termed the Money 
Flows team.  That evidence is still to be led.  So that by the time you 
are in a position to assess the evidence and the conclusions and the 
recommendations put before you by Lord Hain you will be able to base 
that on direct evidence that will by then have been placed before you.  
10 
Perhaps in even more detail as than alluded to by Lord Hain at the 
moment. 
 
Chair if I may just hand up two more bundles?  One is a bundle 
of the Rule 3.3 Notices and correspondence emanating from those Rule 
3.3 Notices and it may be that we can deal with all the responses in 
evidence to avoid later difficulties.   
 
The other is a small bundle of explanatory notes dealing with 
certain concepts and dealing with certain institutions that will be 
referred to by Lord Hain in evidence.  That by way of introduction Chair 
may Lord Hain take the affirmation? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you please administer the affirmation? 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
LORD HAIN:  Lord Peter Hain. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection in taking the prescribed 
affirmation? 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 4 of 119 
 
LORD HAIN:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you solemnly affirm that the evidence you will give 
shall be the truth; the whole truth and nothing but the truth, if so please 
raise your right hand and say, I truly affirm? 
LORD HAIN:  I truly affirm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much Lord Hain.  I just want to 
welcome you and to tell you that we appreciate very much that you 
have taken your time to come and share evidence with the commission.  
We appreciate very much that you have made yourself available. 
LORD HAIN:  Thank you Chair it is a privilege to be before you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Lord Hain before you introduce yourself to the Chair 
by way of introduction as I have noted.  Before you; you have two 
bundles.  The large bundles.  Those bundles are bundle QQa and QQb.  
They contain your statement and annexures to your statement as 
referred to in the footnotes to your statement. 
 
There are also two further bundles that have just – copies of 
which have just been handed up to the Chair.  Those are the notices 
issued by the Legal Team to various parties implicated or indirectly 
implicated by you in your testimony and some – ex – those are also in 
20 
front of you.   
 
Your statement is in bundle QQa. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Pretorius should we not admit these first before 
you start? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes please Chair. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 5 of 119 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  With questions – your questions.  The lever arch file 
containing a statement or submission by Lord Peter Hain and 
annexures thereto will be marked Exhibit QQa and the other one which 
consists of further annexures to his statement will be marked Exhibit 
QQb.  Do you want me to also admit these or? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Perhaps we should for the sake of completeness 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
ADV PRETORIUS:  We can call them QQc and d respectively.  The one 
containing the notices, the small lever arch file may that be QQc and 
10 
then the – the plastic folder may be – perhaps that could be QQd. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
The 
file 
containing 
Rule 
3.3 
Notices 
and 
correspondence will be marked Exhibit QQc and the one that is marked 
other documents will be marked Exhibit QQd.  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Thank you Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Lord Hain briefly would you tell the Chair and 
importantly the public of your origins in South Africa briefly and your 
interest in the subject matter of this commission? 
LORD HAIN:  Chair my parents were both born in South Africa.  My 
20 
father in Durban, my mother in Port Alfred.  I spent my entire childhood 
here, mostly in Pretoria until my parents were first jailed in the anti-
apartheid struggle in 1961 when I was 11 years old.  Then my mother 
was banned.  Then my father was banned.  My mother in 1963, my 
father in 1964 and finally we forced into exile in 1966 when I was age 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 6 of 119 
 
16 because they stopped my father working as an architect. 
 
A few years later I then joined the anti-apartheid struggle in 
Britain and led campaigns to stop all white Springbok tours because 
they were all white at that stage as part of the British anti-apartheid 
movements campaign drive. 
 
I received a letter bomb from the South African Security 
Services in June 1972 as a result of that and also was put on trial for 
conspiracy in a South African finance prosecution and then I was victim 
of a mistaken identity charge of a bank theft committed by a South 
African agent.  But placed me in a position effectively framed me.  I 
10 
was acquitted of that I am pleased to say. 
 
So I have had a long involvement in the anti-apartheid struggle 
carrying on my parents work and I have continued since the 
transformation to support the country chairing the Nelson Mandela 
Centenary Exhibition in 2018 at the Royal Festival Hall and a number of 
other supportive activities for South Africa because a lot of my heart is 
still here. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Thank you Lord Hain.  At page of your statement 
you introduce your evidence and the concept State Capture and the 
source of your knowledge of the phenomenon State Capture.  Would 
20 
you just briefly deal with that? 
LORD HAIN:  Chair this is part of my 10 000 word written submission 
which I understand you will publish online.  My – my understanding of 
state capture is that it was facilitated first of all by the massive 
complicity of international financial and other institutions global 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 7 of 119 
 
corporates and foreign governments.   
 
But that if you look at what happened whether it was the 
dismembering of the South African Revenue Service, the way in which 
the National Prosecuting Authority was turned from pursuing high crime 
to neglecting a lot of crime. The same was true of the Hawks and other 
forms of the security and police services. The way in which the state 
owned enterprises were looted by those who were in control of the 
country at the time principally under former President Zuma and the 
different business associates that he had principally the Gupta 
brothers.  Whether it was Eskom or whether it was South African 
10 
Airways or Transnet this amounted to a complete comprehensive 
picture of state capture by corrupt criminality and it is that which I 
understand to have happened in South Africa and have observed and 
researched myself. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Right.  I have already alluded to the fact that when 
the Chair has to assess the conclusions and recommendations that you 
make he will be able to the extent possible to rely on direct information 
before the commission.  But your own information I understand is 
sourced largely from matters within the public domain and matters 
referred to by individual let us terms them Whistle-blowers, is that 
20 
correct? 
LORD HAIN:  That is correct Chair and I have had the assistance as I 
mentioned in paragraph 3 of my submission; I have had the assistance 
of experts in the field.  Much greater expertise than I could possibly 
have of the way the international financial system works and it is them 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 8 of 119 
 
that I thank for the way that this submission was able to be drafted and 
then submitted to you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Right.  On page 2 of your statement or submission 
you tell the Chair of how your report is structured in the two parts, the 
two main parts.  Perhaps by way of introduction you could tell the Chair 
about that at the outset? 
LORD HAIN:  Well Part 1 Chair is the international actors, the banks, 
the professional enablers which I will describe.  The corporates and 
then governments, the state. 
 
Part 2 is remedial measures.  Recommendations that I am 
10 
making for your consideration in the commission of – for reforms that 
are needed in the way the banks operate, the way corporate operate 
and about information sharing, transparency, self-policing and I go 
through a whole series of recommendations for you to consider. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Right.  And then on page 3 under the head “Global 
Picture” you summarise your focus being an international focus.  Would 
you deal with that please? 
LORD HAIN:  What I describe here is the way the financial crime 
threatens the prosperity and stability of us all.  Individual citizens, 
governments and communities.  And the criminals launder vast sums of 
20 
illicit funds every year transforming the ill-gotten gains to seemingly 
legitimate assets.  It is estimated Chair that around 5% of global gross 
domestic product – global wealth or US Dollars 2 Trillion is laundered 
every – each and every year.  This is a huge sum which dwarfs by far 
the national budgets of countries like South Africa.  So this is a 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 9 of 119 
 
systematic picture of international crime.  And often as I think we saw 
in South Africa the domestic regulatory mechanisms are unable to curb 
this free flowing money laundering and international crime.  And what it 
does is particularly in developing countries keeps people in abject 
poverty.  So this is not just something done by bankers and experts and 
financiers with the assistance often of lawyers and accountants and 
other professional enablers.  It is actually robbing people of their 
national wealth and stopping – and keeping them in complete poverty.  
So it is – it is a problem that has a direct impact on the questions of 
social justice and equality which are very live issues in South Africa 
10 
today. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes.  And you will note there obviously that where 
you place certain statistics on record as you do in paragraph 5 that it is 
footnoted to a particular source and this particular source that you 
have referred to here is a United Nations document. 
LORD HAIN:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  [Indistinct] document.  Those documents Chair are 
the documents in the bundle.  So the – perhaps it is not necessary to 
go through all those documents at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:  But they are there for the record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They are available ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And – so in paragraph 6 you make certain 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 10 of 119 
 
observations based on that general summary of the global picture.  
Would you deal with that please? 
LORD HAIN:  Yes Chair.  This goes to the heart of what I hope will be 
of value to the commission which is my concern that global action and 
global cooperation is needed if this problem is to be dealt with and 
prevented in the future and resolved in respect of the past.  Because 
there needs to be much better global action and coordination from a 
range of stakeholders from Governments to businesses, to banks and 
non-governmental organisations.  And without this I think that the state 
capture of South Africa or in another country could happen again and 
10 
the South African Treasury would not be able to recover the billions 
that have been looted and laundered abroad or pass ported elsewhere.  
And this is all being done not sort of by private individuals but with the 
assistance of the International banking system and that is – and 
corporates that work alongside them.  And that will continue unhindered 
and undeterred and unless action is taken and that is really my focus 
for this submission. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Right and you refer in paragraph 6 to two aspects in 
relation to the remedial action that would require to be taken.  The first 
is obviously prevention through cooperation and the second is recovery 
20 
of monies laundered as a result of corrupt activities.  Am I correct? 
LORD HAIN:  You are correct, you are correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Then you go on to deal with the South African 
picture.  If you would? 
LORD HAIN:  I do.  In paragraph 7 I assert based on documentation 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 11 of 119 
 
and a report – a very impressive report by Marianne Merten in the Daily 
Telegraph sorry in the Daily Maverick – Freudian slip there, that state 
capture in terms of its directs and indirect costs have been estimated 
at around R1.5 Trillion prodigious amount.  I then describe how there 
has been a great deal of examination indeed in your own commission 
Chair of the systematic lack of transparency and accountability of 
South African bodies that allowed corruption to thrive. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  If you would just pause there just by way of 
reference. Chair that amount of R1.5 Trillion which appeared in the 
article is in the bundle but the particular figures that make up that total 
10 
appear at page 33 of the bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
LORD HAIN:  So Chair my focus is not so much on the domestic 
changes that are needed in South Africa though I do – I do touch on 
that.  My plea is for the international community to fully acknowledge 
its own role in this sorry and sordid saga in the way that international 
actors played a crucial function in the capture of the state.  For 
example it was international actors who helped and continue to help 
corrupt individuals to enjoy the spoils of their illegality by allowing 
them to move their ill-gotten gains from South Africa and then 
20 
sometimes as in the Estina Dairy Farm scandal back into South Africa 
undetected. This is all through the international financial and banking 
systems.  It could not have happened otherwise and it was not 
detected.  And it was international actors who helped corrupt 
individuals here in South Africa create complex structures of corporate 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 12 of 119 
 
structures disguising the true ownership of funds – the true ownership 
of funds and complicating the tracing of those stolen funds whilst 
earning fat fees from that looting.  It was international actors that have 
also provided refuge for these corrupt individuals and the mean to 
continue to pursue their activities through less regulated economies. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  May we then move to page 5 where you go into 
some detail in relation to the particular institutions that fall within the 
category of actors internationally that you have described?  But 
perhaps before we do that it should come from you rather than me the 
caveat in paragraph 10. 
10 
LORD HAIN:  Well Chair I just make it clear here that the cases that I 
have drawn upon and sight are drawn from reports in the public domain 
and that has been mentioned already this morning and evidence 
submitted to your own inquiry.  And save for where I refer for example 
in my own interactions with the international banks and relevant 
international actors I do not claim to have any special personal 
knowledge of the facts in this regard and I relied on reports and 
evidence that have been cited in the footnotes that in my submission 
and on the expert evaluation of the material that I have been able to 
draw upon. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Then you go on to deal with the particular 
institutions that form the basis of your recommendations in part.  You 
start with the banks on page 5. 
LORD HAIN:  I do indeed. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Paragraph 11 rather. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 13 of 119 
 
LORD HAIN:  I do indeed and in paragraphs 11 and the following 
paragraphs I describe how electronic banking remains the simplest and 
fastest way of transferring funds between people and across borders.  
And it allows the conventional electronic banking that maybe we all 
from time to time use legitimately.  It allows criminals to move their 
money from – to more convenient and less regulated jurisdictions and it 
cleans the money if I can describe it in that way by mingling it with 
other funds and disguising its true source so that it is easier for them 
then to spend claiming a legitimate form of spending which clearly by 
origin it is not.  And the Gupta brother used a number of these 
10 
international banks.  Many of them are household names such as 
HSBC, Standard Chartered, the Bank of Baroda which have all I think 
been mentioned in  your commission’s deliberations.  And they transfer 
their money around the network disguised payments to hide the source 
of the funds and they seem to have really assisted the Gupta’s in two 
main ways.  By allowing bank accounts to be opened and in so doing 
granting access to the bank’s global network.  So a bank account might 
be opened in let us say HSBC or Bank of Baroda or Standard Chartered 
her in Johannesburg and then it goes through their international 
pipeline into Dubai or Hong Kong or wherever it might be and then 
20 
disappears.  And so they have assisted that and they have also – so 
they have granted effectively they have been able to grant in the case 
of the Gupta brothers and others have used this method – they have 
been granted them an open door to their international network through 
depositing money in local accounts.  And for them to claim and perhaps 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 14 of 119 
 
Chair we might come back onto this – for them to claim as they have to 
me and at least one of them has claimed you know in a response to this 
commission as a result of my submission that they have not 
responsibility for what happens in Dubai let us say seems to me to be 
frankly disingenuous because they are an international operations and 
they should be held accountable for the consequences of accounts in 
let us say Johannesburg or Pretoria or Cape Town or wherever it might 
be in South Africa which then have money that is smuggled in the 
conventional way out of the country into other jurisdictions and into 
their accounts in other jurisdictions.  And I think there were lots of 
10 
warning signs from the evidence I have seen that this was happening 
and frankly the banks concerned did not stop it.  They allowed it to 
occur and therefore they are culpable in my view in state capture and 
are complicit in this corruption and looting.  They should have spotted 
these red flags earlier and dealt with them immediately and I am happy 
to go into that if you wish me to Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes.  The general remarks Lord Hain that you have 
made insofar as our evidence thus far shows that they may well be all 
true of certainly the Bank of Baroda but as far as Standard Chartered 
Bank and HSBC is concerned they – those remarks may not all apply as 
20 
far as our investigations go at least to – to those institutions in their 
totality.  So – but perhaps we should deal in more detail with that when 
we deal with the response of Standard Chartered. 
LORD HAIN:  I am very happy to do that Chair.  I assert that they are 
all culpable, all three and conceivable other banks as well but 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 15 of 119 
 
particularly those three were some of the main ones used by the Gupta 
and we deal with some of the details. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
LORD HAIN:  I am sur we will later on. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In paragraph 12.1 to 12.6 you deal in a little more 
detail with the problems that arise in the international banking context. 
LORD HAIN:  Yes I mean this is the nub of the problem.  First of all you 
have got the secretive nature of these transactions through the 
international banking system because the source of the funds and the 
ownership of the accounts, the particular accounts in these banks was 
10 
often obscured.  Then there were unexplained payments from third 
parties with little or no apparent connection to the underlying 
transactions.  Many accounts were used to transfer funds to various 
amounts – various amounts around shell companies.  Perhaps I will 
explain what I mean by shell companies or front companies if you like 
Chair which do not conduct trading themselves but allow funds to flow 
through them whilst obscuring the identity of the persons who control 
them.  Classically this was done by the Gupta’s.  What I mean if I may? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes please. 
LORD HAIN:  By shell – by shell companies. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And you referring to QQd? 
LORD HAIN:  Yes I am. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  The document is in there Chair but by – for 
reference purposes only. 
LORD HAIN:  So these – these as I have indicated could be described 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 16 of 119 
 
as front companies.  Essentially they used to hide of fustigate who the 
ultimate owners of the companies are.  For example the shareholder of 
a UK company might be a company that is registered in the Cayman 
Islands. The shareholder of the Cayman Company concerned might be 
a British Virgin Island’s company that is then held by another company 
registered in the British Virgin Island’s Cyprus or Vanuatu whose sole 
director is then found to be deceased.  This exemplifies the lengths to 
which some of these owners, the ultimate owners – so called beneficial 
owners will go to hide their interest and therefore conceal the ability of 
the regulatory and enforcement authorities to actually chase them down 
10 
and find out who exactly is involved and…  So it is very difficult to see 
and identify who is standing at the top of this tree of successive linked 
companies that are all in a way illicit – illicit shell operations.  The 
other thing that is – was apparent from my investigations is the 
information held by company registries for example here in South Africa 
as to the ownership of a company it may actually not be accurate.   
 
If I take an UK example for instance.  The UK 
authorities in 2018 successfully prosecuted an individual for forming 
companies 
and 
making 
Members 
of 
Parliament 
directors 
and 
shareholders of the said companies without their knowledge.  I think on 
20 
one occasion the – one of the directors concerned in the shadow 
operations was actually named Mickey Mouse which you know is 
symbolic of the shadiness of this regular practice.  And it has been 
widely documented in the media, investigative media and elsewhere 
that the Guptas used shell companies. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 17 of 119 
 
For example in Dubai, Hong Kong and beyond to - to move 
their assets and the final point I would make about the shell companies 
- and it is an important one and we will come onto this I guess - is that 
this concealment of the true ownership is actually assisted by 
professional enablers. 
By that I mean lawyers and accountants who are paid by the 
ultimate owner to create these complex company structures often a 
legitimate reason given to the professional enabler concerned.  Is - is 
lawful tax avoidance - if it can ever be lawful - and some of them these 
professional enable - enablers have off the shelf companies that they 
10 
can simple - they previously had incorporated. 
They can simply literally grab them and transfer them into a 
client company for a - for a fee.  So to be frank Chair they are all up to 
this in their neck as well.  They all up to their neck in this as well. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And as you say in relation to illicit dealings in 
money for example in South Africa or in a particular country.  This 
enabling activity takes place on the international stage? 
LORD HAIN:  It does, because there were lots of unexplained 
connections and movements of monies between jurisdictions which 
were never explained and the Guptas actually who were the beneficial 
20 
owners - the ultimate owners - of most of the companies concerned.  
They - as I think evidence has shown to your Commission and is widely 
known - were very close to the former President Zuma in South Africa 
and there was increasing awareness of corruption and State Capture 
and it being rife under the former President’s administration and yet 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 18 of 119 
 
these banks and - and international corporates continued to affectively 
work with the Guptas and enable them to conduct their nefarious 
activities and launder the money around the world.  So … 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Do I understand you to be saying that despite the 
warning signs in the media and in the public domain these international 
activities continued? 
LORD HAIN:  They did indeed Chair and they continued because of 
course the corporates concerned including the banks were making 
money out of it and this increasing exposure of State Capture was 
happening in the investigative media here in South Africa and in other - 
10 
other ways as well and it was very apparent to me that the legitimate 
funds created by the Gupta enterprises were dwarfed by the funds that 
they amassed through illegal activity and they could not have amassed 
this - this illicit fund - these illicit - this illicit wealth without the 
corporates and the banks working with them and effectively being their 
little helpers along the way. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So part of your evidence is the Commission should 
look at to what extent banks may have played a role which facilitated 
that monies, funds obtained illicitly as part of State Capture left the 
shores of the country when maybe by doing their job properly the way 
20 
they should have they might have prevented that.  Part of what you are 
saying is - is that.  Is that correct? 
LORD HAIN:  It is exactly that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
LORD HAIN:  All the warning signs were there. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 19 of 119 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
LORD HAIN:  They even turned a blind eye to them … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
LORD HAIN:  And now they claim they knew very little about it which 
frankly I do not believe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And - and I guess that part of what you are saying is 
also let us look at when the banks started acting and see whether they 
may have been justified in not acting much earlier than they did.  That 
is part of what you say we must look at? 
LORD HAIN:  It is part of what I am - I am saying Chair and as I will 
10 
come to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
LORD HAIN:  Reforms that may - you may want to consider. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That may need to be - yes - yes. 
LORD HAIN:  On behalf of the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
LORD HAIN:  To stop this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  You do give some examples in paragraphs 13 to 15 
and you make a conclusion that has been alluded to or suggested by 
20 
the Chair in paragraph 16.  You - you wish to deal with that now? 
LORD HAIN:  I would Chair.  I mean the first example is - is a 
transaction that should have been stopped by the bank concerned or at 
least investigated and that was a loan on 18 January 2017 by Trillion 
Management Consultancy.  Then majority owned by the Gupta associate 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 20 of 119 
 
Salim Essa and that involved 160 million to Centaur Mining which was a 
Gupta owned company via Trillion Financial Advisor. 
A Gupta owned company again and I provided the source for 
that in - in my submission Chair and then the Bank of Baroda South 
Africa which is part of India’s state owned bank - state owned bank - 
state owned global Bank of Baroda.  It is the South African arm of it.  
Their bank accounts were utilised for this particular movement of funds 
and the reason for this chain of transactions was stated to be an 
intercompany loan. 
That was the - the - as it were - the explanation given.  
10 
However no loan documentation that I can identify has so far been 
found to exist and no explanation was reportedly provided to the bank 
for the structure of the transaction.  Other reports into the activities of 
this branch of Baroda Bank in respect of Gupta associated accounts 
and transfers indicated that it issued loan guarantees without approval 
and that it may have quashed internal compliance concerns raised by 
its own employees. 
So here is a - frankly a - a naked example of an international 
bank.  In this case part owned by the - the Government of India.  Not 
just turning a blind eye to money laundering of a very serious kind, but 
20 
actually when its own employers - own employees raised - raised 
issues the senior management - presumably it was them just waived it 
through and then another example which is well known in South Africa. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Just before you go on Lord Hain.  The source of the 
information and that paragraph as appears from footnotes five and six 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 21 of 119 
 
at the bottom of the page appears to have been a particular 
investigation into organised crime and corruption? 
LORD HAIN:  That is correct Chair.  That is correct.  The second 
example that I quote is the one I think widely known in South Africa and 
that is the South African Government funding for a state financed 
project the Estina Dairy Farm.  Now that was transferred via the Gupta 
controlled Estina Limited to a Standard Chartered Bank Account held by 
Gateway Limited a Gupta owned company. 
Registered in the United Arab Emirates, Dubai in May, 
August, September 2013.  Standard Chartered did not stop this 
10 
transaction despite the fact that Government funds were leaving the 
jurisdiction.  They were leaving South Africa to a company beneficially 
owned by the Guptas with no material explanation provided at all 
regarding the suspicious payment structure. 
Now that seems to me Standard Chartered Bank there are 
you know culpable and guilty of facilitating criminality by the - by the 
Guptas in this case and their wider associates and the point I make and 
I will perhaps if - if this is okay refer to Standard Chartered 
specifically. 
That you know banks should have access to customer data 
20 
and transaction data for all the accounts they open and the transfers 
they facilitate and they should be in a position to - to monitor 
legitimacy of any of these transactions.  As well as having regulatory 
and moral responsibilities to recognise, to stop and - and identify 
illegal money flows, but after I had exposed the internal dimension to 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 22 of 119 
 
State Capture in the British Parliament beginning in November 2017 I 
met senior directors of HSBC and Standard Chartered. 
They asked to see me, because I had referred to them in 
Parliament and frankly I found them - I found a great reluctance from 
both of them citing this question of client confidentiality.  Which is the 
excuse they hide behind to actually admit to their culpability and to 
cooperate fully when I specifically asked them to track the money 
laundered by the Guptas under the - under President - former 
President Zuma’s administration and I find this quite unacceptable. 
So this is directors in - of banks in London simply saying 
10 
okay.  We had Gupta accounts, but we closed them years ago.  We are 
not responsible.  We have not culpability.  In my view they are directly 
culpable for what happened in this instance and perhaps with your 
agreement Chair I could refer to - I am not sure what it is called, but 
refer to the response to my assertions here made by Standard 
Chartered in the - in this - in the submission they made to - to your 
Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In the small lever arch file - QQC Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:  At page 99 is the response of Standard Chartered 
on affidavit by one Bam at page 99. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Under tab number? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  The tabs … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or is it right at the end?  I have got it. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 23 of 119 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:  It is right at the end. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have got it. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  There is a tab SC.  A blue tab SC right at the end. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Page 99. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. I have got it. 
LORD HAIN:  Chair I think … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
LORD HAIN:  I think this was submitted by Standard Chartered in 
response - in the usual way that your Commission properly operates as 
10 
I understand it.  In response to my evidence … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
LORD HAIN:  And was sent on 15 November by their Sandton - from - 
from Sandton and I regard it as a shameless body swerve frankly.  They 
- they never came forward to - at the beginning to actually help in any 
way to track this money down and identify where it went and the Estina 
Dairy Farm Project - infamous project was one of the clearest examples 
of organised robbery from some of the poorest people in South Africa. 
In this case in the far - in the Orange Free State and so they 
did not come forward.  They cite in paragraph 9 of the - their response. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am - I am sorry lord - Lord Hain.  I think 
Mr Pretorius what we should do so that those who are listening and do 
not have the benefit of the document in front of them and those who are 
watching on TV or whatever.  I think Lord Hain should say what the gist 
of the response is. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 24 of 119 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes.  I had intended to do so myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that then he can comment. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Perhaps as it is a commissioned document may I 
just read those relevant paragraphs onto the record? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  That is fine.  I think what is important is that 
people must understand … 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What was Lord Hain’s criticism of them and what is 
their response and then he can comment on their response. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  (Indistinct). 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  I think if I may just summarise.  I do not want to put 
words in your mouth Lord Hain and you will correct me where I 
misrepresent your views, but there are several steps or stages.  The 
first is the investigative stage into a suspicious transaction.  The 
second is its disclosure to relevant law enforcement agencies and in 
particular the criticism is that a bank should not remain supine until a 
law enforcement agency comes knocking on their door, but they have 
positive duties in this regard and as I understand what Lord Hain is 
saying is that they failed in these duties of proper investigation, proper 
20 
reporting and putting in place preventative measures.  Is that a fair 
summary Lord Hain? 
LORD HAIN:  That is the correct - that is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  What - what Standard Chartered say in their 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 25 of 119 
 
response to the notice issued to them Chair and I will start with 
paragraph 5. 
“With particular reference to the comments made in 
paragraph 15 of Lord Hain’s written statement I 
completely refute and rebut the suggestion that 
Standard Chartered Bank was in anyway reluctant 
to engage with Lord Hain on this matter.” 
That is a factual matter that Lord Hain can deal with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  The affidavit goes on to say: 
10 
“SCB takes its responsibility to combat financial 
crime very seriously and is fully committed to doing 
business in accordance with local international 
regulatory and legal requirements.” 
And 
it 
is 
in 
particular 
those 
international 
regulatory 
requirements that Lord Hain will refer to later in his evidence Chair.  In 
this case they affidavit continues in paragraph 7. 
“SCB has conducted a thorough investigation into 
all the allegations as part of this investigation.  
SCB has made disclosures to the appropriate 
20 
authorities in a number of jurisdictions.  SCB has 
fully 
discharged 
all 
its 
legal 
and 
regulatory 
obligations wherever they have arisen and wherever 
possible it provided support and assistance to law 
enforcement investigations into the allegations.” 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 26 of 119 
 
And then importantly for our purposes Chair. 
“I confirm SCB’s commitment to working with the 
South 
African 
regulators 
and 
anti-crime 
organisations to combat corruption and financial 
crimes.” 
Further importantly Chair in relation to the evidence.  
Paragraph 9 reads: 
“SCB is only able to disclose information where that 
information is lawfully requested via the appropriate 
legal channels.  SCB’s disclosure of information by 
10 
any 
other 
means 
risks 
breach 
of 
applicable 
regulatory 
and/or 
contractual 
confidential 
obligations to our clients which we cannot ignore.” 
And as I understand Lord Hain it is particularly that which he 
wishes to address.  In other words are the banks entitled to 
remain supine notwithstanding their knowledge and wait for 
the knock on the door from the law enforcement agency and 
then paragraph 10? 
“I understand that SCB - Standard Chartered Bank 
United Arab Emirates has made the necessary 
20 
disclosures in accordance with its local regulatory 
obligations in relation to accounts with apparent 
connections to the Guptas.” 
Again the point there that Lord Hain will address Chair is 
whether in countries with lighter regulatory provisions and 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 27 of 119 
 
demands that is sufficient and then paragraph 11. 
“Standard Chartered BJ does not however have 
access 
to 
the 
SCB 
UAE 
customer 
account 
information nor would be SCBJ be able to provide 
UAE account information to you in response to a 
South African production order.” 
So in fairness Lord Hain that is the position of Standard 
Chartered Bank.  It has now been placed on record fully and 
your comment then is invited. 
LORD HAIN:  Well Chair I have great respect for lawyers in the legal 
10 
profession.  You do an important job, but to be frank this read to me as 
a - as a sort of lawyers smooth talk around culpability here over Estina 
in particular by Standard Chartered Bank.  They make a number of 
points here. 
First this question of client confidentiality which they made to 
me as did H - HSBC.  Bank of Baroda never came to see me.  Although 
through an intermediary they complained that I had been unfair to them.  
To which my answer was well if you want to come to me that is fine by 
me, but this continual thing about client confidentiality. 
Now I understand the principle.  All of us who have bank 
20 
accounts are entitled to have those bank accounts be confidential.  If 
we the confidentiality of those bank accounts we will all expect that and 
have a right to - to do so, but we - we honest citizens.  If you have 
criminals using banks facilities and their accounts to engage in their 
criminality then I do not accept this excuse of client confidentiality. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 28 of 119 
 
That is the first point I want to make and I think the - the 
international banks HSBC, Standard Chartered and Bank of Baroda to 
give three examples are hiding behind this principle to conceal their 
complicity in international criminality and money laundering.  It seems 
to me to be obvious from these examples. 
Then they make this point about - in paragraph 10 of their 
response that the UAE has made - that the bank - their - their banking 
arm in the UAE has made the necessary disclosures.  Well to be frank 
that is where the Estina money went.  So I do not really care whether 
they made the necessary disclosures or not. 
10 
Why was that money not returned to the South African 
taxpayer and hopefully eventually to the Orange Free State very poor 
farmers.  So I do not accept this.  That - that their Dubai bank has 
complied with the local regulations, because clearly criminality went on 
there. 
Laundering and - and robbery was facilitated by Standard 
Chartered and the final point I simply wanted to dispute - dispute is or 
comment upon is this final paragraph of theirs that they say that the 
Johannesburg Standard Chartered Bank.  They call SCBJ does not have 
access to the UAE’s customer account information and nor would they 
20 
be able to provide information in response to a South African order, but 
I just say hang on for a minute here. 
The money left Standard Chartered Johannesburg account.  
The - the Guptas moved it through various concealed ways from that 
account to the Dubai account.  There was a pipeline - a financial 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 29 of 119 
 
pipeline between the two.  They were an international bank.  Then to 
say sorry Gov, nothing to do with me, because they are in another 
jurisdiction and apparently they obey its local regulations. 
Though Dubai’s regulations are notoriously lax and light and 
that is why this sort of money goes through Dubai and other places.  I - 
I just do not accept that kind of evasion and yet it is - it is - time again 
that is what is being said to me by the international banks.  Why do 
they not voluntarily cooperate with this Commission and indeed with the 
regulatory and enforcement authorities? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Lord Hain there - there are a few matters of detail 
that I would like to put to you.  They do not detract I must say from the 
general points that you are making which I will revert to in a moment, 
but our investigative information is that the money left South Africa via 
Standard Bank, First National Bank and Bank of Baroda, but that is a 
matter of detail that we will deal with in evidence in due course and we 
will ask the Char obviously to rely on the original investigative work 
that we have done in order to reach much the same conclusions, but it 
seems that three points emerge from the exchange between yourself 
and Standard Chartered on the one hand and between Standard 
20 
Chartered and the Commission which has just been put to you on the 
other. 
The first is a problem which you address later and that is the 
wall really that stands in the way of transparency and the free flow of 
information.  Protected or built on the foundations of the confidentiality 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 30 of 119 
 
principle.  That is the first issue that they - they raise and the question 
then arises as I understand it in your later recommendations as whether 
notwithstanding 
the 
principle 
of 
confidentiality 
banks 
should 
nevertheless be under a duty - as they are in South Africa - to report 
suspicious transactions and the like, but on an international scale. 
The second issue that is raised here which you also deal with 
in your evidence later is the fact that monies can be transferred to a 
jurisdiction where there are less stringent regulatory requirements and 
that they - these monies therefore are from the point of view of the 
miscreant safer.  Is that the second point? 
10 
LORD HAIN:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And then thirdly it is the apparent stance taken by 
international banks that what happens in one branch in one country is 
not really accessible to the head office in another country.  Is that 
correct? 
LORD HAIN:  That is also correct and we come across another example 
of this in respect of a law firm later in my evidence. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And that in fact is - is much of the debate at least 
at a general level of principle raised by this exchange? 
LORD HAIN:  Yes.  It is Chair.  It is the contradiction between a bank 
20 
say in South Africa having a financial pipeline to its branch in Dubai, 
but once that money has left South Africa claiming it has got no locus 
or responsibility for it.  It is something entirely different though it is the 
same international bank and it has nothing to do with us and we cannot 
be held responsible.  I do not accept that. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 31 of 119 
 
It is one bank.  It is one financial pipeline.  It is electronically 
moved with a digital footprint and they have got to take responsibility.  
Either as a global bank or both ends of it and in - in South Africa - the 
South African branches of these banks concerned they have got to take 
responsibility as well. 
They cannot just say the money has left us.  Nothing to do 
with us.  What happens to it thereafter? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And so there are two issues really that I understand 
you deal with in your submission Lord Hain.  The first is the degree of 
culpability that should be borne by international actors.  In this case 
10 
the banks, but the other is that whether or not the reasons given by the 
banks for their actions are justified or not. 
There are problems and it is those problems that you seek to 
address in your recommendations later.  Is that - do I understand you 
correctly? 
LORD HAIN:  Indeed Chair.  I mean I think the banks have got to take 
full responsibility for monitoring transactions and ensuring that there is 
adequate compliance policies which clearly - and procedures which 
clearly was not the case in the examples I am being given - that I have 
given and they have got to make sure that - that this compliance and 
20 
monitoring happens in all branches and business areas internationally. 
In other words it is not just say a South African bank 
question.  It is also a Dubai and a Hong Kong and a London for that 
matter the same bank concerned.  They have all got to accept their 
interconnected responsibility in an interconnected global financial 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 32 of 119 
 
system. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Chair and then if I may just place on record in 
fairness we have had a response to a 3.3 Notice from HSBC.  I am - I 
am informed that their response predates the particular notice referred 
to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  They have offered cooperation to the Commission 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And that will be pursued by the investigators. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In paragraph 17 Lord Hain you deal with and - and 
that is not to comment on the historical situation that offer - that will be 
dealt with in evidence in due course Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  You are done for now with QQC? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes Chair.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So we go back to the main submission? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  QQA? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes.  Paragraph 17 you deal with another category 
20 
of enabler on the international scale and those are the professional 
enablers? 
LORD HAIN:  Yes Chair.  Perhaps if I could just describe this.  
Professionally enablers are persons or entities that become involved 
whether intentionally or unintentionally in facilitating the “cleaning” of 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 33 of 119 
 
laundered money.  I have put cleaning in quotation marks.  In return for 
a fee. 
So their - their role is to disguise the source, the location and 
ownership of funds.  An examples of professional enablers include 
lawyers, auditors, accountants and estate agents.  Law - lawyers might 
assist by setting up complex corporate structures in a way that I 
described of shell companies. 
Enabling money to move from one country to another country.  
Perhaps the other country where there is low transparency unlike the 
originating country like South Africa where there is more.   
10 
 
So that’s what lawyers do in this.  Accountants might 
incorrectly audit the company’s finances leading to suspicious 
transactions being hidden in the accounts and estate agents might 
receive the laundered money into their client accounts during the 
property purchases concerned without properly checking on the original 
source, so I mean that’s the professional enablers that have been the 
ones alongside the Gupta Brothers for example enabling them to 
continue with their criminality. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   In paragraph 18 you give an example that might be 
instructive to our own law enforcement structures here. 
20 
LORD  HAIN:   Yes Chair this was a United Kingdom example of where 
the solicitors regulatory authority which governs solicitors practices, 
legal practices in the UK, they conducted a review into 59 law firms in 
England and Wales to see whether they were complying with their 
money laundering checks responsibilities and out of that 59 26 of those 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 34 of 119 
 
were ultimately referred for disciplinary processes, so in other words 
nearly half were not complying.    
 
Now if that’s the case in a country which like the UK which 
scores pretty highly on anti-corruption international indices of 
transparency international, for example I think the UK is 11 t h, so it is 
one of the best countries for transparency and anti-corruption 
measures.  Then if that is the case there nearly half the legal firms 
surveyed were not complying with money laundering obligations, 
imagine what it’s like in what professional enablers are up to in 
countries with worse standards of corruption and transparency, the 
10 
mind boggles frankly. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And then you give specific examples in paragraph 
19. 
LORD HAIN:  I do, these were examples of corporates, global 
corporates that assisted the Gupta’s in their looting from the South 
African people, including KPMG, Ayan & Company and Hogan Lovells, 
the International law firm, and what happened was these firms all 
profited while the Gupta’s hid funds stolen from South Africa, funds that 
would otherwise have been spent on essential public services and on 
helping repair the colossal damage caused by apartheid, which is still a 
20 
huge deadweight on the country, so they earned fat profits out of these 
operations but they actually assisted with the looting indirectly, they 
were not personally responsible for the looting but they gave advice 
and assistance in their professional capacities to the Gupta Brothers to 
enable it to continue. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 35 of 119 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Your interactions with Hogan Lovells those I 
understand were with Hogan Lovells International based in the United 
Kingdom? 
LORD HAIN:  Yes, in 2018 Chair I referred Hogan Lovells to the -  
Hogan Lovells UK, because it was the only branch of this international 
law firm that I could so do, to the solicitors regulatory authority for 
whitewashing corruption within the South African Revenue Service and 
asked that it be disbarred from practicing in the United Kingdom for its 
complicity.   The solicitors regulatory authority, and this is another 
example of what you know happens, originally accepted they did have a 
10 
locus to investigate the British end of it because it was an international 
law firm, as they explained to me, but then they accepted Hogan 
Lovells’ UK explanation that actually Hogan Lovells International was 
only international for branding purposes and that the South African 
Hogan Lovells which had been the ones, which had whitewashed 
corruption in the South African Revenue Service with its report which 
simply turned a blind eye to all of the corruption and they got a fee for 
it as well, but the South African arm, it was nothing to do with the 
British arm of it, because it was only a branding kind of link. 
 
Now Hogan Lovells do present themselves as an international 
20 
law firm, so – but for these purposes when they were put on the spot 
they were suddenly not, it was just a branding exercise, and this is an 
example of the sort of sophistry that I am afraid these professional 
enablers resort to, to try to evade their responsibility for complicity. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  I am informed and I don’t know if you are aware 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 36 of 119 
 
that Hogan Lovells South Africa is no longer in existence it is now 
Lawtons Africa, I am not sure of what arrangements were made in the 
dissociation between Hogan Lovells International and local but perhaps 
if it is necessary that will be dealt with at a later stage. 
LORD HAIN:  I understand that to be the case Chair and what I note is 
that unlike for example KPMG and McKinsey who were directly culpable 
in assisting the Gupta’s with their looting Hogan Lovells never accepted 
their responsibility, they flatly denied it and that for me put them in a 
particular as it were conviction box if I could put it this way of 
culpability because the others at least did admit responsibility, maybe 
10 
not sufficiently for – some people might say but they did own up to  
some extent, Hogan Lovells have never owned up, but they have as I 
understand it lost business and have had to dismember their South 
African arm and there we are. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  If one goes to paragraph 21 there you deal with 
KPMG and as I understand it much of the information relevant to their 
activities was the product of – or was at least reported on in an internal 
report, as I understand it. 
LORD HAIN:  That is as I understand it as well, and I have given my 
sources for what I say, I mean they were another example Chair of a 
20 
professional enabler who assisted the Gupta’s through KPMG South 
African division.  They were responsible for auditing various Gupta 
companies for around 15 years, up until March 2016, and during this 
period KPMG flagrantly ignored warnings regarding the integrity and 
the ethics of the Gupta’s and the falsely categorised spending such as 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 37 of 119 
 
a wedding in 2013 as business expenses, whilst earning significant 
fees themselves for performing auditing services.   
 
The fees by the way ultimately paid for by the laundered stolen 
funds, and eventually they did conduct an internal investigation and 
sacked I think eight senior executives, to their credit KPMG had them 
sacked, and they came to see me as well Chair and explained what 
they were doing, and there was no attempt to cover up or evade 
responsibility in the way that Hogan Lovells have consistently done. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And then you deal in paragraph 22 with a third 
example, that has been the subject of investigation by the Nugent 
10 
Commission and you refer to the findings of the Nugent Commission in 
regard to the Boston based consultancy firm Bain? 
LORD HAIN:  Yes I do Chair, they are responsible for coaching the 
head to be, Tom Moyane, the head to be of the South African Revenue 
Service, SARS, a full year before he was appointed Commissioner as I 
understand it under President Zuma’s request, and they were coaching 
him on what he should do to turn the South African Revenue Service 
from one of the most respected tax collecting agencies in the world to 
one that became dysfunctional under Moyane’s leadership and several 
of these coaching sessions apparently took place at Nkandla, the 
20 
private  homestead of former President Zuma, and I have a quote there 
from the Nugent Commission which recommended criminal prosecutions 
against Bain & Co for what was an outrageous form of culpability that 
you know for a global corporate that allegedly maintains high 
international standards in its global operations this was astonishing 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 38 of 119 
 
complicity in criminality. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Then if you go to paragraph 23 you draw some 
conclusions from these examples, or reported examples. 
LORD HAIN:  Yes Chair this is the point about these professional 
services firms that they have access to client data that the regulators 
don’t have, that enforcement authorities don’t have, so they are 
actually best placed to monitor and report and recognise suspicious 
transactions and suspicious customer activities and I think it’s 
incumbent upon them to see their role as global compliance enablers, 
not just professional enablers, they should be doing the jobs that the 
10 
enforcement authorities and the regulators can’t possibly do because 
they don’t have the same access to a customer and account data that 
these corporates do.  They should be the first line of defence against 
criminality and money laundering and state capture and robbery on this 
industrial scale that we saw in South Africa and may still be going on 
for all I know. 
 
They should be the first line of defence and be the ones who 
alert the statutory authorities and yet they haven’t been doing so, and I 
still don’t think they are doing so.  
ADV PRETORIUS:  You deal in paragraph 24 and the paragraphs that 
20 
follow with corporates, do you wish to just take the Chair through those 
observations please? 
LORD HAIN:  I do Chair because quite understandably accusations 
have often been directed, accusations and allegations of corruption at 
for example Government Ministers or ANC politicians or EFF politicians 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 39 of 119 
 
or whoever it might be, or government officials, but actually South 
Africa is a living example where privately owned companies made this 
possible, so it is not just a question of identifying the public officials or 
politicians responsible it is also the complicity of these corporates who 
gained fat fees for doing business with criminals and often gaining 
lucrative contracts for example from the Gupta’s in order to continue 
that, in other words it takes two to tango.   You need corrupt politicians 
or officials on the one side of the State Capture equation but you also 
need if not corrupt then certainly highly unprofessional corporates 
conniving in this criminality on the other side of the equation and this is 
10 
clearly what happened. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  You give an example in paragraph 24. 
LORD HAIN:  I do Chair, this is the example of the UK’s Serious Fraud 
Office engagement with Acacia Mining in December 2018 in relation to 
employees in Tanzania engaging in corruption, this is exactly the sort 
of conduct that in this case the UK Serious Fraud Office was looking 
into but often the enforcement agencies like the Serious Fraud Office in 
the UK are not aware of what’s going on because as I say the 
professional responsibility of the auditors or the lawyers or the 
corporates concerned, the consultants concerned they are not 
20 
discharging their professional responsibilities.  The State Agencies 
can’t be aware of everything that is going on in every business, in 
every bank, in every corporate concerned.  These corporates are 
supposed to abide by high standards of international professional 
conduct and clearly in the South African State Capture saga they did 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 40 of 119 
 
not, they fell well below those standards. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Then in paragraph 25 you refer to the methods used 
by corporates that might facilitate corruption and the exploitation of 
corrupt relationships, you have largely dealt with it, is there anything 
you wish to add?   There is more detail in paragraph 25. 
LORD HAIN:  I think this is – perhaps I will touch on briefly this form of 
rent-seeking as it is called, it is a form of bribery, where the company 
is awarded a private or government contract for an agreed price that is 
often inflated to take into account various bribery payments and it’s 
called in the financial community rent-seeking, without there having 
10 
been a fair bidding process, without actually the companies concerned 
having proved their capability to discharge the responsibilities for 
which they are being contracted and these contracts infected with this 
form of rent-seeking or bribery often really perform properly, and 
sometimes even not performed at all, as we saw in the Estina Dairy 
Farm case for example, and I set out some examples which I think 
some of which are well known to the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Pretorius I think we should take the tea break. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, we will take the tea break now and we will 
20 
resume at half past eleven. 
 
We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 41 of 119 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Thank you Chair.  Lord Hain in paragraphs 26 and 
following you deal with three examples involving corporates.  In 
relation to Transnet there has been substantial evidence in relation to 
the example that you give.  It has been pointed out to me that the 250 
million pounds you refer to there translates to approximately R5 Billion.  
In fact the amount in the evidence has been R5.267 Billion just for 
record purposes.  You then deal with an example of housing in the Free 
State that will be the subject matter of evidence in due course on which 
the Chair can then rely.  And then thirdly you deal with the issue of 
10 
consultants. Some of that evidence has already been given, some has 
yet to be given will be the subject of detailed evidence following 
investigations before the commission.  I am not sure that there is 
anything you wish to add to those examples that you give but if there is 
please do so? 
LORD HAIN:  First of all Chair I need to correct myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
LORD HAIN:  I think it was the Free State rather than the Orange Free 
State of my youth but I apologise for that.  The only point that may be 
worth making here is that many global brand names like SAP and 
20 
McKinsey who shamelessly cooperated and were complicit in this 
looting earned enormous fees and therefore stopped that money scarce 
tax-payers money from providing much needed health education, 
housing and other vital provisions in the country.  And I suppose if I 
may Chair the country is still weighed down by the apartheid legacy of 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 42 of 119 
 
mass unemployment, poverty and deliberate under-skilling under 
apartheid and for those like my parents who were involved in the 
freedom struggle and made sacrifices far less than the leaders of the 
struggle like Nelson Mandela and Walter Sisulu and many others made 
in giving up the best years of their life or many others who were 
assassinated and tortured but I give the example of my parents 
because what other reasons I have been able to I hope help shine a 
bright light on the international dimension.  Because I feel a degree of 
serious pain that the freedom struggles values have been prostituted by 
this terrible saga of state capture and corruption and looting.  And I 
10 
feel that the global corporates that I have mentioned here they are 
responsible too for – for the prostitution of those values.  They have – 
the Nelson Mandela vision that we all fought for has been of integrity 
and morality and social justice and equality that has been shouldered 
aside for this quite shameless looting.   
ADV PRETORIUS:  Alright.  You deal then Lord Hain in paragraph 30 
and following with another international structure at this stage the level 
of states.  Would you just clarify your observations there for the Chair 
please? 
LORD HAIN:  Well so far Chair I have dealt with the private sectors 
20 
complicity in all of this.  And actually governments are complicit as well 
– foreign governments and I think they should take responsibility and 
own up.  Because we live in a world where globalisation has made it 
easier for criminals to distribute tainted funds or stolen funds more 
broadly.  And some of the countries where it ends up are unconnected 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 43 of 119 
 
to the original crime for example in South Africa. But a really complicit 
in it albeit indirectly for allowing their jurisdictions to have these funds 
enter and often be spent.  And so criminals also exploit the differing 
regulatory standards and the lack of will in some jurisdictions.  I think 
for example Dubai and Hong Kong and India at the present time in 
respect of the Gupta’s to locate their assets and launder their funds 
into those jurisdictions.  So my focus in this particular part of the 
evidence is on the states and the governments’ responsibility.  It is not 
just a problem with the private sector as I have described it but also of 
governments.  And you know I think a lot of governments have paid lip 
10 
service including the United Kingdom to curbing financial crime without 
actually doing so.  You know the UK and South Africa have pretty 
strong anti-money laundering regulations but the Gupta’s and others 
have used both countries despite those anti-money laundering 
regulations to launder money on a prodigious scale.  So something has 
gone badly wrong in the international arena and I think that global 
states – states on a global basis need to own up and take responsibility 
and take action and not just make speeches and issue policy papers 
objecting to international crime but actually take the action and so far 
they have not. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In paragraph 30 Lord Hain you refer to the ability 
for corrupt parties to escape really to foreign jurisdictions and you 
mention three characteristics that might exist in those foreign 
jurisdictions in paragraph 30 firstly where regulations or the regulatory 
framework is weaker.  But secondly where regulators are underfunded 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 44 of 119 
 
or themselves for one or other reason less than energetic about 
regulations and thirdly whether – where there might be less 
transparency and less regulation in relation to corporate ownership. 
LORD HAIN:  That is correct Chair all of those three factors are 
apparent in some of these jurisdictions. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And then in paragraph 31 you deal with extradition.  
Perhaps you would like to comment on that? 
LORD HAIN:  Well some of the criminals involved, the Gupta’s are an 
example of this go to countries where there are no extradition 
agreements or where there are extradition agreements Chair.  Those 
10 
are not properly enforced.  So the Gupta’s went to Dubai for instance.  
That is where they reside.  They have a home there, a registered home.  
And that is where they went as I understand it after fleeing South Africa 
early in 2018.  And although there had – there is now an extradition 
agreement between South Africa and Dubai which there was not 
previously they have not been extradited and I would – you know I hope 
that the commission will be able to find out why that is the case.  
Where – has it been a failure at the Pretoria end as it well – as it were 
or the – at the Dubai end.  I suspect it is the Dubai end and we may 
well come back to that Chair. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:  You deal in paragraph 33 with the Hong Kong 
example. 
LORD HAIN:  I do.  The – I think I am right in saying that the head of 
the South African Reserve Bank informed the commission during his 
testimony to you Chair that R52 million was moved from South Africa to 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 45 of 119 
 
Hong Kong via a Gupta owned company called Homix to Morning Star 
International and YKA International Trading Companies which are Hong 
Kong companies.  And other reports have indicated that some of the 
funds laundered in Hong Kong were used to purchase diamonds via a 
company such as Simoni Gems, a Hong Kong company linked to the 
Gupta’s that received funds from South African Gupta companies.  
These funds have not been repatriated at all to South Africa.  Nor as I 
understand it have the Hong Kong authorities taken any public action 
against the Gupta’s.  And I think you know it is incumbent upon Hong 
Kong to actually cooperate in this.  Otherwise it stands accused of 
10 
being culpable in this international criminality.   
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
LORD HAIN:  There were other reports that for example a 100 million 
Dollars of the kickbacks received by the Gupta’s in – on the Transnet 
locomotives example were channelled through HSBC Hong Kong 
accounts of their front companies Tequesta and Regiments Asia.  So 
now we have another example of HSBC in this case being a conduit in – 
in Hong Kong for illicit money laundering.   
ADV PRETORIUS:  You touch on the second of two themes that 
underlie your submission Lord Hain.  The one is prevention.   What are 
20 
the problems of corporates states and other stakeholders in preventing 
what you refer to by way of example in your submission?  But the 
second is recovery and what are the problems that stand in the way of 
rapid and expedited and full thorough recovery?  And if I may just 
observe as I think you have in your paper whether parties are guilty or 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 46 of 119 
 
not or conscious or not of it the problems remain and it is the problems 
that you seek to address in your second part.  Do I understand it 
correctly? 
LORD HAIN:  Chair that is correct.  That if for example the banks 
concerned claim they did not know I find that hard to believe.  But let 
us take that at face value.  HSBC, Standard Chartered Bank, Baroda 
Bank for example.  And if the authorities let us say in Hong Kong and 
Dubai claim they did not know all this was going on – this – this vast 
money laundering and robbery through their own systems in those 
jurisdictions there is still a fundamental problem in the international 
10 
financial system.  It is still a problem that has to be addressed and they 
have to help us address it.  That it is no good saying we did not know. 
There is a question – why did they not know?  For the reasons I 
explained earlier in my evidence and they should have known but it has 
been going on, nobody can dispute that on their watch.  On their 
watch’s banks as corporates and as governments and I mentioned Hong 
Kong and Dubai particularly.  They have never accepted responsibility.  
They have never owned up and yet they stand in my view in a line of – 
a line of complicity in robbery from South Africa on this massive scale. 
And they should accept that responsibility.  If I may Chair since it was 
20 
raised come to the repatriation or recovery of the funds concerned?  
Because it is not going to happen unless the states themselves 
prioritise it.  There regulatory authorities, their enforcement authorities.  
The funds that were looted a lot of which have already been spent and I 
hope to come back to that later in my submission in evidence.  But you 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 47 of 119 
 
will never get those back and those responsible face trial unless there 
is wholehearted and determined cooperation from the governments and 
the corporates concerned.  Because often they are in – they are beyond 
the jurisdictional reach of the South African Enforcement Authorities 
and you know I do not think it is enough to establish legislation and 
such it is admirable legislation such as the UK’s Bribery Act of 2010 or 
South Africa’s own powerful Anti-Corruption Laws.  What you have got 
to also do and this is a key point if I may I would like to stress for your 
consideration?  The enforcement and investigative agencies in the UK 
for example the serious Fraud Office, the National Crime Agency and 
10 
the Financial Conduct Authority those are our principle regulatory and 
enforcement authorities.  In South Africa different ones need to be 
properly resourced.  And if I use you know – if I use – if I use the 
example of the UK here the National Crime Agency asked for 2.7 Billion 
extra resources from the current UK government. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Pounds? 
LORD HAIN:  Sorry 2.7 Billion Pounds and that is billion pounds.  That 
is a massive number of I do not know how many Trillion rand I would 
expect.  They were denied it and actually told off by the British 
government for asking for it in the first place.  And yet they were saying 
20 
this problem of financial crime and money laundering is such – on such 
a gigantic scale that they cannot cope with it with their existing 
resources.  Well if that is the case for a well-resourced you know 
country like the UK, the fifth richest economy in the world if their 
enforcement authorities are under resourced by that margin imagine 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 48 of 119 
 
what the case is in South Africa or other countries which face this – 
which face – you know and have to deal with huge problems of – of 
poverty and unemployment and inequality.   
ADV PRETORIUS:  Perhaps Lord Hain I should just clarify both to 
yourself and to the Chair that where culpability and fault criminality is 
at stake our remarks as a legal team should not be interpreted to mean 
that these will not be fully investigated and dealt with.  But as I 
understand the issues you raising it goes further than that even if there 
is an explanation or a defence or a response as we have seen to 
allegations of criminality.  There is still a further problem and that is 
10 
how these international problems address to prevent this sort of 
occurrence to which you refer happening in the future and to facilitate 
repatriation extradition and the like. 
LORD HAIN:  Yes indeed Chair.  We have got a situation where all the 
states the UK is in the lead on this say they condemn corruption on the 
international stage and yet nobody admits obviously in government to – 
to approving of it.  But it is still a fact that they allow the proceeds of 
crime to be pumped through their economies and I think and then come 
to the remedial steps that I suggest.  I think it is incumbent upon 
governments around the world, my own in the UK should be at the head 
20 
of the queue to accept that they have a responsibility for what 
happened in South Africa.  Just as the global corporates did, the ones 
that I have named that have been well documented.  But governments 
need to as well.  They cannot on the one hand say, we disapprove of 
this when it has been happening and nobody – they cannot dispute that 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 49 of 119 
 
it has been happening on their watch, often in their jurisdictions. They 
must therefore take action or nobody will believe that they really are 
opposed to money laundering and international corruption on the scale 
which we have seen and with South Africa is a sorry example of it. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In paragraphs 34 AND 35 Lord Hain you deal with 
the state’s Dubai and India or United Arab Emirates and India.  Do you 
have anything to add or just to highlight those examples? 
LORD HAIN:  Well I – I list there Chair the address of the Gupta’s 
home in Dubai and nothing is done about that.  It must have been 
purchased by the – the illicit criminal – criminally extracted funds from 
10 
South Africa.  I am also concerned about India because India is a very 
important and respected global power increasingly so and the Gupta’s 
are Indian by birth.  They have a number of family members and 
businesses and properties there.  They have commissioned the building 
of a R200 million Shivadham Temple using the laundered funds and 
appear to be continuing haemorrhage funds at an alarming rate which 
will mean South African authorities can never repatriate them.  For 
example they recently funded a wedding for two of their sons of 
different brother – Gupta brothers reportedly costing R427 million in 
June 2019 just a few months ago.  So that is another R400 million down 
20 
the drain which could have spent on health care or schools or houses in 
– and other real needs in South Africa.  And although I understand the 
Gupta’s have invested – have been investigated by the Indian 
authorities no funds have been repatriated by the Indian authorities 
back to South Africa.  Well I think they should.  I think they should start 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 50 of 119 
 
doing that and not before time before more of it is – is spent and can 
never be repatriated. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  You have touched on the proposals that you 
summarise in paragraph 36 and financing of law enforcement agencies 
and you refer to the United Kingdom example.  You will deal with these 
issues in more detail in the second part to which we are about to come 
now.  But perhaps the example of the UK serious fraud office 
investigation in Tanzania, Tanzania. 
LORD HAIN:  Yes I – we touched upon this Chair earlier on, the 
Tanzanian example and as I mentioned then the serious fraud office did 
10 
investigate Standard Bank PLC’s activities in Tanzania and it led to 7 
million US Dollars being paid in compensation to the government of 
Tanzania and over 25 million US Dollars paid in fines and [indistinct] of 
profits.  So there was in this case penalties – there were in this case 
penalties extracted, fines paid and that is an example of what can be 
done if you had systematic international cooperation into financial 
crime.  Just one example of what could be you know potentially 
hundreds if not thousands more. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  If we may move then to paragraph 38 and part 2 of 
your submission Lord Hain.  You have by way of the examples tabulated 
20 
in your statement highlighted the problems, categories of problems, the 
nature of problems, individual issues that require to be addressed and 
in part 12 you make certain submissions for the consideration of the 
Chair as to how these could be addressed particularly on the 
international stage. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 51 of 119 
 
LORD HAIN:  Yes Chair.  I describe it in paragraph 38 and some may 
wonder why I use this term.  As given that international actors has been 
crucial to this – this corruption, money laundering and state capture it 
could be – the South African case could be used as an opportunity for 
the international community including the businesses and banks 
concerned to learn from the failures that they were responsible for and 
the weaknesses in the global regulatory system to make changes soon 
and to enforce those changes.  So some of the changes that I – in fact 
all of the changes I have suggested.  So this terrible episode could be 
an opportunity but for that to – for that to happen we would – we need 
10 
less warm words and more firm action.  And we have seen plenty of 
warm words including from my own government in the UK and I will 
come to that later on if I may?  But very little firm action. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes.   And as a broad category of approach you 
deal with a need for proactive cooperation in paragraphs 39 that 
appears to be cardinal to your submissions.  Perhaps you should place 
that on record if you would? 
LORD HAIN:  Chair it is indeed.  What I want to see and why I have 
suggested this quite a long list of recommendations for your 
consideration is we should be putting in place a transparent 
20 
international environment where there is proactive cooperation between 
banks, professional enablers, companies and governments and where 
the perpetrators of corruption and money laundering are no longer able 
to – to slink and hide in the shadows.  That clearly is not happening 
now.  It clearly did not happen in the case of the – the state capture of 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 52 of 119 
 
South Africa and it needs to happen from now onwards.  And again I am 
tired of lip service being paid to this including in the UK Parliament 
when I have raised the matter.  Oh yes we totally understand and we 
are very concerned and all these civil service drafted words that 
Minister – Ministers utter no doubt with some sincerity.  But actually 
nothing happens and I want to see something happen as a result of this 
that stops it ever happening again otherwise it will happen again.  
Possibly in South Africa, possibly in another jurisdiction. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Under the rubric then Lord Hain of as you term it 
proactive 
cooperation 
between 
banks, 
professional 
enablers, 
10 
companies and states you deal specifically in paragraphs 40 and 41 
with banks and professional enablers in general terms and then you 
deal with specifics in paragraph 42.  Is there anything you need to add 
perhaps highlight one or two issues that we have spoken about in 
paragraph 40 and 41? 
LORD HAIN:  Just very succinctly I hope Chair to simply say that within 
the private sector, the banks and the professional enablers I mean by 
that the lawyers, the auditors and so on they have the most significant 
role to play in combating international crime.  I have alluded to this 
point earlier on.  But I think it should be a real source of shame for the 
20 
world’s leading economies and banking institutions and professional 
enablers that they have been re – conniving and facilitating these 
corrupt practices.  And by corporates that are headquartered in London, 
in New York, in Delhi and Shanghai for example.  And I just make this 
point too and I feel this myself and I guess you might too Chair that the 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 53 of 119 
 
average honest citizen on modest or medium income has to jump 
through all sorts of hoops and time consuming frustrating bureaucracy 
to open a bank account or to move money just between relatives or you 
know whatever it might be of a legitimate kind.  Booking a holiday, a 
foreign holiday or whatever it might be.  They – we are all put under 
stringent observation and have to jump through stringent multiple hoops 
but then when it comes to money laundering and criminality on this 
huge scale they just – a blind is turned to the Gupta’s and their cronies 
and allies on a gargantuan scale and I just feel that the international 
institutions from governments to banks and corporates really ought to 
10 
answer for this.  Why they have not adopted the same stringent curbs 
and checks and transparency they apply to us as ordinary citizens on 
the criminals and the looters.   
ADV PRETORIUS:  In paragraph 41 Lord Hain you deal with an 
important feature of the modern banking system in fact the modern 
world and that is the digital footprint which is a – in itself a 
technological enabler of the problems you have highlighted.  Do you 
want to deal with that please? 
LORD HAIN:  If I may?  I am not an expert in this field Chair but as I 
understand it all the money that is moved around the world leave a 
20 
digital footprint because that is the way it is moved electronically in a 
digital fashion.  It is not like the old way where you – you know you 
stuffed brown paper bags full of money.  That may have happened and 
may even be a matter for your consideration in the commission but 
broadly speaking the billions that are moved around the world every 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 54 of 119 
 
day are not in brown paper bags stuffed full of cash of various 
currencies.  It is digitally and a footprint is left and therefore I think 
that although I have been highly critical of the HSBC, the Standard 
Chartered, The Bank of Baroda’s and the McKinsey, KPMG, Hogan 
Lovells Bain and Co, SAP and so forth. Actually what I am appealing to 
them now is to actually assist including yourselves if you judge this 
assistance you would encourage as a commission but more particularly 
the enforcement authorities, the governments and the regulatory 
authorities and specifically the South African ones to – to recover the 
money, identify where it went.  Because they can do it.  There is no 
10 
excuse given the digital footprint that it leaves for them not to do it. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Lord Hain in paragraph 42 and following you deal 
with one of the issues raised by you earlier this morning and that is the 
frequency of the problems encountered in understanding who precisely 
owns a particular company be it a shelf company – shell company or 
direct ownership of assets and you make some recommendations in that 
regard.  Do you wish to deal with that please? 
LORD HAIN:  Please.  Yes Chair.  I recommend the creation in South 
Africa of a public register of beneficial owners with the next six months 
and for you to consider that recommendation and the strengthening of 
20 
the audit program of banks and professional enablers due diligence 
responsibilities in South Africa. 
By ultimate beneficial owners I mean and why a register 
would be important, because this would ensure and I refer to - I am not 
sure which document it is - but the - one of those that - that I 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 55 of 119 
 
deposited.  I refer thereto what I mean by this which would be 
transparency.  A UBO Register.  An Ultimate Beneficial Owners 
Register. 
That is to say they person who or the persons who ultimately 
own the entity.  Even if their - as I described it before - their identity is 
shielded through a series of buffer companies in between. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  For record purposes Lord Hain may I refer you to 
the folder QQD. 
LORD HAIN:  Indeed. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Behind the first divider you there have included a 
10 
note on the concept Ultimate Beneficial Owners.  Either for your 
reference or simply to record that that is your note. 
LORD HAIN:  That is my note Chair and it refers in particular to 
paragraph 44, but I think it would be a very useful incredibly useful 
step towards transparency.  In that it - it would ensure transparency 
around ownership in relation to Government contracts specifically.  It 
would also assist in determining whether a company or its owners have 
the appropriate experience to carry out a project which a state arm is 
contracting them for. 
I mean the Commission I would submit need look no further 
20 
than the Estina Dairy Farm example to see that the ultimate owners 
behind the project - the Guptas - had no dairy farm experience at all 
and were plainly inappropriate for the funds allocated for that project 
and up until such - the time that such a register is created could I 
recommend that the Commission consider and the South African 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 56 of 119 
 
Government adopts a policy that it will not engage with companies that 
are unable or unwilling to demonstrate who their ultimate beneficial 
owner is. 
If the companies have nothing to hide then they will have 
nothing to fear in this regard.  So that is something that could happen 
immediately.  A policy as opposed to any statutory regulatory steps that 
would be needed to establish … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, hm. 
LORD HAIN:  A register. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Of course our own Treasury Regulations may 
10 
already require that or something similar and then it is a question of 
enforcement rather than a creation of a new legitimate framework of 
requirements, but that is a matter that we can look in - in more detail.  
The point is that the ultimate beneficial owner of any entity with - with 
which the state does business as it were should be known. 
LORD HAIN:  It should indeed be known and immediately transparent. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
LORD HAIN:  Especially when getting a public contract Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In that same divider - EXHIBIT QQD - Lord Hain in 
the first portion of that exhibit.  You deal with shell companies and you 
20 
deal with the concept of ultimate beneficial owner.  You also deal with 
unexplained wealth orders, but that we can come to in due course. 
LORD HAIN:  Indeed Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And then in paragraph 45 you deal with the auditing 
function and particularly the due diligence auditing. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 57 of 119 
 
LORD HAIN:  I do Chair.  I - I think that and I would recommend that in 
order for - to ensure that banks and professional enablers are held to 
account for their risk assessments of customers and transactions.  I 
recommend that there is a program of auditing and the - it - I 
recommend that the program for auditing the due diligence carried out 
by these entities in South Africa is improved. 
Currently the South African Reserve Bank audits banks on a 
regular basis under the Financial Intelligence Centre Act 2001 and I 
reference that in paragraph 45 and the South African Reserve Bank is 
also responsible.  So banks are - the South African Reserve Bank Act 
10 
of 1989 is also material here and reports on the audits are there - are 
then published and substantial fines imposed on any non-compliance, 
but I would like to make an additional point that given the point we 
have discussed before - the significant role that banks and professional 
enablers played in facilitating State Capture. 
Could I suggest that the Reserve Bank carries out a greater 
number of audits on these entities?  Particularly those that have been 
identified as not complying with anti-money laundering previously and 
this is the crucial point if I may Chair.  These orders - audits should 
take place without notice and a random sample of due diligence files in 
20 
those entities should be reviewed. 
That is not the case at the moment, because that would make 
it difficult for banks and professional auditors to hide - professional 
enablers to hide their compliance failures and then key findings from 
the reviews to the extent that they do not assist criminals trying to - to 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 58 of 119 
 
beat banks controls. 
There should be a root cause’s analysis and overall score 
should be made publically available.  As should personal undertakings 
by senior head quartered management to timelines and funding 
guarantying commitments made by the relevant banks local branch to 
any critical remediation work, because in this way Chair I would 
suggest that the public - the public, business and Government can help 
- be helped to reach decisions about which banks live up to their 
ethical 
claims 
and 
deserve 
increased 
business 
including 
from 
Government, but the important point is unlike what happens at the 
10 
present time when notice is given of these audit visits. 
They - they should take place without notice and obviously 
only review a bit of information.  So that what has been happening I 
think is that the entities concerned including the banks make sure 
understandably that everything is spick and span by the time the knock 
on the door comes from the auditor on the - on the date that they have 
been notified. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  For the record Chair at - at your own instance and 
at the instance of the legal team the whole function of the regulatory 
authorities in relation to financial transactions is the subject matter of 
20 
investigation and the product of that particularly auditing whether that 
takes place privately or as a state function will allow you with respect 
Chair to consider recommendations in that regard. 
You then deal in paragraph 46 Lord Hain with information 
sharing and you refer to certain entities or institutions private and … 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 59 of 119 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  We - we back to his main statement.  Right? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes.  Paragraph 46. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  You refer thereto certain institutions that exist 
internationally and their existence and function maybe instructive for 
the South African experience.  In the bundle QQD behind the second 
divider you have made certain notes in relation to some or all of these 
entities and you refer to them in paragraph 46.  If you could shed some 
light on what say please in paragraph 46 and following? 
LORD HAIN:  Yes Chair.  I do.  This is - these - these are 
10 
recommendations for the - for the South African - South Africa to 
consider and for your Commission Chair to consider in establishing 
bodies that have been established elsewhere including in the United 
Kingdom and have operated quite successfully. 
Perhaps it might be easier, because it is quite complicated.  
That is the reason I submitted this additional note that you have 
referred - that - that Advocate Pretorius has referred to.  If I take for 
example the - the UK’s Joint Money Laundering Steering Group.  Some 
unpronounceable acronym.  JMLS or whatever it is. 
JMLSG.  Joint Money Laundering Steering Group and I 
20 
recommend that South Africa establishes this within the next 12 
months.  If I briefly describe what it is.  It covers policy and good 
practice.  So it consists of all the - the leading UK trade associations in 
the financial services industry. 
The Association for Insurers, the Association for Foreign 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 60 of 119 
 
Banks, UK Finance.  There is a whole list of members that - that you 
could - there is a link in - in the note which could be identified and the 
- the focus is really to spread good practice in banks in countering 
money laundering and give practical assistance in interpreting the UK 
Money Laundering Regulations and it publishes industry guidance and 
regularly reviews the guidance to make changes and additions as 
required and it provides regular updates on various money laundering 
regulations enforce. 
So that is what it is and I - I recommend that that is done to 
allow - what it particularly does is allow you know it allows good 
10 
practice basically and then there is the question of implementing 
legislation to allow voluntary sharing of data between banks where 
there suspicion - suspicion of money laundering. 
I mentioned Chair earlier on this - this obstacle of client 
confidentiality which is always cited as it was by Standard Chartered as 
I addressed earlier on this morning.  It is always cited client 
confidentiality as an obstacle to transparency and sharing of data.  Not 
with the public, but between the banks and I think that we need to 
establish a - a body. 
We need to have legislation that allows that voluntary 
20 
sharing.  We then need to consider the establishment of another body 
which replicates another UK institution.  The Joint Money Laundering 
Intelligence Task Force - JMLIT and that should be done within South - 
in South Africa within the next 12 months if the Commission so 
recommends and JMLIT is a body that is really about enforcement. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 61 of 119 
 
Whereas the Joint Money Laundering Steering Group is about 
policy and good practice recommendations.  This is about enforcement.  
So it is essentially a partnership between law enforcement, the 
Government and the financial sector including the UK agencies, the 
Financial Conduct Authority, the National Crimes Agency, the Serious 
Fraud Office and so and it has got over 40 financial institutions 
including HSBC and JP Morgan and Royal Bank of Scotland and so on 
and its focus is to share public private information regarding money 
laundering and wider economic threats and it allows banks to work with 
law enforcement to detect money laundering threats by sharing - and 
10 
this is crucial - sharing the confidential information that they have as 
separate banking institutions with other banks between each other and 
with the regulators and they can do that under this initiative and clearly 
in the South African State Capture saga that did not happen or it could 
have been spotted earlier and something dealt with it. 
I mean it also improves the financial institutions commitment 
and prioritisation of risks and strengthening bank systems and controls 
and this sort of law enforcement can help establish the comprehensive 
understanding of a case they are investigating because to use a phrase 
- I think a South African phrase. 
20 
They can join the dots between money laundering and money 
laundering attempts at different banks and that is not happening at the 
present time and that was one of the reasons why the Guptas in 
particular were able to get away with - with what they did. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  You will recall Lord Hain that we discussed your 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 62 of 119 
 
concern with time periods which you mentioned in relation to a number 
of the suggestions you make and I understood you to be of the view 
that there is some urgency particularly in relation to the repatriation of 
funds or the recovery of funds. 
LORD HAIN:  Yes.  I mean I think there is some urgency in establishing 
these new bodies - if the Commission so recommends, because we do 
not know whether this is continuing at the moment.  I mean all the 
focus has been on the Gupta brothers and their patron former 
President Zuma, but you know I think people in business and in the 
financial sector in South Africa well placed senior people tell me that 
10 
the problem is continuing amongst others. 
That there could be a tendency and that is for you in South 
Africa to assess rather than me, but there could be a tendency to say 
we deal with the Gupta problem and then we have dealt with the whole 
thing and actually it is just - if I could use the phrase - perhaps the 
largest iceberg in a lake of many icebergs of corrupt practice. 
So I think there is a lot of urgency in - in this and that is why 
I have suggested those - those timeframes.  On the question of asset 
recovery Chair if that is what I am being invited to address at the 
present time.  Is that correct?  I am and I - I refer to this only in - in 
20 
outline in the - in the notes that have been referred to in - in the 
exhibit. 
My concern is that the South African authorities, the 
Government and its agencies are not pursuing asset recovery with the 
urgency that is needed and this money is being spent.  I quoted the 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 63 of 119 
 
example of the wedding by the Gupta sons.  That is a lot of money - 
R400 million. 
That is disappearing and it is being moved around different 
jurisdictions and although you know I think I am not the first to observe 
that the South African enforcement and regulatory authorities - the 
National Prosecuting Authority for example which at last is under good 
leadership are sort of submerged by the pressures and there is a 
capacity issue, but there is also the option of using other means to 
recover these assets and I give the example for - for instance of the 
Nigerian Government. 
10 
It is through civil action in the English Courts by the - the 
private agencies that it has - it has commissioned against Shell, 
against the Italian Oil Company ENI and against the Global Bank JP 
Morgan.  It expects to recover $1.2 billion - American Dollars for the 
Nigerian Government from money which was stolen.  I think mainly in 
the oil sector. 
Now they are using - they are using a method which is that 
the private agencies concerned working for the Nigerian Government 
they cannot do this without the Government’s authorisation are then 
recovering the assets.  They - they do not require any upfront fee.  
20 
They pay a negotiated agreed percentage or amount of what they 
recover and I understand that they have already recovered for the 
Nigerian Government such - something like $US70 million which is 
multiple hundreds of millions of - of Rand already out of the 1.2 billion 
that they are targeting and I - I think the Commission might want to 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 64 of 119 
 
consider that example to as it were jog the - the elbow of the 
Government and the - the enforcement authorities to - to see whether 
this might be an option for them if their own resources - as was the 
case in Nigeria. 
Nigeria is not - is not dealing with the legacy particularly.  
Although there is widespread corruption in the country that is well 
known particularly dealing with the State Capture problem that South 
Africa has faced. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Lord Hain just to get back to your recommendations 
regarding steering groups and information sharing.  You make the point 
10 
in paragraph 49.  It is - it is not an obscure reference that you make 
there to the point.  That whilst based on the digital footprint of records 
in 
financial 
transactions 
each 
institution 
separately 
will 
have 
information. 
It is only when this information is collated by joint action and 
cooperation and information sharing that maximum use can be made of 
this information. 
LORD HAIN:  Indeed Chair.  The - the digital technology which 
facilitates all of these problems is actually deployed through systems 
that the international banks and the professional enablers have and so 
20 
as I described it in paragraph 49.  I think the banks and the 
professional enablers are therefore the first line of defence when it 
comes to corruption and a private/public sector partnership I think is 
integral to reducing financial crime. 
It is not just a question and I would suggest that the 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 65 of 119 
 
Commission focuses on this matter.  It is not just a question for the 
official state regulators or enforcement authorities desperately under 
resourced and with the limited capacity that sadly they have in South 
Africa.  Not least as a result of the - the decease of State Capture. 
They need the - the private sector - the financial sector and 
the professional enablers to come to their assistance.  Share 
information and stop - they must stop hiding behind the confidentiality 
or the limits of their current reporting systems and work collaboratively 
and proactively to share useful data and intelligence on a confidential 
basis of course with South Africa, global and regulators and 
10 
enforcement agencies. 
I think that should be their duty and they clearly have not 
been fulfilling that up to now. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In paragraph 51 Lord Hain you speak of the need 
for information sharing to take place in addition within institutions, 
within banks and within professional enablers and in this context you 
deal with the concept of passporting as you described it there in 
paragraph 51.  Would you explain that to the Chair please? 
LORD HAIN:  Indeed Chair, because these banks and professional 
consolidators - sorry - professional enablers consolidate their data 
20 
across their organisations.  They - they should be doing that.  They are 
not doing that at the moment.  That means information should be 
shared across different product departments and geographical areas 
and then that will help prevent passporting - and I will explain this. 
Whereby criminals gain access to the financial institutions 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 66 of 119 
 
multinational network through a less regulated jurisdictional product 
area.  We touched on this earlier this morning, but I do not believe that 
banks and professional enablers should be allowed to claim ignorance 
of the activities of branches placed in a jurisdiction in a bank’s 
multinational operation where anti-money laundering policies and 
procedures are not as rigorous as for example in South Africa or - or 
Britain. 
I do not think that they should be able to claim ignorance of 
this or where there a kind of peak banking and corporate structures and 
again we need to look no further than the activities of the Bank of 
10 
Baroda.  The South African branch of it.  For example in paragraph 13 
of my submission which we have touched on earlier. 
For example how a local bank branch was exploited to gain - 
here in Johannesburg - was gained - had to gain - exploited to gain 
access to the global bank’s infrastructure.  Perhaps if I - if I just say I 
do not think I have covered this this morning, but if I have perhaps I 
can …(intervenes). 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Not - not in the detail that you … 
LORD HAIN:  The passporting question. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Are dealing with at the moment and perhaps it 
20 
would be instructive.  We have an example of a bank saying that what 
happens in another jurisdiction is at least to a degree inaccessible to 
us and I think that is - if I may say the point that you are making that a 
bank should not be enabled or allowed or permitted or should not at 
least say that that happened in another jurisdiction and therefore it is 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 67 of 119 
 
beyond our control and jurisdiction. 
LORD HAIN:  Yes Chair.  I mean I touched on this earlier in respect of 
my rebuttal of Standard Chartered’s response, because part of that 
response was saying that Johannesburg branch has no locus in Dubai 
with its Dubai branch of the international Standard Chartered Bank.  
Even though the money left the Johannesburg branch into the Dubai 
branch and went through that common pipeline that they share as it 
were - digital share and this - this issue or passporting.  I think that 
they have got to … 
ADV PRETORIUS:  If I may interrupt.  I apologise Lord Hain. 
10 
LORD HAIN:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Chair the note is in the last divider in EXHIBIT 
QQD. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is in QQD? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes.  Behind the last divider Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you. 
LORD HAIN:  I just - I hope Chair if I may ask this.  That my private 
email which is on that is not disclosed when - when this is before the 
Commission in any public ay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  We will delete it assiduously. 
20 
LORD HAIN:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We will take care of that. 
LORD HAIN:  Right, but … 
ADV PRETORIUS:  That is not to detract from the evidence that you are 
giving … 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 68 of 119 
 
LORD HAIN:  No.  No, no, no. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Regarding transparency. 
LORD HAIN:  So - so I am making a plea for banks and professional 
enablers to consolidate their data across their own boundaries and 
organisations and that will prevent this phenomenon of passporting 
whereby criminals gain access to a financial institution’s multinational 
network through a less regulated jurisdictional product area and banks 
and professional enablers should not be allowed to claim ignorance of 
the activities placed - of the activities of branches placed in a 
jurisdiction elsewhere in its multi - multinational operation where 
10 
anti-money laundering policies and procedures are not as rigorous and 
that is exactly what Standard Chartered have done in their response to 
the - to my evidence to the Commission. 
They have said it is nothing to do with us.  Many of the 
services they need are actually complicated and best provided through 
a large or global bank.  For example opening up of offshore trust 
accounts.  So the truth is as I see it this is one international bank and 
instead of the left hand in Johannesburg not knowing or claiming not to 
know what the right hand in Dubai is doing they should be both - accept 
their responsibilities and that clearly is not happening and you know 
20 
what - what happens is that in the case of the Guptas and other 
criminals they do not go to the headquarters of the bank concerned 
which might be - have more stringent compliance procedures where 
they are more experienced or where in the case of London 
headquarters those you know anti-money laundering checks maybe 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 69 of 119 
 
quite good. 
What will happen is a criminal opens a basic account in a 
part of the bank that has not rigorously implemented anti-money 
laundering procedures and where checks for example in a high risk 
country where there is poor infrastructure or poor and use that to 
passport the funds through much more complex banking arrangements 
and because a banking headquarters can say it has relied on its 
subsidiary to perform these anti-money laundering checks and keep 
them up to date and then if anything goes wrong simply blame the local 
bank - the local branch of the bank. 
10 
That is not acceptable as far as I am concerned.  The only 
way to make the global banking system work properly is for banks to 
control internal passporting and share best practice and information 
much more freely also with other banks and with regulators.  I mean 
what is happening here is the criminal is - the criminals are clever. 
They are always ahead of the game and the banks must be 
cleverer still and try to get ahead of the game as well and operate 
much more seamlessly across their - their - between their international 
different global branches in different jurisdictions.  Rather than 
pretending that they are separate.  Even though they are an 
20 
international bank that permits funds to move between their branches. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   And just to go back to your own proposals in the 
submissions, the creation or participation in the institutions that you’ve 
mentioned will facilitate this, not only within financial institutions but 
between financial institutions. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 70 of 119 
 
LORD HAIN:   Indeed that is correct Chair it’s not just within financial 
institutions but between and they just don’t do this enough at the 
present time.  So if we take the Gupta example, the Gupta’s were 
laundering money through Bank of Roda they were separately 
laundering money through HSBC and then thirdly they were laundering 
money through Standard Chartered and given the evidence and it’s 
before you.  They were not talking to each other as far as we know, 
those banks, with this parallel money laundering going on.  If they had 
been then maybe they would have had a mutual system of spotting it 
and doing something about it.  So that’s the point I’m making, 
10 
effectively the Guptas and other criminals are able to just choose a 
bank and then take their illicit funds through its global networks, then 
they go to another bank/branch and do the same thing then they go to 
another bank/branch and do the same thing and the one doesn’t or 
claims it doesn’t know what’s happening in the other and that’s just not 
good enough. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   You refer somewhere in the statement, Lord Hain 
to best practice and I understand that to be a reference to the 
establishment and enforcement of international best practice on an 
international scale. 
20 
LORD HAIN:   Yes I do refer to that Chair and I’ve referred to the Joint 
Money Laundering Intelligence Taskforce [indistinct] because in 
paragraph 55 for example it’s – because it promotes the exchange and 
analysis of information in relation to money laundering and wider 
economic threats, and this is important, since its inception it supported 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 71 of 119 
 
and developed over 500 Law Enforcement investigations and is directly 
contributed to over 130 arrests and the seizure or restraint of over 
46million UK Pounds Sterling, that’s a considerable amount, that’s 
many hundreds of million rand.  So it’s had results and I think that as in 
the UK if South Africa formed such a new body of an appropriate kind in 
the country it should be comprised of both local banks and international 
banks because corruption and money laundering occurs through both, it 
goes out through local banks and the local branches of global banks.  
So they all need to be involved in this new body and if it can be as 
effective as it has in those cases – in the 500 cases of investigations in 
10 
the UK then I’m sure it can be in South Africa as well. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Are you aware of any cross-border cooperation 
between different financial institutions or are there any suggestions 
that you might have in that regard? 
LORD HAIN:   Unless…[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   In other words across national boundaries rather 
than solely within national boundaries. 
LORD HAIN:   Well there is the financial action taskforce which I refer 
to later on in my evidence in paragraph 76 and 77, Chair if that’s what 
being referred to and that’s, I think that’s been carrying out an 
20 
investigation in South Africa at the present time or certainly recently I 
think it’s due to report next year but although it’s a member – it has in 
membership the financial action taskforce if I at this moment take this 
opportunity to just describe it for the benefit of the Commission.  It’s an 
inter-governmental body with 37 members…[intervenes]. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 72 of 119 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:   I must apologise for taking you out of sequence. 
LORD HAIN:   Not at all. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   That FAT it was also referred to in QQD behind the 
second divider on the second page of that section – no on the first 
page of that section under the Head Financial Action Taskforce.  If you 
don’t mind then to deal with it now? 
LORD HAIN:   Chair as I say this is an inter-governmental body with 37 
member countries and two regional organisations and there is a link in 
the note I provided to its membership and its focus is combating money 
laundering, 
terrorist 
financing 
and 
other 
related 
threats 
the 
10 
International Financial System.  It’s a policy making body not an 
enforcement one as such which – it’s objective is to bring to a national 
legislative notice the regulatory and legal reforms that should be 
implemented to keep up with the criminals and the terrorists and it’s 
developed a series of recommendations which are international 
standard recommendations for combating money laundering and the 
financing of terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction and it conducts independent country reviews to provide 
public recommendations and criticisms and they often lead to changes 
or pressure for change in those countries and as I say, it’s conducting a 
20 
inquiry into South Africa at the present time and I don’t know exactly 
next year it’s due to report but it may be worth making contact to see if 
it’s findings and likely recommendations would be of interest to the 
Commission, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   If we may then go back to the text of your 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 73 of 119 
 
statement, Lord Hain, in paragraph 53, you’ve touched on issues raised 
there and you refer in particular to the UK Joint Money Laundering 
Steering Group, you have referred to that. 
LORD HAIN:   Yes I referred to it and described it already, suggested 
that it is also established here Chair in South Africa but the guidance 
that it’s issued is reportedly reduced the significantly – sorry enhance 
the ability of those in the financial sector to comply with the laws and 
regulations because it’s written by those who have an in-depth 
knowledge of how the sector works on the ground.  So because it’s a 
body that involves the financial sector, they have been able to provide 
10 
their expert technical advice and it’s actually been working quite well 
and I also suggest to buttress that, that there’s legislation permitting 
the voluntary sharing of data between banks where there’s a suspicion 
of money laundering and that should be implemented in South Africa as 
I recommend in paragraph 54 as has occurred in other states, for 
example,  the UK’s Criminal Finances Act 2017 introduces voluntary 
information sharing between regulated entities such as banks and 
professional enablers, when they’ve notified the UK’s National Crime 
Agency of a suspicion of money laundering.  So where there didn’t used 
to – it didn’t used to be felt that they could voluntarily share 
20 
information across their entities for the client confidentiality reasons, 
principally this legislation, the 2017 legislation Britain does permit that 
and it permits them to communicate when there’s a suspicion and 
collate relevant data held by the different organisations so they have a 
more comprehensive overall picture of what is going on and that in 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 74 of 119 
 
turn, enables regulators to sort of better allocate resources and make a 
better assessment, a more accurate assessment of what action  needs 
to be taken.   So it seems, it’s early days yet, but it seems to be a 
positive benefit in the UK and it may well be worth South Africa looking 
at as well. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Yes, for the record once again, Lord Hein the 
South African Legislative  Framework does provide for an obligation on 
banks to report to authorities suspicious transactions as they are 
referred to quite what happens once that report has been made is a 
topic that the Chair will be examining in due course but I think the point 
10 
here is that in addition to an obligation that might or might not exist 
upon a bank or other financial institution to report to the authority 
you’re suggesting, am I right, that there be information sharing 
permitted between financial institutions to enhance that reporting 
obligation? 
LORD HAIN:   Indeed Chair that’s voluntary information sharing 
permitted in real time because inevitably the regulatory authorities or 
the enforcement agencies come afterwards and if there was this legally 
sanctioned voluntary sharing information, indeed that it was urged 
under the law that this were done, you might be able to nab these guys 
20 
in the – you know nab this  problem and nib this problem in the bud to 
track down what was happening in time to stop it and prevent the 
looting which we’ve been concerned about here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well with regard to information sharing it seems to 
me that one advantage it would have is that whereas if a client acts is 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 75 of 119 
 
dealing with a particular bank and that bank sees or becomes 
suspicious of a single transaction but not deeply suspicious but they 
have some question marks and then it takes six months before there is 
another suspicious transaction it might take long before that bank says, 
no we need to do something with regard to this client.  We must look 
much more deeper into this, whereas if the same client is using three or 
four banks using this one bank for this suspicious transaction and 
another bank for another suspicious transaction and another bank for 
another suspicious transaction and they all share this information at 
the same time, they could act much more quicker, all of them to say, it 
10 
can’t be that this is innocent, why – what’s happening.  That’s the kind 
of situation which I were- I think probably could be very helpful in 
getting the banks to act much more expeditiously. 
LORD HAIN:   Absolutely Chair that’s precisely the point that there – 
not only would there be, as it were, notification process to the relevant 
agency, statutory agency which I guess happens at the present time but 
sometimes only retrospectively but that this would be a happening in 
real time and it would be enhanced by common sharing of data in 
precisely the way that you’ve described Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:   And of course the question arises as to whether 
such legislation perhaps consideration should be given to making 
information sharing in certain circumstances compulsory rather than 
voluntarily but that’s a matter beyond our...[intervenes]. 
LORD HAIN:   Indeed certainly beyond – well beyond my pay grade that 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 76 of 119 
 
one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I was going to ask you, Lord Hain, whether you 
had a particular reason for choosing that the information sharing 
between banks should be voluntary or whether that’s just what came to 
your mind, whether there was a special reason why you were thinking 
like that, I’m particularly thinking of a suspicious- where a bank is 
suspicious of a transaction or maybe it could be, as you see it, there 
could be a level of suspicion where the sharing of information should 
be voluntary and the more serious or the stronger the suspicion is then 
the more likely that it should be compulsory – the sharing should be 
10 
compulsory, I’m not sure but I wanted to find out whether you had a 
special reason for saying it should be voluntary? 
LORD HAIN:   Well I think Chair that – and it’s a very important point 
that you raise, I think it should be a requirement, a statutory 
requirement to share voluntarily, information.  So that it’s done, my 
point about, in real time because I mean they have, banks, 
international banks, they have monthly or weekly reports to their 
management in relation to their assessments of money laundering any 
risks to that effect.  They do this themselves, you could argue not very 
effectively in this case but they do it themselves so I think they should 
20 
be required to share that with the South African authorities and 
required to voluntarily share it rather than doing it through a sort of 
rigid bureaucratic route with each other, I think that’s the point.  It 
would be a daily, as I see it and I’m not a banker and I’m not an expert 
is this field but a daily automatic requirement that they think right, 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 77 of 119 
 
there’s something I’m a little worried about here I think I’m going to tell 
the neighbour bank just in case there’s bank accounts that they might 
have from the same individuals. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes thank you. 
LORD HAIN:   Perhaps the general point I might make at this stage, 
Chair, which I make in terms in paragraph 56, is I don’t think there’s 
any good reason for foreign banks to be better informed of the financial 
crime risk they present to South Africa, than the South African 
Regulatory and Enforcement Authorities themselves and unless they 
are more transparent and unless they share their information more 
10 
readily they will know of financial crime happening or have suspicions 
about it well before the Regulatory Authorities and that doesn’t seem to 
be right to me. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   You’ve then dealt with, Lord Hain, the issues 
raised in paragraph 55 and 56 unless there’s anything you wish to add 
in that regard perhaps you could explain under the head, Self Policing 
the steps that you think should be considered in that regard? 
LORD HAIN:   I would, if I may Chair, then move to recommendation in 
paragraph 57 where I suggest additional penalties of a statutory kind 
for banks and professional enablers for failure to self monitor through 
20 
the removal or suspension of banking licenses and a senior Manager’s 
regime and I’ll explain what I mean by that.  So in addition to the banks 
and professional enablers sharing date between themselves in the way 
that we discussed, they should make much better use of the data they 
have by systematically, fastidiously even ensuring that it’s utilised to 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 78 of 119 
 
identify potential criminal activity.  They should take proactive 
responsibility for monitoring their inherent standing on the money 
laundering regulations and internal anti-corruption policies rather than 
rely on regulators to oversee and intervene when legislation’s been 
breached and crimes have already been committed.  So for example, in 
paragraph 58 Chair, I mention what I describe as the Bank of Baroda’s 
wilful indifference to the Gupta’s shady dealings, only closing their 
accounts very late in the day after the billions have already been 
laundered through them.  That’s a shameful example of complicity in 
State Capture corruption and criminality and the bank of Baroda, in my 
10 
view, should have been punished for its actions, well it hasn’t been it’s 
sort of got some public opprobrium for it but it hasn’t actually been 
punished, it should be and that’s what I mean by the penalties, 
additional penalties that are needed and I then go on in paragraph 59 
to describe, you know, other changes that might be needed 
when…[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Before we get there, just to refer back to the 
example that we discussed earlier this morning Lord Hain, that perhaps 
it’s too late when the Law Enforcement Agency comes knocking on the 
door that the remedial steps of detection and prevention should be 
20 
compulsory before that. 
LORD HAIN:   Indeed Chair, I mean by the time the regulators and the 
Enforcement Agencies come in and knock on the door, the horse has 
bolted, the money is gone and that’s why I keep coming back to the 
banks and professional enablers both culpability and responsibility here 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 79 of 119 
 
to stop the horse bolting because otherwise they are the ones who have 
enabled it to bolt in that way before anything can be done about it. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   You wanted to deal with paragraph 59 Lord Hain. 
LORD HAIN:   Chair if I may yes, because I also think that to 
encourage the really strict adherence to money laundering regulations 
banks and professional enablers should face additional sanctions on 
both an organisational and individual level in addition to those already 
included in current anti-money laundering legislation.  On an 
organisational level licenses should be immediately stripped from banks 
if they consistently fail to meet anti-money laundering standards 
10 
expected and licenses should be automatically suspended pending 
investigation if it is suspected that they facilitated money laundering or 
corruption.  I think this would act as a powerful deterrent to them not to 
repeat or replicate what happened with the Gupta’s and I should think 
many others. On an individual level, and this is the senior Manager’s 
regime point that I referred to earlier, on an individual level I suggest 
for your consideration the introduction of a senior Manager’s regime 
whereby senior Management is personally responsible for the failures 
of their company over money laundering and corruption.  So it’s not just 
the corporate but it’s the individual managers and punishment should 
20 
include the commission to work for any regulated entity in this field 
such as a bank for example, fines and perhaps even prison for the most 
serious offences.  I think that would encourage management to take a 
much more active role in ensuring that the institution adopts the 
necessary stringent anti-money laundering procedures and policies 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 80 of 119 
 
rather than simply seeing that this is a corporate responsibility which 
may result in a fine on the corporation but actually it’s the individual 
manager whose held to account, could lose their job, could face 
criminal penalties as a result of that corporate failure that they might 
themselves have been responsible for. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   In paragraph 60 and following, Lord Hain, you deal 
with corporates and what perhaps they might consider by way of joint 
cooperation between corporates in order to deal with the issues you’ve 
raised in your submissions and you refer to the extractive industries 
transparency initiative that also is referred to in your notes in Exhibit 
10 
QQD, if I’m correct, it may not be. 
LORD HAIN:   I’m just trying to find it if I may Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   You deal with that on page three behind the first 
divider very briefly but perhaps you should just rely on what you say in 
paragraph 62 which is more explicit. 
LORD HAIN:   Yes, I do deal with it on page three but I think paragraph 
62, Chair is much more detailed.  What I’m recommending here is the 
establishment of standards for good governance based on the 
Extractive Industry’s Transparency Initiative known as EITI.  It’s a 
global standard for good governance of businesses operating, 
20 
particularly in the mining, oil, gas and other extractive industries and it 
promotes greater transparency and accountability amongst industry 
players to combat corruption and money laundering and these 
industries have been notoriously vulnerable to those problems.  So 
those that sign up to it, have to adhere to EITI standards to publically 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 81 of 119 
 
disclose information from the point of extraction right up to how the 
public is benefited.   So it’s a kind of, good practice standard that they 
sign up to and then government companies, civil society expected to 
collaborate and cooperate to promote greater understanding of 
resource management and preventing proper exploitation of resources 
in countries, for example South Africa and so EITI members, for 
instance are required to disclose information on how their sector is 
managed so that there is an understanding of the laws and procedures 
for the award of production licenses and this information should include 
the process for awarding a license information about the recipient of a 
10 
license and any other issues that are relevant to the tender framework.  
The point is the disclosure, this level and type of information makes it 
difficult for licenses to be awarded outside the established framework 
without attracting criticism and challenge from bidders and the public 
but the additional point I make Chair in the following paragraph 63 is 
that it’s clear from the South African State Capture experience to me, 
and I hope more widely accepted that the extractive industry should not 
be the only business areas that are subject to these kinds of codes of 
practice because although they’ve been historically vulnerable to 
corruption they’re not the only ones and as I understand it the 
20 
international communities in the process are considering establishing 
EITI equivalents in other vulnerable business areas that could benefit 
from increased transparency particularly the State procurement 
contracts which have been a big problem in South Africa and I detail 
there, in paragraph 63 the kind of issues that would require a level of 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 82 of 119 
 
visibility around a successful tender party which would make it easier 
for the government or somebody else to better understand who they’re 
doing business with and whether that person poses a financial crime 
risk because, again this problem came up time and time again with the 
Gupta’s.  So I’m suggesting that South Africa joins the EITI initiative as 
a matter of priority and for the Commission to consider that to tackle 
corruption in the extractive industries but more broadly as well rolled 
out to other sectors so that other appropriate business areas are 
subject to those kinds of codes of practice in South Africa as well.  
particularly, if I may say so State owned enterprises where the problem 
10 
is being rife of State Capture. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   In paragraph 65 and following you deal with a new 
issue Lord Hain, perhaps to take us up to the time for the long 
adjournment you wanted to preface what you say in paragraphs 66 and 
67 with a general comment regarding the topics you deal with there. 
LORD HAIN:   Yes, Chair in this section I’m dealing with black 
economic empowerment and I’m very strongly supportive as I imagine 
the Commission would be of the principle of black economic 
empowerment, very strongly supportive as part of the transition from 
the historic discrimination under a white owned and controlled economy 
20 
during apartheid but what is true, I’m afraid, is that there is increased 
protection, I believe necessary in order to ensure that the legitimate 
and very important aims of BEE are not undermined and distorted by 
corrupt manipulation by a few corrupt individuals including the Gupta 
brothers with their bribery and unfortunately in recent history a lot of 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 83 of 119 
 
the contracts or State owned enterprises were awarded to BEE 
enterprises under that label that did not have or intended to obtain the 
requisite capability to perform those contracts satisfactorily nor indeed 
to further the aims of the black economic empowerment movement.   
 
In other words they were perverting the important and valid 
objectives of the BEE movement and policy, government policy which I 
support, they were manipulating and perverting it, so I identified for 
example earlier on in this document in part one the Gupta businesses 
and those related to the Free State that were often claimed to be BEE’s 
but which did not deliver on their promises or empower black 
10 
communities at all, so they were a convenient mechanism for looting 
rather than to further the very important objectives of the BEE policy 
and the communities themselves didn’t benefit as classically in the 
Estina Dairy Farm example which is a kind of flashing lights example of 
this problem. 
 
So I am suggesting that there should be better regulatory 
regulation and promotion of the BEE program beyond the general 
recommendations that I have made in this area for businesses to 
ensure that actually the benefits really do accrue to the people, the 
communities, the black communities that are, as is the intention of the 
20 
policy. 
 
So I think that in addition to the transparency of ownership and 
information sharing issues which we touched upon so far in my 
evidence I think there should be increased transparency around 
whether a black economic empowerment organisational party first of all 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 84 of 119 
 
has a relevant track record in the field concerned, secondly meets 
basic up-skilling  requirements to perform a contract, specifically that 
they do actually hire and train fresh black employees to the number and 
qualifications required to deliver that contract competently and thirdly 
satisfactorily 
perform 
their 
contracts 
against 
key 
performance 
indicators including final sign-off on completion. 
 
The number of employees retained by businesses claiming to 
operate as BEE enterprises should also be carefully recorded, verified 
and disclosed as those that have exploited the BEE initiative usually 
create a shell company, in other words a front company posing as a 
10 
BEE company but actually having very few employees, many fewer than 
will be needed to deliver the contract, solely to win the contract and 
then to loot as they have done, so in other words they are distorting 
and perverting the admirable and vital objectives of BEE and I think 
that additional transparency is needed in the form of also regular public 
updates through the Department of Public Enterprises website and a 
whistle-blowing hotline for the reporting of breaches, and as I say 
perhaps I would conclude this point if I may Chair, obviously to all of us 
I’m sure and to me as well the BEE program is really important for the 
future of South Africa and it shouldn’t be criminally exploited and 
20 
manipulated by the State Capture individuals as they did over a 
protracted period. 
 
There should be greater transparency and accountability to 
ensure that the initiative first of all benefits the people that it was 
designed to benefit, and secondly the South African people are 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 85 of 119 
 
provided with the goods and services promised under a State contract, 
which in many cases under the Gupta’s never happened, and thirdly the 
financial institutions who bank BEE’s are scrutinised what’s going on 
much more effectively. 
 
And in that way the press and local communities could identify, 
if I may describe them as rogue BEE’s so that they can’t move any ill-
gotten rents abroad or passport them out of the country in the way that 
was so consistently done.  It wouldn’t be as easy for them to do it. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   And in that context just one last point Lord Hain 
you raised the issue that we have dealt with and perhaps we will deal 
10 
with again and that is the need to identify true beneficial ownership. 
LORD  HAIN:   Indeed, that is absolutely crucial to all of this, the point 
covered in paragraph 44 and my recommendation for a register and so 
on, it is really, really important in the BEE area as well. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Yes.   Would that be a convenient time for the long 
adjournment? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, let’s take the lunch break and the we will resume 
at five past two. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Thanks Chairman and we will finish today. 
REGISTRAR:   Al rise. 
20 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  I understand that we are back on TV.   
ADV PRETORIUS:  For the moment yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hopefully it will allow us to finish before it interrupts 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 86 of 119 
 
us again. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us proceed.  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Thank you Chair.  Lord Hain we were at paragraph 
69 before the long adjournment where you make some comments in 
relation to states.  You have dealt with some of the issues in that 
paragraph but do you have anything to add? 
LORD HAIN:  Only Chairman that I think it is important that states if 
they want to have good reputations raise their standards on the one 
hand and collaborate more between each other on the other.  Because 
10 
this cannot be done by on state alone whether it is South Africa or any 
other country.  The global financial criminal network is that it is global 
and therefore states have to operate on a global basis cooperating with 
each other and that is not happening frankly to the extent that it – that 
is should do and it needs to because otherwise this – this will continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  You made the point earlier in regard to banks that 
even from a technological point of view criminals might be ahead of the 
game and I take it you making the same point in regard to states within 
national borders? 
LORD HAIN:  I am Chair because it seems to me having looked into 
20 
this prior to submitting my evidence to you that frankly there is a lot of 
policy statements and speeches made about money laundering and 
financial crime. But when it comes to pre-emptive action and ensuring 
that the safeguards are there, the obstruction walls are there to stop all 
of this money laundering and financial crime really we are nowhere so 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 87 of 119 
 
to speak.  We way behind the game most governments in the world and 
certainly in their collaboration.  And there are particular villains 
amongst the different global governments and I think they should be 
exposed and the – have to account for their backtracking and back 
marking on this whole agenda. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  You then deal in paragraph 70 and following with 
the matter of legislation and you make the point in paragraph 71 that 
not only is it important to have legislation in place but to ensure the 
adequate enforcement of that legislation.   
LORD HAIN:  Yes indeed I mean Chair in paragraph 70 I recommend 
10 
the proper utilisation of existing legislation   South Africa does have for 
example good legislation in the Prevention of Combating Corrupt 
Activities 
Act 
2004 
and 
the 
Financial 
Intelligence 
Act 
2001.  
Nevertheless we have had this whole picture of rampant criminality and 
state capture.  So it needs to be properly enforced. There need also to 
be additional measures to hold public officials to account for misusing 
information gathered during an investigation.  Because there needs to 
be a much higher standard of accountability.  And I mention public 
officials here because they should be held criminally liable for misusing 
information gathered during an anti-corruption legislation.  We have 
20 
seen this over recent years I am afraid.  And although such behaviour 
is criminalised in South Africa and on a statutory basis the fact that 
there has been no prosecution of the misuse of information I think is 
probably more to do though that is a matter for the commission with the 
hollowing out or the dysfunctionality of South African Law Enforcement 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 88 of 119 
 
Authorities following state capture then it is necessarily to do with is it 
were the letter of the law.  So I am underlining the point that it is – it is 
not enough simply to place on statute the necessary legislation.  What 
you have to do is follow that up with proper enforcement and holding 
public officials in particular to account.  And then I recommend as well 
the implementation of additional measures to recover the proceeds of 
crime.  For example unexplained wealth orders and if I may I will just 
touch upon that as well as additional funding for regulators.  
Unexplained wealth… 
ADV PRETORIUS:  I am sorry Lord Hain may I just interrupt there.  You 
10 
do deal in the previous paragraph 72 with the importance of the 
functionality of Law Enforcement Agencies. 
LORD HAIN:  Yes.  I have done – dealt with that and that is – that is 
where – you know crucial to what I am saying. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes.  I am sorry I interrupted you, paragraph 73. 
LORD HAIN:  Here I argue for a robust and dynamic set of tools to 
assist regulators with recovering the proceeds of crime Chair.  To do 
that more easily so that they are more able to monitor and investigate 
parties that they suspect have facilitated money laundering or 
corruption.  And I would urge that South Africa reviewed all its anti-
20 
corruption and anti-money laundering measures and reviews the ones 
that have been adopted by other states because I think there is lessons 
to be learnt to hold for regulators to hold criminals to account and 
recover the proceeds of crime.  And I mention the example of the 
United Kingdom’s recently introduced unexplained wealth orders, 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 89 of 119 
 
UWO’s into the regulators task toolbox.  Into their – their powers.  By 
on an altered – unexplained wealth orders I mean these are – people 
have wealth that they cannot explain where they come from because it 
has been laundered or stolen in some way and it has been hidden.  And 
you have – UWO’s have allowed the – the National Crime Agency in 
United Kingdom to seize assets and this is the important point.  If the 
owner cannot prove that they were purchased legitimately rather than 
the regulator having to prove that the owner purchased the assets 
legitimately this can be quite draconian a power if it is misused 
obviously to seize people’s houses and so on.  But I think in this 
10 
context I think it should be looked at by the South African government 
and before hopefully by your commission Chair because if you look for 
example at the – the Sahara Computers instance.  The court files a 
recently shown that 98% of Sahara’s profits and it was I think a Gupta 
owned company ultimately.  98% of its profits came from payments 
made by a bogus IT company a UWO and unexplained wealth order 
source in other words and a UWO would have been a powerful tool in 
seizing the assets that could have been plainly not a purchase as a 
result of that company’s legitimate activities.  So there is home grown 
example here in South Africa under the Gupta sage where they 
20 
manipulated Sahara Computers an associated entity. And if you had 
unexplained wealth orders you could have immediately gone and seized 
those assets if you know attention was drawn to them.  So I think that 
introducing them here in South Africa would be you know a very 
positive – a very positive move.  Let me give you one example 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 90 of 119 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I am sorry Lord Hain talking about unexplained 
wealth in South Africa we talk a lot about lifestyle audits. 
LORD HAIN:  Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would that be the same thing? 
LORD HAIN:    I guess it would. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or unexplained wealth would be wider? 
LORD HAIN:  I guess it would be analogist and certainly worth 
comparing it side by side but I think I am right in saying unexplained 
wealth orders in the UK model are much wider. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
LORD HAIN:  And they – they also have the – they have behind them 
this ability to just seize assets. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
LORD HAIN:  Which I do not think is the case in South Africa but I 
stand to be corrected. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
LORD HAIN:  On – on that point. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Chair I was about to raise that issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Oh you were about to raise it. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  We do have the notion lifestyle audit which is a tool 
20 
that is used by our Revenue Authorities.  I under – to detect tax 
evasion or tax avoidance but I understand you to be talking about a 
power to reside in the hands of Law Enforcement Agencies as opposed 
to only revenue authorities.  The other difference I think you have 
pointed out is that the onus in an unexplained wealth order scenario is 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 91 of 119 
 
for the holder of the unexplained wealth to prove legitimate ownership. 
LORD HAIN:  Yes so the – for example if I have suddenly built a temple 
that – use an example at random and I cannot show how I have been 
able to fund that then that temple could be seized and similarly for a 
company – a property – a commercial property or a property for 
example the Gupta’s home in Dubai.  I think that is the difference.  The 
onus is on you to explain how you purchased this – how you have that 
asset.  Not on the regulatory or the enforcement agency to prove it.  So 
it reverses the burden on proof if you like. And as I say it is pretty 
draconian or could be especially if misused but if properly used it is a 
10 
powerful instrument.  And I give an example of that this regulation, this 
unexplained wealth order regulation was used in the UK by the UK’s 
National Crime Agency and they required the wife of a jailed banker 
who was convicted of embezzling up to 3 Billion Dollars in Azerbaijan 
to explain how she had come to require certain valuable properties and 
assets in England worth over 22 Million Pounds and she could not 
explain that.  So clearly there had been … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
LORD HAIN:  A serious amount of criminal money laundering going on 
there. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  One would assume that the enforcement of these 
orders is subject to regulatory or judicial oversight in any event? 
LORD HAIN:  I would think so.  I mean I am not an authority on them 
but you would expect you cannot have the state just going around willy 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 92 of 119 
 
nilly seizing assets.  I mean that is undermining the rule of law and 
human rights but in the case of criminality, a suspected criminality I 
think it is a powerful instrument and certainly so far in the UK I mean it 
is a relatively recent power I do not think there has been any cries of 
as it were rights infringements it has just been squeals from criminals 
who have been targeted in this fashion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  A third distinctive factor has been pointed out to me 
in relation to any comparison between unexplained wealth orders and 
lifestyle orders and that is that the unexplained wealth order is backed 
10 
by a threat of confiscation of unexplained wealth, do I understand it 
correctly? 
LORD HAIN:  Yes Chair that – that is the case.  They can – there is the 
power to confiscate which is a powerful, powerful power.  It is a robust 
power. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Right. 
LORD HAIN:  And it can be quite brutal on a – on a criminal who has 
got an asset that they cannot account for.  And rightly so in my view 
because people have got away with blue murder quite frankly in this 
whole exercise and continue and do so.   
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And it is more then more therefore than just an 
investigative tool? 
LORD HAIN:  It is definitely more than an investigative tool.  It is an 
enforcement tool and a seizure of assets tool.  So it is – it is a very 
stringent and potentially enormously significant power. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 93 of 119 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In paragraph 74 Lord Hain you talk about funding of 
regulators. 
 
I 
presume 
regulators 
includes 
Law 
Enforcement 
Authorities? 
LORD HAIN:  Indeed Chair.  I think this is an under – under sort of 
recognised question that it is one thing to set up regulators it is 
another thing to give them the statutory underpinning that they need to 
do their jobs.  But it is quite different if they are not resourced properly.  
I touched upon this morning the question of the you know the National 
Crime Agency in the United Kingdom saying it needed an extra 2.7 
billion to do its job which the government refused to give it.  But I do 
10 
think this funding question is crucial and in a country like – I mean the 
truth is the less funding regulators receive the less investigations will 
be – will take place and the less funds recovered and the less criminals 
held to account.  That is simply a statement of the obvious.  And I think 
it is essential to increase funding to regulators and in particular to 
South African regulators and law enforcement agencies to enable them 
to fulfil their functions.  And I realise that in the context of partly 
caused by this or primarily caused by this systematic looting the South 
African Treasury is pretty bare at the moment and public spending is 
under enormous pressure.  And I therefore think that a levy on the 
20 
banks and other entities that have been conduits for this criminal 
financial activity that they should – they should pay a levy towards 
these enforcement and regulatory costs.  Because I is them that are 
responsible ultimately.  It is not you know the South African Anti-
Corruption Agencies that are responsible.  It is the failure of the 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 94 of 119 
 
financial institutions and the professional enablers and he corporates 
concerned as we have – as we have seen. It is their failure to stop this 
financial crime and I think there should be levy on them.  And the 
incentive for – to reduce the costs of law enforcement and regulation 
would be that if they kept their own house in order.  If they cleaned 
their own houses and stop this crime then they would not need – there 
would be the need for extra levies to fund extra budgets for the costs 
incurred by policing this crime and bringing it to – to heel.  So I think a 
levy would be something that I would recommend that the commission 
considered.  Obviously there are complexities to it but I do not see how 
10 
at least in the foreseeable few year how this can be properly done in 
South Africa without extra resourcing since that is almost certainly 
unlikely to come from the Treasury given its limited revenues at the 
moment and other pressing needs.  Then I think the banks should chip 
in and so should other corporate and professional enablers. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Lord Hain you have mentioned the financial action 
task force already.  Apparently South Africa is a member of that body 
and you do so against the background of a statement in paragraph 76 
that states should perhaps strive for increased universality and I 
presume consistency and commonality are other ways of describing it in 
20 
anti-money laundering policies and procedures.  Do you have any 
further comments in that regard? 
LORD HAIN:  Well Chair yes I do. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  But particularly that in the last sentence of 
paragraph 76. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 95 of 119 
 
LORD HAIN:  I do because it is – it is not enough simply to have good 
practice following the financial action task force recommendations let 
us say in South Africa.  It is not enough to do that if here is not 
universality of imposing these standards in all – in all countries.  And I 
think it is essential for example to raise the standard in states where 
financial corruption is endemic.  I think of the United Arab Emirates 
particularly Dubai, China, Hong Kong are examples possibly the 
principle ones.  Then offshore tax havens in the Caribbean and 
elsewhere where the problem arises as well. But these are the big 
giants involved.   And the financial action task force has proposed a set 
10 
of recommendations aimed at preventing, detecting and sanctioning 
money laundering that should be adopted by all states and that should 
underpin national legislation on this issue in every country in the world. 
And I think it would be good if through your commission it was 
considered whether the South African government should appeal to 
other states itself having adopted these standards to do so as well. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In paragraph 78 and following you deal with the 
issue of mutual legal assistance. Be grateful if you would explain that 
concept.  We will Chair be leading independent evidence on this matter 
in due course.   
20 
LORD HAIN:  Yes indeed.  I mean by mutual legal assistance treaties 
these are designed to prevent criminals from escaping justice by 
relocating themselves and their assets and other jurisdictions.  And I 
heard that states worked together to ensure criminals are held to 
account wherever they are in the world I mean the – this seems to me 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 96 of 119 
 
to be absolutely essential and based on the reported locations of the 
funds stolen and laundered from – by the Gupta’s cooperation between 
South Africa, Hong Kong, the United Arab Emirates and India is the 
priority.  So there has got to be much better mutual legal assistance 
arrangements there with those four jurisdictions in order to make 
immediate progress. That is absolutely the priority. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And you talk about mutual legal assistance treaties 
in paragraph 80. 
LORD HAIN:  Yes.  As I explained these are designed to increase 
cooperation, exchange information, get criminals back into their home 
10 
jurisdiction and they can provide a domestic – a domestic their 
enforcement agencies and indeed the state with the information they 
cannot normally get through inter-law enforcement cooperation.  It 
actually needs cooperation between governments and their regulatory 
and enforcement agencies not relying on the courts to – to do it which 
is you know much more bureaucratic, time consuming and much 
clumsier and that is no criticism of the courts it is just in the nature of 
the beast.  And I think the time – the types of consistent – assistance 
that could be requested within a mutual legal assistance treaty includes 
serving proceedings, obtaining special procedural material for example 
20 
records held by banks and accountants and the accountants and 
additionally searching and seizure of evidence and then the freezing or 
confiscation of assets.  So all these things are possible but made much 
more difficult if unachievable unless these treaties are in place. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In paragraph 81 you make further comments Lord 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 97 of 119 
 
Hain in relation to mutual legal assistance treaties and you refer to a 
mutual legal assistance treaty and extradition agreement with Hong 
Kong signed on 20 February 2009 and you state but has yet to be 
submitted to parliament for ratification.  As authority for that you cite in 
a footnote a Department of Justice and Constitutional Development 
document in footnote 46.  Do you perhaps the date of that document 
whether that still is the position? 
LORD HAIN:  I do not I am sorry Chair but I could try to find out and let 
the commission know if that would be of assistance? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  I am reliably informed by Mr [indistinct] that it is 
10 
still the case.   
LORD HAIN:  So that is if – that being the case this is now ten years 
ago Chair.  And Hong Kong is one of the, if I could put it this way dodgy 
jurisdictions which I have repeatedly mentioned.  And I do not know 
what the reason for that is.  President Zuma has been out of – former 
President Zuma has been out of office now for what – nearly two years 
and if that was a – one of the reasons for why it was delayed I do not 
know but there is no reason why it should be delayed any further. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And then you speak in paragraph 81 also of the 
enforcement of such agreements and the utilisation of such agreements 
20 
where they do exist.   
LORD HAIN:  Yes indeed and that is really important.  It is no good 
having it if you not actually enforcing it and – and using it.  For 
example there is one with India but we know the Gupta’s live, have 
weddings, buy temples, have homes in India and yet they have not 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 98 of 119 
 
been returned by the Indian government despite the South African 
authorities wishing to see them back in this country facing justice.  So 
it is no good just having one of these treaties you have actually got to 
implement it. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Then in paragraph 82 Lord Hain and following you 
deal with extradition agreements along the same lines as you have 
dealt with mutual legal assistance treaties.   
LORD HAIN:  Yes I mean like mutual legal assistance treaties Chair 
these are another type of interstate, inter-country mechanisms that can 
be utilised and agreements to hold criminals to account and bring those 
10 
who have fled overseas along with their laundered funds back home to 
justice.  So I think that it is important that those are pursued and that 
those who have – those criminals who have committed for example 
state capture offences in South Africa are prevented from make – of 
committing further offences and their ill-gotten gains are returned.  And 
all governments must ensure that their country does not provide a safe 
haven for the perpetrators of state capture.  Again looking to seek 
refuge beyond the reach of international justice some of the main 
culprits and these names crop up I am afraid Chair time and time again, 
Dubai, Hong Kong and as I mentioned in passing but want to stress now 
20 
tax havens in the Caribbean.  They are also the rogues in this rogues 
gallery of international financial crime.  And that ex – requires the 
express criminalisation of money laundering and other types of 
financial crime as extraditable offences.  Very important extraditable 
offences and agreements between states to extradite persons who 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 99 of 119 
 
commit these offences.  That is absolutely essential. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  You signed a note of caution in paragraph 85 where 
you say that it must be recognised that caution must be exercised in 
relation to states that do not observe the universal declaration of 
human rights and their justice systems. 
LORD HAIN:  Yes I am glad that that has been drawn to my attention 
Chair because you can see abuses of such procedures.  I means it is 
well known for example that the Russian mafia and criminal elements in 
Russia use red notices under Interpol procedures to just slap one on 
individuals willy nilly who then get arrested.  Sometimes embossed 
10 
doing so when they are quite innocent.  And so it is important that it is 
done with some care and that Interpol actually you know do not just act 
on a red notice request willy nilly as they have done repeatedly that is 
well documented and I could send examples of that to you if that were 
something you might be interested in Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  What is a red notice request? 
LORD HAIN:  Well this is – this is basically where an international 
person is – wanted notices essentially. There is another term for it 
which escapes me at the moment but they are ways of Interpol acting 
properly and legitimately to track criminals down who have gone to 
20 
another country and – and they should be supported in that and 
encouraged.  But they have also been abused and there has been a 
series of cases where they have been abused.  So it has got to be done 
you know properly and not abused by as I say Russian criminal 
elements as has been the case.  But there is also a question here 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 100 of 119 
 
which I mentioned the existence of extradition free havens.  And I touch 
upon this in Exhibit QQ.  Because there are a very few countries with … 
ADV PRETORIUS:  It is QQd. 
LORD HAIN:  QQd sorry.  There are very few countries with absolutely 
no extradition treaties but it is quite common for some countries to 
really if ever extradite their own nationals.  France and Russia are 
examples of that.  There are also many, many countries within South 
Africa has not current extradition treaties and where South Africa has 
to proceed using ad-hoc and actually non-enforceable requests and 
which are slow and can allow plenty of time for the criminal concerned 
10 
to evade justice for many years flee to another jurisdiction for example. 
So I think these - this extradition free haven problem is one 
that I think it would be good to - to consider in the context of your - 
your deliberations Chair and perhaps if I can just add briefly the - the 
point in paragraph 86 that it is not good enough just to have extradition 
agreements. 
States must be willing to cooperate and cooperate quickly to 
ensure that criminals are held to account and it - I - I have suggested 
that ad hoc agreements are reached with respect to specific individuals 
responsible for serious financial crime in the interim to speed the 
20 
process up prior to negotiating and putting in - onto statute extradition 
treaties which you know take a bit longer.  Can I …? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Is there anything you wish to add Lord Hain in 
relation to extradition? 
LORD HAIN:  Well there is.  If I may going back to paragraph 84 Chair.  
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 101 of 119 
 
I mean I am particularly concerned with the - the question of the - the 
UAE - the United Arab Emirates and - and specifically Dubai.  As - as 
have been mentioned before the Extradition Agreement and Mutual 
Legal Assistance Treaty between South Africa and the Emirates is a 
positive step forward, but it has taken eight years of negotiations and 
the Guptas are yet to be extradited and they currently free to spend 
their billions reducing any amount that might conceivably be repatriated 
back to South Africa later on and the question is why has this happened 
in Dubai. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe I must just mention Lord Hain that I recently 
10 
had a meeting with the Minister of Justice and I asked about what is 
happening in regard to that issue and he certainly did tell me that there 
were certainly challenges.  I cannot remember the details, but I know 
that I think the following day there was some public statement or there 
was something in the newspapers that the Ministry of Justice had either 
issued or the newspaper said had taken up. 
That was I think roundabout the time when the United States 
announced some action against Gupta linked businesses and the Gupta 
family.  So - so I certainly did raise questions to say what is happening 
and he did say that there were certain challenges, but he did say that 
20 
they were pursuing the matter.  I - I cannot remember the details, but it 
is taking long.  That - that is true.  It is taking long. 
LORD HAIN:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  If I may assist there Chair, because I was there … 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 102 of 119 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes you were in that meeting. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  When that communication was made … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And it mirrors the concern raised by Lord Hain that 
despite efforts the level of cooperation appears to be lacking.  I do not 
want to create an international incident, but that is the fact. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  No.  That is - I think that is true.  Ja. 
LORD HAIN:  And perhaps Chair if I might just briefly add.  The 
question I - I ask in my submission is why is this happening.  It seems 
to 
me 
either 
the 
Government 
under 
the 
rule 
of 
Dubai 
- 
10 
Sheikh Mohammed Bin Rashid Al Maktoum - is wilfully sheltering a 
family that has looted astronomical amounts from South Africa 
taxpayers. 
All the South African authorities do not have the capabilities 
or maybe political will to insist that the Guptas are arrested and 
returned to South Africa to face trial.  I mean it is - it is frankly 
astonishing to me that that has not happened given everybody knows 
where they are. 
So I think the - the Dubai Ruler I think it would be very 
helpful if he accounted publicly for why this has not happened and 
20 
explain whether it is to the Commission or more generally. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Lord Hain before we conclude your evidence as you 
do in paragraphs 87 and 88 of your statement.  You have indicated that 
you wish to deal with a few other issues that are not - not in your 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 103 of 119 
 
statement.  The first of those is the action taken by the US Government 
to impose sanctions on the Gupta family and your response in relation 
to your own Department of the Exchequer in the United Kingdom. 
LORD HAIN:  Yes Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  If I may just - I am sorry to interrupt once more.  
Just refer the Chair to the documentation which appears at tabs 38 and 
39 in Bundle QQB.  That is the second large bundle before you Chair. 
LORD HAIN:  Yes.  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Pages 7-8-9 and 7-9-1.  Tabs 38 and 39.  Do you 
have that? 
10 
LORD HAIN:  I do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you say tab 39? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  38 and then 38. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And 39.  Yes and under 38 what paragraphs or no 
paragraphs?  I thought you are referring to paragraphs.  I thought you 
were referring to paragraphs. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  My apologies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  No.  Tabs. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  Tabs.  Okay. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:  I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  I am at 38. 
LORD HAIN:  So 38 is a - a letter I sent to the British Chancellor the 
Exchequer - the British Finance Minister … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 104 of 119 
 
LORD HAIN:  On 11 October 2019. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
LORD HAIN:  Following the decision by the United States Government 
to impose sanctions on the Gupta business family and one of their 
associates in relation to the subject we are discussing.  The matter of 
corruption and money laundering and I refer there to robbing South 
African taxpayers of over £500 million and I ask specifically that the 
British Government urgently did exactly the same. 
Follow the American lead and I name Rajesh, Atul and Ajay 
are the Gupta brothers concerned and gave their identity numbers 
10 
which were provided to me - to me on a previous occasion and stated 
the address where they live in Dubai and also pointed out that they 
travel including to India and that they seem to do so quite freely and 
asked that - that Britain do exactly the same thing. 
Impose similar sanctions, because of all the reasons we have 
discussed.  The shadowy shell companies.  The lucrative contracts from 
State Owned Enterprises and so on and the important thing about these 
US sanctions is that they forbid all US entities from doing business with 
the family or handling their assets. 
Now that would include banks and include the Bank of Baroda 
20 
by the way.  Even its Indian based and principal operations.  So those - 
those are pretty powerful and forbidding sanctions to cross.  So I was 
asking that the same type of sanctions were introduced in - in - by 
Britain and that they were - and that the Government imposed the same 
ban on UK entities including London based banks like HSBC, Standard 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 105 of 119 
 
Chartered and the Bank of Baroda our - our friends in the banking world 
which had been culpable for all this money laundering and asked that 
the Indian and Dubai - that the British Government request the Indian 
and Dubai authorities to do the same thing and I might have added 
Hong Kong too which I will now and I - I think you know the South 
African President Cyril Ramaphosa has been very clear about leading 
the - the fight against corruption and State Capture and I think he 
needs much more help from countries like Britain as well as other 
countries around the world, because they have been conduit for the 
Guptas to move their criminal millions globally. 
10 
The reply I got Chair which is at EXHIBIT 39 and I think page 
7-9-1.  Frankly … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
LORD HAIN:  Was to put it mildly very, very disappointing.  I received 
this letter on 5 November.  It has not been publicised yet and I placed 
it on the record which I frankly is a weak and pathetic non-reply saying 
no they are not intending to follow the US sanctions precedent.  
Claiming they did not have the same powers in the UK. 
Well if not why not?  Is my question and if I may say so I was 
a Government Minister for 12 years in Britain including seven years in 
20 
the Cabinet.  I recognise this type of civil servant …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Response. 
LORD HAIN:  It is a kind of word designed to give you know warm - 
warm sort of feelings … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 106 of 119 
 
LORD HAIN:  But actually do nothing at all … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
LORD HAIN:  And it is simply not good enough and I think the - the 
British Government should do better.  I have told - I have expressed 
directly to the - to the Minister concerned.  I did not even have a reply 
from the Chancellor himself.  I get a reply from a junior minister in the 
Department for International Development. 
It is an important department, but not as powerful as the - the 
British Treasury to whom I wrote and it is just not good enough and - 
and I think that you know why are there not sanctions being imposed by 
10 
Dubai, India and Hong Kong and then I would like to if I can Chair ask 
the question has the South African Government requested this. 
Has the South African Government requested that the UK and 
other jurisdictions where this money laundering has been documented 
as flowing through … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
LORD HAIN:  And I repeatedly mentioned them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
LORD HAIN:  Why they are not imposing sanctions as well.  I think we 
deserve an answer, because it is not good enough to simply give these 
20 
bland and - and as I say pathetic non replies as I had sadly from my 
own Government.  Sanctions are a powerful tool and we have seen 
them applied elsewhere in the world and they should be applied to the 
Guptas as well in my view. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Lord Hain there were three other matters that you 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 107 of 119 
 
drew to the attention of the legal team that you might still wish to 
mention.  Some of them you have dealt with.  The question of asset 
recovery.  The predominance in the international finance environment 
of new digital methods being ahead of the game. 
You have dealt with that to some extent and the issue of the 
levy on global corporates.  You have mentioned that as well, but if 
there is anything you wish to add in that regard or in any other regard 
please do so. 
LORD HAIN:  Well perhaps Chair just briefly to - to reinforce the points 
that - that had been made earlier.  That I sought to make earlier.  I had 
10 
been struck at how slow action has been from South Africa and I know 
it is emerging from this terrible era of State Capture and the 
institutions have been either dismembered or their capacity undermined 
and I - and the resources are slim. 
I understand all that, but you know it is a fast changing 
environment.  This environment of international crime with the new 
digital opportunities for it and crooks wise up all the time and I think 
that is important that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  And they act fast. 
LORD HAIN:  And the act fast. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  They act fast.  Ja. 
LORD HAIN:  They do indeed and they are doing it all the time through 
cybercrime and all sorts of other new phenomenon or relatively new 
phenomenon.  It changes almost week by week and it is essentially to 
move - essential to move quickly and I understand why due process is 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 108 of 119 
 
needed, but I - I just say as a friendly - a friend of the South African 
Government and particularly its President whom I admire and I think is 
widely respected across the world - is President Ramaphosa. 
 
I just they need to make decisions more quickly and act more 
quickly and I hope that that might be something that your Commission 
could investigate.  I just reinforce the need for the levy on global 
corporate given the lack of resourcing - resources that there are for the 
public purse in South Africa. 
I think that that would be - and I - I wonder to what the follow 
up will be both by the Commission and in any recommendations you 
10 
might make by the Government.  Will - we - we will not have then 
months of consultation on - on what your Commission might 
recommend.  Followed by Parliamentary debate.  Followed by still more 
months of consultation.  Something … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
LORD HAIN:  Beloved of public administrations … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
LORD HAIN:  And I experience this myself as a Government Minister 
very frustrating. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
LORD HAIN:  Endless process going round and round in circles. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
LORD HAIN:  Instead of just immediate action. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
LORD HAIN:  Is what I - I would urge before I perhaps conclude my 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 109 of 119 
 
remarks on paragraphs 87 to 88. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well what - what I can tell you in - in regard to what 
will 
happen 
or 
how 
quickly 
action 
may 
be 
taken 
after 
the 
recommendations of the - or the report of the Commission has been 
presented to the President is that as you would know this Commission 
has its origin in a report of the previous Public Protector and - and in 
her 
remedial 
action 
which 
required 
that 
this 
Commission 
be 
established. 
She had also directed that within 14 days after the report has 
been made available to the President.  The President I think should 
10 
send to Parliament information as to what he would do with regard to 
the recommendations which seems to give an indication that the desire 
was that there should not be a long delay after the report of the 
Commission has been submitted to the President and that was if I recall 
correctly repeated by the High Court in Pretoria when it made an order 
which effectively reflected the remedial action of the Public Protector. 
So there is that obligation on the part of the - of the 
President to make up his mind as soon as possible.  At any rate within 
the time given unless that time is extended by the court to give him 
more time, because it maybe that 14 days after the report might be too 
20 
short when the Commission has sat for a long time listening to 
evidence, but there is no doubt that the idea is that there should not be 
the kind of delay that has been seen in regard to some Commissions 
reports you know. 
Long delays before any action is taken.  So - and I think the 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 110 of 119 
 
President - the current President has committed himself to acting you 
know without delay after the report has been given, but obviously he 
will have to digest the report and get advice and make up his mind what 
his response would be to it before that is made public, but that - that is 
how much I can tell you. 
LORD HAIN:  Well that - that Chair that is - that is encouraging and I 
am grateful for that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
LORD HAIN:  That update which is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
10 
LORD HAIN:  Encouraging indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Quite apart Lord Hain from the will to act which is 
the subject matter of the exchange between you and the Chair now and 
his assurances in that regard.  There is also the other question that you 
raised in your evidence that perhaps should not be lost sight of and 
that is given the sophistication of the international money laundering 
network and the tools at its disposal. 
It is important that South Africa’s own law enforcement 
agencies are equipped to as you put it stay ahead of the game.  Both 
20 
technologically and from a capacity point of view. 
LORD HAIN:  Yes indeed Chair.  That is critically important and it is 
difficult enough for much better resourced and better routed agencies 
in the UK to do this.  Such is the nature of cybercrime and financial 
crime and it is accelerating speed around the world and in South Africa 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 111 of 119 
 
of course you know it is - it is difficult to - to keep up, but somehow it - 
it would be good if that were - if that were possible. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Then … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well - I am sorry Mr Pretorius.  Going back to the 
question we were discussing a few minutes ago.  The one thing which 
could delay - could potentially delay action on the findings and 
recommendations of this Commission might be litigation, because there 
are very many people out there would like what this Commission is 
doing, but there are also very many people out there who do not like 
what this Commission is doing and by the nature of the investigation 
10 
that this Commission is doing and - and if it - if it is to make certain 
findings one cannot almost be sure that certain people would want to 
go to court and that - that could cause some delay, but it may well be 
that for example the President to whom the recommendations would be 
made and the report would be submitted that he might have to make up 
his mind on certain recommendations to say well if there is no court 
challenge about these ones I would want to go ahead and implement 
these, but he might just have to make up his mind about some, because 
it is - it is - I do not think anybody would be surprised if there is a lot of 
litigation.  A right to challenge findings of this Commission. 
20 
LORD HAIN:  Thank - thank you for that - that update Chair.  I - I am 
not sure that is really for me to - to comment on that.  Except I have 
observed with some frustration and I am sure it is not as much 
frustration as you yourself have observed being at such - at such a 
high position in the judicial system. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 112 of 119 
 
The way the courts can somehow be in the process of law 
being used by the bad guys as opposed - as opposed to allowing the 
good guys to - to proceed and establish probity and … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
LORD HAIN:  And integrity in our - in our public administration system. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes.  That raises a number of constitutional issues, 
but perhaps that is a debate for another time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In paragraphs 87 and 88 - paragraph 88 of your 
10 
statement Lord Hain.  You summarise your submissions.  We have 
heard the evidence and perhaps you wish to either summarise or make 
the concluding statement that you do in paragraph 88. 
LORD HAIN:  Well thank you Chair.  I am - I am not sure if this 
appropriate, but could I just say by one of these historic ironies that I 
found myself appearing before you as a Deputy Chief Justice and my 
mother in 1963 in Pretoria was assisted at the trial - at his trial 15 year 
old 
Dikgang Moseneke 
the 
former 
Deputy 
Chief 
Justice 
your 
predecessor. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that is interesting. 
20 
LORD HAIN:  And he - he used to love a bar of chocolate.  So she 
always took him a bar of chocolate every day as well as food and soup 
and so on and it - she - she did not know what became of him and she - 
he did not know who she was.  That she you know - that I was her son 
and that I be active and prominent and so on. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 113 of 119 
 
So I am sure - she is recently died, but I am sure she would 
have loved the - the symmetry of me appearing before you just as she 
had supported your predecessor when he was a young boy and before 
he was dispatched to Robben Island to serve 10 years.  So - apologies 
for that brief interlude, but … 
CHAIRPERSON:  No.  That - that is fine.  Yes. 
LORD HAIN:  My recommendations to the Commission Chair just to 
summarise briefly.  First of all increase transparency around beneficial 
owners of corporate and strengthen the program for auditing and due 
diligence conducted by banks and professional enablers to ensure that 
10 
they fully complying with anti-money laundering legislation policies. 
Secondly, increase the sharing of data between banks and 
professional enablers, between banks and - and the State.  So that 
there is greater visibility around the risk profile of customers and 
transactions. 
 
Thirdly, 
create 
additional 
penalties 
both 
at 
an 
organisational level and at an individual level for banks, their 
management and professional enablers who fail to self-police and act in 
accordance with anti-money laundering legislation and procedures. 
Fourthly, to join the Extractive Industries Transparency 
Initiative - the EITI.  So that there is greater transparency and 
20 
accountability around the operation of those industries and consider 
extending those to other sectors.  Fifthly, increase the transparency 
around the Black Economic Empowerment Program to ensure that the 
legitimate aims of this initiative and important aims are not subverted 
for the personal gain of a minority of criminals. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 114 of 119 
 
Sixthly, ensure proper utilisation of anti-money laundering 
and corruption legislation in existence as well as implementing 
additional legislation to better hold public officials to account and 
assist with the recovery of assets coupled with increased funding for 
the regulators both State funding if possible, but also by private levy - 
private corporation levy banks and so forth. 
Seventh, fully implement all of the financial action task force 
recommendations.  Eight, increase mutual legal assistance between 
States.  Ninth, increase - encourage extradition agreements between 
States and Chair finally can I say that - that making the changes 
10 
needed to combat financial crime, investigate potential corruption and 
repatriation of stolen funds will not be easy. 
However the people of South Africa deserve better than the 
obscene looting and devastation caused by State Capture and I hope 
the recommendation referenced in this report will also be recommended 
and considered by your Commission and then implemented by the 
Government, because I think as a friend of South Africa and as a 
former South African myself prior to my enforced exile a long time ago 
South Africa’s had and still does a corruption near death experience 
and must not - that must not be repeated and must be eradicated if the 
20 
country is to survive and prosper in the future and if the values of the 
freedom struggle are to be realised.  I thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Thank you Lord. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank - thank you very much Lord Hain, but before I 
let you go.  Can I go back with you to the question of lifestyle audits 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 115 of 119 
 
and unexplained wealth?  What do you think of a proposal to the effect 
that as far as possible as part of trying to limit chances of corruption 
and limit the extent of corruption and so on and also as measures 
aimed at helping to pick up indications of corruption. 
What do you think of a proposal that would say one, public 
officials maybe from a certain level, because maybe if it is everybody it 
might be unmanageable practically.  From a certain level upwards 
should only be employed by Government or Government entities if they 
have agreed to undergo a lifestyle audit which must be done regularly. 
Maybe once every two years.  Once every three years or 
10 
whatever the intervals are just to see whether there is anything that 
calls for in - for investigation, but also to say with regard to entities 
and business that want to do business with Government and 
Government entities. 
Directors of those entities or companies that want to do 
business with Government should be prepared if they want their 
company to be considered to agree to lifestyle audits or something of 
that kind.  Have you got any views you would like to share with - with 
me on that and is that something that you may know of in other 
jurisdictions as something that maybe has been tried? 
20 
LORD  HAIN:   Chair I very much applaud the principle and see it as 
complimenting rather than being in some ways sort of contrary to 
unexplained wealth audits, because unexplained wealth audits are of a 
different character.   I think the principle of lifestyle audits for all public 
officials, particularly the senior ones, I am not sure the cleaner would 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 116 of 119 
 
need that, but certainly the CEO or the senior executives would   The 
people likely to be involved in public contract negotiations and so forth 
or giving planning permissions and all those kind of licenses and all 
those kinds of things.  I think that would be a very good thing where 
South Africa could maybe set a bit of a gold standard in this respect, 
and certainly as far as the private sector is concerned or those 
businesses that want to do public work for the government at all levels, 
national, provincial, local, municipal city and so on that they should be 
transparent and that would I think be very valuable indeed. 
 
I mean all of these things obviously it needs to be 
10 
proportionate, because I found in my time with government, and this 
may or may not be relevant to the South African situation, but certainly 
in Britain there was a tendency to once the – and by the way I am a big 
fan of civil servants, I couldn’t have done my job as a government 
minister without you know diligent civil servants supporting me and 
implementing the decisions that I took, but I think there is a tendency 
to become over-bureaucratised and over-process driven where you take 
a principle lifestyle audit for both public officials and for potential 
beneficiaries of public contracts, and you kind of complicate it and put 
bells and whistles on it to the extent that it becomes a – you know a 
20 
super-human achievement to be able to tick all these boxes, you don’t 
want that but you do want to know whether people are having money 
stuffed in their back pockets that they shouldn’t, so I very much 
applaud that proposal from you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.   Yes no thank you, I thought I would just 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 117 of 119 
 
put that to you for your views, you know there is going to come a time 
in the life of the Commission where we will focus on possible 
recommendations and I will hear a lot of submissions from different 
stakeholders and so on, but I thought now that you are here maybe you 
could give me the benefit of your views, thank you very much. 
LORD  HAIN:   No thank you, and if as I indicated earlier if there was 
any specific areas of expertise that you wanted, that I could maybe 
assist on, not necessarily myself but from some of those who helped 
me draw up the solution. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
10 
LORD  HAIN:   And in a sense educated me about the problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
LORD  HAIN:   I will always happy to help. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No thank you very much, thank you very much.  Mr 
Pretorius are you done? 
ADV PRETORIUS:   [Inaudible – mic off] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, well it remains for me once again Lord Hain to 
thank you very much for taking your time to come and share with the 
Commission the evidence that you have shared, what you have 
experienced and what you have gathered in the public domain which I 
20 
think deserves a very close examination by myself.   I will certainly 
look at them, some of the proposals you have made appear to me to be 
quite attractive.    
 
I will hear more and we will hear from people in the industry 
and hear what they have to say but on the face of some of them 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 118 of 119 
 
certainly they appear quite attractive and I thank you for having come 
all the way to assist us, thank you very much. 
LORD  HAIN:   Thank you, as I said at the beginning it’s been a 
privilege and I am grateful to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, thank you very much.  I have no doubt that the 
Commission will look at your offer very closely and where we think we 
could make use of your assistance through other people that we would 
approach you and see if you can continue to assist in whatever way. 
LORD HAIN:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are now excused, thank you very much.   That’s 
the end of proceedings for today? 
ADV PRETORIUS:   For today yes, and I haven’t yet ascertained the 
state of play for tomorrow but we will communicate with you as soon as 
possible. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have been informed that there will be two witnesses 
tomorrow? 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Reverend Frank Chikane will come and give evidence 
20 
tomorrow as well as I think it’s Colonel General Matakata, I may be 
having the title wrong, but I have been assured that she would be 
coming also tomorrow. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So we will start at ten o’clock tomorrow morning. 
18 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 189 
 
Page 119 of 119 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you, we will therefore now adjourn for the 
today, the proceedings are adjourned. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 19 NOVEMBER 2019 
 
