 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
19 JULY 2019 
 
 
 
DAY 136 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 2 of 43 
 
PROCEEDINGS ON 19 JULY 2019 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Pretorius, good morning Mr Zuma, 
good morning everybody.   
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Good morning Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  I just want to say before we proceed that as at this 
stage I do not know what is going to happen as yet.  Last evening I saw 
that in one of the TV channels in the news as six o’clock they 
announced that the former President would continue to give evidence 
this morning and they indicated that this was coming from the 
commission.  I did not know anything about that as at that stage.  I 
10 
have asked for a report as to where that came because I had not been 
informed of anything as to where the discussions that may have taken 
place yesterday were.  About five minutes ago I have been – I was 
given 
some 
correspondence 
that 
was 
exchanged 
between 
the 
commission’s legal team through the acting secretary and the former 
President’s attorney.  I have read those but as to what is going to 
happen I am still going to hear.  I got very little time to read so I hope I 
did not miss anything in the correspondence because we needed to 
start.  But I did not pick up anything that was clear as to what is going 
to happen.  So I just thought before we proceed I needed to make clear 
20 
what I know and what I do not know at this stage.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Chair we have determined as a 
legal team that we are ready to proceed.  There has been no agreement 
to deviate or derogate from any of the rules.  We are quite happy to 
proceed in terms of the rules subject to your directions.  The 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 3 of 43 
 
correspondence received from the other side yesterday pursuant to the 
notice that you gave of an engagement between the various teams from 
the – Mr Mantsha the former President’s attorneys is marked private 
and confidential but I am happy to place on record what the attitude of 
the legal team is in relation to discussions held yesterday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  And in relation to its own 
deliberations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  The first point is that the 
10 
commission’s legal team has and will continue to exercise all the 
powers and perform all the duties of the commission as delegated to 
them contemplated by the act, the regulations and the rules.   
The second point is that we would like to place on record that 
you as Chair of the commission have the discretion to call witness to 
give oral evidence before the commission and that former President 
Zuma responded to an invitation from the Chairperson to appear. 
Regulation 8.1 of our regulations provides that no person 
appearing before the commission may refuse to answer any question on 
any grounds other than those contemplated in Section 34 of the 
20 
Commissions Act. 
Rule 3.2 the rules governing the commission allows a member 
of the commission’s legal team to put questions to a witness which 
include questions aimed at assisting the commission in assessing the 
truthfulness of the evidence of a witness. 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 4 of 43 
 
Indeed that forms part of the duties of the legal team apart 
from any entitlement to that effect. 
The commission’s legal team wishes to place on record that it 
has not made and does not intend to make any concessions in that 
regard.  In other words in relation to the rules and the fair application 
of those rules. 
All witnesses are equally entitled to fair procedures and to 
fairness in the application of procedures.  We wish to point out to that 
former President Zuma has not yet been cross-examined and I use that 
term advisedly because I may revert to it in a moment. 
10 
He is still in the process of being asked questions to illicit his 
full response in detail in respect of the matters raised by the nine 
witnesses whose statements implicating him have been furnished to him 
for the purposes of this weeks’ hearings. 
The process will necessarily at a later stage have to be 
continued well beyond the scope of the matters raised by those 
particular witnesses because there are other witnesses who have dealt 
with matters directly concerning the former President. 
Cross-examination and the need for cross-examination will be 
addressed in terms of the rules when it arises. 
20 
We do not believe and we deny that Mr Zuma’s procedural 
objections, complaints and reservations are valid.  His rights and the 
integrity of the commission will be fully safeguarded by continued 
adherence to the Commissions Act, regulations and rules and there is 
no proposal that the legal team would make to deviate from those 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 5 of 43 
 
provisions.  Indeed we cannot deviate from the act, the regulations and 
the rules.  And accordingly the legal team’s intention is to proceed with 
the hearing subject of course Chair to your direction. 
We are quite willing to undertake as we have done it does not 
need an undertaking because it goes without saying that we will follow 
the rules.  We are obliged to follow the rules.  We cannot enter into any 
arrangement which will derogate or deviate from those rules. 
And importantly we will seek to enforce, follow and apply the 
rules particularly Rule 3.2 which allows us to ask questions to assist 
you Chair to evaluate the truthfulness of any answer given by any 
10 
witness.  We will continue to do so under your direction and that 
direction in the commission not outside of the commission. 
Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Counsel for the former President. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Chair thank you for the opportunity.  I am – 
I am glad that the Chair – well I am puzzles that the Chairperson only 
got the correspondence this morning.  I am puzzled because the 
Chairperson you will recall that the letters I am going to show you I 
took comfort in the fact that the Chairperson said “all letters that come 
to us from the secretariat are from the Chairperson.”  That is what the 
20 
Chairperson said. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes in regard to the ones we were talking about 
certainly. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 6 of 43 
 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Well Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  We – we – I – I suppose you would be with 
me that we correct to assume or to have assume that what we received 
given what the Chairperson said to us on the record whatever the 
reasons were at the time but we correct to assume or to have assumed 
that the letters come from you.  And so the attitude today that we are 
going to tell you is that we assume that what we have got comes from 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Yes 
maybe 
I 
must 
just 
say 
certainly 
the 
10 
correspondence relating to arrangements for Mr Zuma to appear today 
those come from me. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And those I think one or two relating to the request I 
had made for him to submit an affidavit those come from me. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The – anyone of the one or I think there is only one in 
the correspondence I have seen today does not come from me.   
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Well Chair I hope you can give me some 
time to state – I do not know whether to start at the end or at the 
beginning. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Maybe let me start at the end. 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 7 of 43 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  And you will understand that our attitude 
was informed by the fact that when we saw the statement in the media 
of what the commission had decided we were correct to assume that 
the commission had decided.  And so what we came to tell the Chair – 
okay Chair let me allow you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no, no I was not intending to interrupt you but I 
think that part of the reason why I wanted a report as to where this 
thing was coming from to say the commission has said – had said that 
the former President would continue today – part of the reason why I 
10 
have called for a report is precisely because it had nothing to do with 
the me.  I was still waiting to be informed. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As to the outcome of the discussions between the two 
legal teams.  I had not been informed and as I say this morning my 
office phoned me to say there were some letters that had arrived and I 
said well they are too late.  I was about to come to the commission and 
when I arrived here I was given copies of correspondence that seems to 
have been exchanged.  I have not looked at the dates.  I think probably 
from yesterday and maybe today I am not sure but between the two 
20 
legal teams.  But other than that I know nothing. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Thank you Chair.  And Chair can – maybe 
this will make better sense if I proceed.  But I am going to start at the 
end. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 8 of 43 
 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Because it is important for me to be honest 
with you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:   And state right 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Assuming what we assumed why we are 
here today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Chair we are here today to tell you that we 
will take no further part in these proceedings.  That is what we have 
10 
come here to tell you.  But let me go back to tell you why.  You will 
recall that on Monday I expressed my reservations that a commission 
which is a creature of statute which has set out ground rules, writes a 
letter on the 7 April I think – of June to say, we are calling your client 
in terms of no rules.   
We expressed our reservations because this commission at all 
times has to comply with its ground rules in order to secure – I mean to 
protect its own integrity but the integrity of witnesses.  And we had our 
own reservations about a creature of statute saying I am calling you but 
in terms of no rules, just come.  Because we were anticipating an 
20 
impasse like this. 
Now of course my learned friend has stood up now when we 
were called in terms of no rules to invoke rules – to invoke rules. 
Well let me start with the letter yesterday.  I did not know that 
you were not appraised.  You will – you will appreciate this Chair.  This 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 9 of 43 
 
commission and its evidence leaders you are the custodians of the 
proceeding, of what can happen.  So we did the reasonable thing 
yesterday.  I had a call with Mr Pretorius but I will not talk about the 
call.  And I said to him we going to give you a letter and the letter I 
would like to read this letters at tedious at this is going to be because 
it is important for us to know that a crisis has been created here 
because of not really knowing what the evidence – what rules the 
evidence leaders are following or what the commission is following. 
We wrote to the legal team and we said to them:  
“As directed by the Chairperson we have indeed 
10 
considered our client’s position in respect of his 
engagement with and participation in the further 
proceedings of the commission.  We therefore 
address this letter to you to record our client’s 
position which is informed by his own experience of 
the 
commission 
having 
presented 
him 
at 
the 
commission’s invitation which was described by the 
commission as a courtesy. Our client’s misgivings 
about how the commission approached him are 
recorded in the correspondence exchanged between 
20 
the 
commission 
and 
ourselves. 
 
Despite 
the 
reservations set out in our correspondence our client 
out of respect for the citizens of this country and the 
commission felt it was necessary to honour the 
invitation.  These reservations were repeated by our 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 10 of 43 
 
counsel during the proceedings on 15 July 2019 
when our client appeared before the commission.  On 
the second day our client personally and through his 
– through our counsel raised several objections to 
the manner in which he was invited and treated.  In 
fact his reservations were fortified when he was 
subjected to relentless cross-examination.  This was 
despite the undertaking that he would not be cross-
examined.  We hold a strong view that it is the 
commission that must assure our client that it is still 
10 
capable of curing what we view as serious procedural 
deficiencies.  Kindly revert to us with a proposal on 
how our client’s serious complaints and reservations 
can still be remedied to safeguard the rights of our 
client and the integrity of the commission.” 
 
Chair I called this letter reasonable because we – we 
understood that it is not us at that point who could have said, do this, 
do that, do that because the commission came to us.  We were 
expecting a letter that sets out how this could be done as directed by 
the Chairperson.   
20 
 
And of course we get a letter which is I must describe it as 
cheeky.  But it is fine.  This is – this is some sort of quasi litigation.  
We accept that.  And it says it is the first response to our letter.   
“We acknowledge receipt of your letter of today 18 
July 2019.  The commission’s legal team continues to 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 11 of 43 
 
assert 
all 
the 
powers 
of 
the 
commission 
contemplated 
by 
the 
Commissions 
Act, 
the 
regulations and the rules.  We back to the rules.  The 
Chairperson of the commission has the discretion to 
call witnesses to give oral evidence before the 
commission.  Former President Zuma responded to 
an invitation from the Chairperson to appear.  
Regulation 8.1 provides that no person appearing 
before the commission may refuse to answer any 
question 
on 
any 
grounds 
other 
than 
those 
10 
contemplated in Section 34 of the Commissions Act.  
Rule 3.2 allows a member of the commission’s legal 
team to put questions to a witness which include 
questioned aimed at assisting the commission in 
assessing the truthfulness of the evidence of a 
witness.  Indeed that forms part of the duties of the 
legal team.  The commission’s legal team has not 
made and does not intend to make any concessions 
in this regard.  All witnesses are equally entitled to 
fair procedures and to fairness in the application of 
20 
procedures.  Former President Zuma has not yet 
been cross-examined.  He is still in the process of 
being asked questions to illicit his full response in 
detail in respect of the matters.  All the matters 
raised by the nine witnesses.” 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 12 of 43 
 
 
I am emphasising nine because I am going to come back to 
this nine witnesses because there is another letter which shows that 
the left hand does not know what the right hand is doing.   
“Raised 
by 
nine 
witnesses 
whose 
statements 
implicating him have been furnished to him for 
purposes of this weeks’ hearing.  The process will 
necessarily have to be continued well beyond the 
scope of the matters raised by these particular 
witnesses.  The need for cross-examination will be 
addressed in terms of rules when it arises.  It is 
10 
denied 
that 
Mr 
Zuma’s 
procedural 
objections, 
complaints and reservations are valid.  His rights and 
the 
integrity 
of 
the 
commission 
will 
be 
fully 
safeguarded by the continued adherence to the 
Commissions Act, Regulations and Rules.  No 
proposal to deviate from these provisions will be 
forthcoming.  Accordingly the legal team’s intention 
is to proceed with the hearing tomorrow.” 
 
Chair we approached the commission as directed by you, the 
legal team.  We say you the custodians please tell us how we – cure 
20 
how we came here, how we being treated and how we can move forward 
and this is what we get.  But I am going to take this when I said nine 
witnesses Chair those nine witnesses in terms of which my client has 
been brought here.  Chair I am like you I may be getting 
correspondence I did not know.  No it is not.  It is not.  Let me read 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 13 of 43 
 
those nine witnesses to you in terms of which he was invited, in terms 
of no rules as a courtesy. 
 
It is Themba Maseko, it is Ms Vytjie Mentor, It is Mr Nhlanhla 
Nene, it is Mr Pravin Gordhan, it is Ms Barbara Hogan, It is Mr Ngoako 
Ramathlodi, it is Advocate Sam Muofhe, Mr Fikele Mbalula, Mr Angelo 
Agrizzi.  Right I want to focus on Mr Angelo Agrizzi. 
 
To 
demonstrate 
Chair 
when 
I 
said 
I 
was 
not 
being 
disrespectful.  We may have expressed this to you that basically our 
client from the beginning was treated as someone who must come and 
answer from the beginning as someone who is accused.  And we even 
10 
asked well you surround you get witnesses as we – I do not think it is a 
– I think it is a public secret now that everyone who came, who was 
selected from government has a grievance against him literally.  Had 
something to say about him and he is a head of state.  We said to you 
Chair and Mr Pretorius our client sat waiting to be treated just like you 
treated Mr Gordhan.  Just like you treated Mr Nene.  Just like all of 
those witnesses because you have not decided who is wrong and who 
is – who is at fault because this animal called corruption is a morphis.  
We do not know who is actually corrupt we are investigating it.  And in 
order for the commission to avoid being part of what I think would be 
20 
the biggest or well in manipulation by assuming there are people who 
are innocent and others who are guilty before you investigate.  We 
proposed that witnesses must be called accorded the same respect 
right at the beginning and maybe as you speak to them you get the 
facts that direct you – that well we spoke to them at the beginning but 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 14 of 43 
 
this one is a scum.  Or this one is implicated.  This one is guilty.  Well 
here is another letter.  While we are dealing my client must deal with 
Mr Agrizzi here as he is standing here.  While we talking to you Chair 
on Wednesday trying to find a solution you write this letter to us or the 
commission writes this letter to us on the 17 July Wednesday as we are 
trying to find the solution.  I am going to read it. 
“Dear Mr Zuma.  You were implicated during the 
testimony 
of 
Mr 
Angelo 
Agrizzi 
before 
the 
Commission of Inquiry into allegations of state 
capture, corruption and fraud in the public sector 
10 
including organs of state.  A notice in terms of Rule 
3.3 of the Rules of the Commission was subsequently 
sent to you.  We have not received an application 
from you to cross-examine Mr Agrizzi or your 
response to the allegations made by Mr Agrizzi which 
implicates you.  Therefore we require to meet with 
you.  He is already sitting here.  We require to meet 
with you with the purpose to obtain your written 
explanation in a statement form in response to the 
allegations against you.  Lastly you may provide us 
20 
with your own written statement under oath which 
may be made with the assistance of your legal 
advisor if any.  Alternatively we will assist you with 
compiling your statement at a time and place 
convenient to you.” 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 15 of 43 
 
 
Chair quite frankly this is a joke.  That a witness is called and 
placed here in terms of a particular regime which is no rules we just a 
courtesy.  Put yourself in his shoes.  He is going to be asked about Mr 
Agrizzi in terms of your invitation sitting here.  He is going to engage in 
this exercise which we have submitted should have been the approach 
to each and every witness because this commission Chair, this 
commission – forget the journalists, forget everyone outside this 
commission does not know who is guilty.  It is trying to find out.  And I 
raised this on Monday that a legal process must be cleansed of 
prejudices that comes from outside.  Because witnesses must have 
10 
faith in our law and our judges and our systems that when they come 
here they have come here to assist the process but not to be 
persecuted the same way they are persecuted outside.  We therefore 
Chair submit to you that there is something irrational about a parallel 
approach to the witness about the same – well the same witness that 
he must deal with.  Therefore we can Chair – I am at the end where I 
started because we assume as you told us that these letters come from 
you and we assume that you had made this ruling and nothing was done 
behind your back.  We have come to tell you Chair that because of this 
and the reservations we have raised and our experience in this rule 
20 
that Mr – my client has instructed me that he will take no further part in 
these proceedings.  He respected you, he still does, he respects this 
commission but the commission does not seem to know its ground rules 
and for that reason we came here to tell you that we want to explore 
the option of going to our courts to challenge what we think is your 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 16 of 43 
 
decision but you have told us it is not.  In any event I have an ethical 
duty myself.  I believe that a client, a witness like any witness must be 
treated fairly and at this point I am not certain that I will be doing my 
ethical duties if I proceeded in these proceedings.  I think Chair I am 
imploring you I think there is something wrong not with you, not with 
any particular person.  I am pleading with you Sir to really, really check 
whether your process has not become a political process where the left 
hand does not know what the right hand is doing. 
 
Chair can I just finalise this point? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Is that I think I must make this point 
delicately and I have made it to you in chambers that whatever people 
say – are going to say about why my client came here, it was his 
decision and we agreed with it.  He thought and he still respects judges 
and he thought it would be proper to come here whatever his 
reservations because he did not want a situation where his conduct is 
seen as conduct that is defying the Chair.  But Chair as you know you 
are a human being this process is a process of human beings.  It is not 
infallible.  It is not personal when I say to you we are now at the point 
where we want to take the conduct of this commission in respect of our 
20 
client and what we think are irreparable damages to how he – he can 
conduct himself here and it has serious implications for him and I 
cannot bring a client here when this commission and the world believe I 
must just walk him into Kgosi Mampuru prison without a process.  
Thank you. 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 17 of 43 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are done? 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  I am done Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I am going to let Mr Pretorius respond and then 
I take it from there.  Thank you Mr Sikhakhane. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Thank you Chair. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  The first issue 
raised was the correspondence and the letter sent on behalf of the 
legal team to the representatives of the former President yesterday.  It 
was clear from both the text of the letter that the sentiments therein 
expressed were not your Chair were subject to your direction ultimately 
10 
but were the sentiments and views of the legal team.  
 
Secondly they were part of the engagement announced by you 
when we adjourned on Wednesday.  So it is clear in the context of an 
engagement between the two legal teams that that letter both in 
process and in its context and in its wording came from the legal team.  
But leave that aside not much turns on that ultimately.   
We note the statement that the former President will take no 
further part in the proceedings but we need to clarify a number of 
issues in response to the reasons given by my learned friend for that.  
When you as Chair said that you invited the former President to come 
20 
to the Commission the topics on which the invitation was based and the 
invitation to give evidence was detailed in those letters. 
There was no lack of clarity as to the purpose of the 
invitation and the implications for the topics which would form the basis 
of questioning.  That was made very clear.  It is on record Chair.  What 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 18 of 43 
 
you did make very clear is that you were not using the powers in the 
Rules to compel the President but that does not mean to say you have 
no power to invite. 
In fact obviously you do and you did and that invitation was 
accepted.  So there can be no quarrel about but once a person appears 
before the Commission whether by virtue of an agreement or whether 
by virtue of the compulsory powers that the Commission may exercise 
and you in particular Chair may exercise.  Certain obligations arise and 
I may just refer for example to Regulation 8.1 which says that: 
“No person appearing before the Commission …” 
10 
And the former President is appearing before the Commission. 
“…may refuse to answer any question on any 
grounds other than those contemplated in Section 
2.4 of the Commissions Act.” 
That relates to the well-known ground of privilege.  Chair 
obviously that must be read in terms of the constitutional rights that a 
person appearing before the Commission must have but that is another 
matter.  So once a person comes before the Commission however that 
may happen compulsion or response to an invitation and voluntarily 
which is the case here certain duties and obligations arise. 
20 
One of those is the duty of the legal team to perform its 
functions in terms of its mandate.  Its mandate is created by the Act, 
the Regulation, the Rules and the Terms of Reference.  That is the 
legal framework which binds the Commission.  We cannot enter into any 
arrangement to favour and this is what is being asked for Mr Zuma and 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 19 of 43 
 
his legal team are in effect asking to be excused from the application of 
the Rules and Rule 3.2 here is significant. 
It is not only incumbent upon us to ask questions to assist 
you to establish the truthfulness of any evidence.  It is part of the 
mandate.  We have the power to do so and we have the duty to do so 
and we cannot derogate from that in any private arrangement to soften 
what happens here and if the questions are detailed and if the 
questions are difficult and if the questions involve trying to remember 
events some time ago so be it. 
Not one of the questions that we have asked have gone 
10 
beyond the Terms of Reference, have gone beyond the bounds of the 
limits placed in the correspondence, the invitation and acceptance and 
have gone beyond what was – what is enjoined upon us in terms of the 
Rules.  Chair I want to say just something about the so called promise 
or undertaking not to cross-examine but before I get there I must just 
highlight something that appears from the correspondence. 
The premise of the letter which I can now refer to because 
the confidentiality has been lifted the premise is that and I refer to 
paragraph 6: 
“On the second day our client …” 
20 
That is the former President. 
“…personally and throughout counsel raised several 
objections to the manner in which he was invited 
and treated.  In fact his reservations were too 
fortified when he was subjected to relentless 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 20 of 43 
 
cross-examination.” 
I am not sure I understand what that term means.  It is not 
specified.  No particular question is referred to nor any particular line 
of questioning.  It goes onto say: 
“This was despite the undertaking that he would not 
be cross-examined.  We hold a strong view that it is 
the Commission that must assure our client that it 
is still capable of curing what we view as serious 
procedural difficulties.” 
The premise then of the complaint raised is firstly that there 
10 
has been a breach of the Rules procedural deficiencies.  Now it is not 
up to a party ex parte to determine that there has been a breach of 
Rules and then see that as a final determination of the issues at stake.  
The Rules are always subject to your decision Chair and then the 
decision of the Court. 
A person cannot stand on a platform outside here and say the 
Rules have been breached therefore we are entitled to do something.  
That is not the way our law works.  Our response – well the second 
premise is that there has been relentless cross-examination.  Neither of 
those premises is correct.  Our response however is we will follow the 
20 
Act and the Rules to the letter and that Chair we invite you as you will 
no doubt you do not need our invitation and that has been clear from 
the proceedings today you will enforce the Rules. 
You will interpret and apply and you will do so fairly and you 
enforce the Rules.  So insofar as the former President and the legal 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 21 of 43 
 
representatives require an undertaking from us.  We do not need to 
give an undertaking but we are bound by the Rules and we will follow 
the Rules.  An undertaking is completely superfluous but if they want 
an undertaking they can have it. 
The invitation could not be accepted to find any solution 
which would derogate from the strict letter of the Rules.  Firstly 
because that would be a concession that we have not abided by the 
Rules and we have and secondly, it would indicate a willingness to 
depart from the letter of the Regulations and Rules which we cannot do 
and which we will not do. 
10 
In 
relation 
to 
the 
particular 
issue 
of 
so 
called 
cross-examination.  It needs a little detailed response here I am afraid 
Chair.  In regard to that we are quite happy to abide by the Rules.  
Should there be an objection to any particular question that can come 
before you and you can make your determination.  Rule 3.2 is clearly 
designed to allow and oblige the evidence leaders to comply with the 
investigative and inquisitorial mandate. 
We are not here to prove a case and I will come to that in a 
moment in a sense of a pleaded civil suit or a criminal charge.  That is 
not our job.  What we are here to do is to investigate in an inquisitorial 
20 
fashion and to ask questions in relation to topics of which the former 
President has been made aware to ask questions which will assist you 
at the end of the day to determine what is true and what is not true. 
The fact that those questions maybe question canvassing a 
long period of time that they are questions of detail does not preclude 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 22 of 43 
 
us nor does it relieve us of the obligation to ask questions which may 
otherwise be regarded as difficult questions.  The so called undertaking 
not to cross-examine must be placed in its proper context.  There has 
never been an undertaking not to ask questions to determine the 
truthfulness of evidence.  You yourself in your opening Chair on 15 July 
said: 
“It is important to emphasise that the evidence 
leaders are mandated to seek to establish what the 
facts are through questions that they ask and not to 
prove any particular allegation against anybody but 
10 
they are required to assist me as the Chairperson 
of the Commission buy asking questions including 
those that will seek to establish what the truth is.” 
And those – that has guided us and that will continue to guide 
us.  Again we are not only entitled but obliged as part of inquisitorial 
mandate to ask those questions and we will continue to do so for all 
witnesses.  The question of cross-examination is with respect a term 
that has been used quite loosely and incorrectly by my learned friends 
to describe all manner of questions that might be difficult to answer and 
so in response to your opening Chair it was said on record the first 
20 
point is that - by myself as part of the legal team – the first point is that 
this Commission is at this stage at least investigating matters covered 
by the Terms of Reference. 
It is an investigation.  That means it is not a trial where we 
seek to prove a predetermined or pleaded or charged case and for that 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 23 of 43 
 
reason there is no cross-examination.  Cross-examination can in any 
event only take place by prior permission granted and it is not likely 
that is all that was said that we will ask for such.  Our mandate is to 
investigate various matters. 
So Chair that by way of background as to what was said later 
on the point was made clearer where I addressed you Chair in relation 
to an objection that had been raised.  I said: 
“I do not want to enter into a long debate as to what 
questioning is and what cross-examination is safe 
to say that there is no pleaded case or charge 
10 
sheet which we are seeking to validate or sections 
of which we were seeking to prove through your 
questioning – through our questioning and insofar 
as it maybe alleged that we are seeking to question 
to prove a particular pleaded case in a civil matter 
or a particular criminal as represented by a charge 
sheet is simply not correct.  What we are doing is 
affording Mr Zuma a full opportunity to deal with all 
the factual evidence that Mr Maseko led and indeed 
the implications of that evidence.” 
20 
Always Chair that was subject to the reliance by the legal 
team and the injunction by yourself Chair that 3.2 was important.  So in 
response to one of the objections raised you said on 17 July Chair: 
“I just want to say and I think in regard to that I 
want to point out that it is important to draw 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 24 of 43 
 
attention to in terms of the role of the legal team to 
draw attention to Rule 3.2 of the Rules of the 
Commission and I draw this just so there is no 
confusion.” 
You made it very clear on more than one occasion Chair. 
“A member of the Commission’s legal team may put 
questions to a witness whose evidence is presented 
to the Commission by the Commission’s legal team 
including 
questions 
aimed 
at 
assisting 
the 
Commission and assessing the truthfulness of the 
10 
evidence of a witness subject to the directions to 
the Chairperson the Commission’s legal team may 
ask leading questions.” 
We have never strayed beyond that boundary Chair and we 
will not but we must use that power in order to fulfil the inquisitorial 
duties of the Commission.  May I just say there maybe debate about 
what is meant by cross-examination.  It is mentioned elsewhere in the 
Rules.  Cross-examination is not a type of question.  Cross-examination 
is a step in the procedure where the representative of a particular 
opposing party questions a witness for various reasons and on various 
20 
grounds who has been led by another party. 
So you get examination in chief and then you get 
cross-examination.  Cross-examination may include various questions.  
It may include various approaches.  It may include questions to confirm 
what the witness has said.  It may include questions to obtain more 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 25 of 43 
 
facts from the witness in support of a case but the essential nature of 
that step in the process is to secure evidence in support of a particular 
case and to question or challenge evidence that is not in support of a 
particular case. 
Here we are not doing that Chair.  So we are not 
cross-examining that sense.  Here one of the types of questions that 
maybe asked under cross-examination is the type of question that 
would challenge or assert that a witness is not being truthful and that 
duty and that right is expressly preserved under Rule 3.2.  So what is 
preserved under Rule 3.2 the truthfulness inquiry or the truthfulness 
10 
investigation to assist you to make a decision Chair is but one of the 
various types of questions that maybe used in the process or step of 
cross-examination by another party. 
In short and in summary Chair we have complied by the 
Rules.  We will continue to comply with the Rules subject to your 
rulings given in Commission of course and we must by law and in 
accordance with our mandate as counsel for the Commission pursue 
that mandate.  What we cannot do in discussions with colleagues 
representing a witness or implicated person where a complaint is laid 
not in respect of a particular question but by general approach 
20 
derogate from our own duties or limit our own powers. 
We must investigate and we must question and we must 
continue to do so.  It is our mandate Chair.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well before you sit down what – what is the story 
about the letter that Mr Sikhakane read that he says was written on 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 26 of 43 
 
Wednesday to Mr Zuma relating to Mr Agrizzi?  I do not know anything 
about it but of course I do not have to … 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  It was written on Wednesday 
Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not have to know all the letters that different 
people write from the Commission but do you know anything about that 
letter? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  I – I do not.  It – it may have 
come from the investigators.  It certainly did not come via me in the 
legal team. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  But I am not  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Trying to derogate from … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You – you will investigate? 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Reliance.  I will look at it and 
respond. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You will – you will investigate to find out what – 
where it comes from, ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes I will investigate it and – 
20 
and see … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Why but it certainly not a letter 
from myself … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 27 of 43 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Nor I understand from others but 
I will check. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright thank you.  Let me – let me say a few 
things now and maybe later I will say more.  One, I am disappointed 
that yesterday a situation was allowed to happen where I went to bed 
without knowing how the discussions between the Commission’s legal 
team and the former President’s legal team were going. 
I had hoped and I may have indicated to both teams in 
chambers that I would need to be informed and I had in mind that if by 
a certain time I – I had hoped to be informed in the later afternoon or 
10 
early evening but I had in mind that if I was informed at a certain stage 
and I took the view that there were challenges in reaching agreement 
and I thought that there may have been room for me to contribute to the 
resolution of the impasse I would have considered meeting with both 
teams.  That is the one point. 
The second point I want to make is that when we adjourned 
on Wednesday and I expressed confidence that both teams would find 
and I said there were reasonable prospects in my view that both teams 
would find common ground I did not say that simply without any basis.  
I had a basis which gave me confidence that the two teams could find 
20 
each other. 
Of course there was no guarantee.  In any discussions you 
never have a guarantee.  So – but I had confidence.  I have heard what 
Mr Sikhakane has said are his instructions from his client which his 
client is entitled to give him.  That he does not intend to participate 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 28 of 43 
 
anymore.  I do intend nevertheless before we reach finality on this 
matter I do intend and would like to have a session with counsel for the 
former President and counsel for the legal team in my chambers. 
I may not need to be told what transpired between them 
yesterday that made them not reach agreement but I do have my - 
ideas of my own that I would like to discuss with them to see whether 
we cannot find a situation where the concerns raised by the former 
President can be accommodated without compromising the job that the 
legal team of the Commission has to do and the job that I have to do as 
well as the job that his legal team has to do. 
10 
I emphasised already on Wednesday at some stage that 
nobody is being asked to compromise their own rights or obligations but 
even when nobody compromises their rights, their positions there may 
be room for some understanding and agreement where we might be 
able to take care of concerns without anybody compromising their own 
obligations and rights. 
I also want to just say two other things.  Later on if need be I 
might have to say more.  I just want to repeat what I said I think either 
on Wednesday or on Tuesday.  The decision to ask the former President 
to appear before the Commission this – this week was my decision and 
20 
my decision alone.  I therefore do not want Mr Pretorius or the 
Commission’s legal team to be criticised for a decision that they did not 
make. 
I made that decision and I made it alone.  I believed it was 
the correct decision.  I still believe it is the correct decision.  In this 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 29 of 43 
 
entire room I am the only person who ultimately must make decisions in 
regard to the evidence that I am hearing.  I am the only one who must 
make findings about witnesses who come here and give evidence about 
other people and about State Capture and about corruption. 
I and I alone must make those decisions.  I believe that as far 
as it is possible and practicable I must hear all sides.  I must not hear 
one side and therefore it is in that context that I make the decision that 
I would like to hear the former President’s side of the story.  That was 
made clear in correspondence that was sent to his attorney that there 
were two purposes for which his appearance was required. 
10 
The first purpose was to give him an opportunity to tell his 
side of the story.  The second purpose was to enable an evidence 
leader and myself to put questions to him.  I made those decisions and 
it is was made clear that his side of the story and the questions that we 
would put – that would be put to him would relate to the statements or 
evidence that had been given by certain specified witnesses. 
Their names were given.  It was said that those statements 
had previously been given to him.  Later on it was discovered that one 
or two apparently by mistake had not been sent to him.  At that stage it 
was said that there was no need to send him those statements again.  
20 
At a certain stage there was an indication from his attorneys that they 
might not have received all of them. 
So a decision was then taken again by me that all the 
statements that would be used to ask questions and relevant annexures 
should be put in lever arch files and be given to his attorneys.  So that 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 30 of 43 
 
when he came here if there was one or two other statements that he 
might not have received there would have been at least two weeks 
before the 15 t h when he would have had a chance to look at those 
statements together with his attorneys or counsel. 
Now you all heard I think on Monday or Tuesday I am not 
sure.  I think Monday that it was acknowledged that those two lever 
arch files were received by Mr Zuma’s attorneys.  There was some 
perspectives about certain aspects but it was accepted that they were 
received.  It was stated that the questions that would be asked would 
fall within matters or issues that are covered by those statements. 
10 
A request was made for specific questions to be given in 
advance to him.  I made the decision that the question the actual 
questions would not be given because I believed that if he knew the 
statements of witnesses from whom - from which the questions would 
come and he knew that the issues and the incidence or events about 
which he would be asked questions were only those covered in the 
statements and nowhere else that ought to be enough. 
 
Now part of the reason why I am explaining this is that I heard 
a few days ago one of the journalists explaining what has happened 
both in radio – on radio and TV and it seemed that he did not 
20 
understand correctly what had happened, and I believe in good faith 
may have put the Commission in a negative light but it must have been 
out of misunderstanding of what the position is.  So the statements – 
on Monday it was explained to that, I think one or two statements had, 
by mistake not been sent to him prior to the beginning of July but 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 31 of 43 
 
otherwise all the statements had been sent before and the lever arch 
files were simply a precaution to make sure that when he came here 
there wasn’t an argument about statements not having been received.  
Now I also just want to say, the regulations that apply to the 
Commission say that the Commission will adopt any procedure that it 
determines and the rules that have been published that the Commission 
is using are rules that are – were promulgated in terms of that 
provision.   
 
The rules do not provide for everything, there are – there are 
two ways in which a person is secured to appear before a Commission 
10 
or a Court.  One is simply by way of arrangement you talk to the person 
who is to be called to give evidence and if that person agrees to come 
and give evidence that person comes, it’s normal.  If that person 
refuses to come you have an option to issue a subpoena or a summons 
to force that person to come.  There are many witnesses who have 
come before this Commission who came, not because they wee 
compelled to come to this Commission because they were talked to, to 
say, are you willing to come and they said yes I’m willing and they 
came. There are others who came because summonses were issued 
against them, some of them were unwilling to come to the Commission 
20 
and the Commission, therefore had to use its power to issue a 
summons and compel them to come.  Others were willing to come but 
they preferred that they should be issued with a summons and that was 
done. 
 
If I wanted the former President or when I wanted the Former 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 32 of 43 
 
President to appear before the Commission and give his side of the 
story and enable the Commission and the evidence leaders to ask 
questions I had two options, either to make an arrangement, find out if 
he’s willing to come as has been done with regard to some other 
witnesses or get the secretary of the Commission to issue a summons 
to compel him.  Now Mr Sikhakhane, when he appeared in the 
Commission on Monday, one of the first things he told – he reminded 
me of is that when he appeared before this Commission last year, he 
made it clear that the former President would cooperate with the 
Commission.  If I had decided that a summons should be issued against 
10 
the former President and a summons had been issued, I’m sure that 
what I would be asked is, why do you issue a summons against 
somebody who said they would cooperate with the Commission, why 
you doing that?  This person has made it clear that he will cooperate 
with the Commission, so why you issuing a summons against him, why 
do you seek to compel him?  I decided not to do that, I set aside 
certain dates and a letter was written to ask him whether he would give 
an undertaking that he would come because if he gave that undertaking 
there would be no problem, there would be no reason to compel or to 
do anything.  In accordance with what I’ve been told I expected that he 
20 
would cooperate, which he did by agreeing to come.  I’m explaining this 
because, once again, I am saying I’m the Chairperson of the 
Commission, although I don’t get to do everything and there are 
different sections of the Commission, different people do different 
things, when it comes to the appearance of the former President before 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 33 of 43 
 
the Commission, I make the decision and if that decision is to be 
criticised it’s my decision and people can criticise me for it, it is fine, it 
is fine, I believe it was the right decision. 
 
When, on Wednesday the former – or on Monday, the former 
President asked to be given a chance before any questions could be 
put to him, that he be given a chance to make a statement, I allowed it 
and I didn’t put a timeframe, I didn’t say I’m giving you only fifteen 
minutes for that statement, I’m in a rush for us to ask you questions.  I 
didn’t say I’m giving you 30 minutes, I didn’t say I’m giving you an 
hour, I allowed him to have his say and he had his say until he was the 
10 
one who said, what I’ve said is enough for now, I may come back to 
some issues later on.  I did not even limit him as to the time within 
which he had to make that statement.  During that time, I believe I 
interrupted him only once because I wanted clarity on something he had 
just said, other than that, he was interrupted, he was allowed to have 
his full say to tell his side of the story which was stated in the letter as 
one of the purposes why he was asked to come, so that he could tell 
his side of the story 
 
So I just thought I must just explain some of these things so 
that they are understood and it should be quite clear that, as far as his 
20 
decision is concerned if anybody wants to blame anybody they can 
blame me and I want to make it clear that there are only two purposes 
why I asked and they were stated in that letter to allow him to give his 
version to his side of the story and to allow for questions to be asked.  
Having said that, I indicated earlier in the week that I was encouraged 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 34 of 43 
 
by the spirit of respect and courtesy and cooperation that was shown by 
the former President, by his counsel, by the legal team and all of that 
had informed my confidence that a solution would be found to his 
concerns and therefore I would like to have a session in chambers with 
counsel on both sides so that we can see whether the matter should – 
will remain where the former President’s counsel said they stand at the 
moment or whether there may be room with my intervention to find a 
way, thank you.  Mr Pretorius I intend adjourning but I don’t know 
whether Mr Sikhakhane wants to say something now or whether we 
should rather have our session in chambers. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Perhaps we should meet in 
Chambers Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay I think Mr Sikhakhane wants to say something 
now, let me allow him. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:  Chair thank you so much.  We’re indebted to 
your endeavours, wasn’t to state that there is no lack of appreciation 
from the former President’s side and ourselves about your genuine 
endeavours to find ways, we’re not even here to cast aspersions in your 
direction, that’s not what we’re doing at all, but Chair let me come back 
to Mr Pretorius because he gives us a lecture that we don’t need.  He 
20 
gives us a lecture about what cross-examination is as if we don’t know, 
how patronising, he actually doesn’t know it, he says, we don’t 
determine cross-examination by knowing the type of question, just as a 
side.  Go to any first year advocate they will tell you, we object as 
advocates, when we stand up – when we stand up to object, it’s 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 35 of 43 
 
because the type of questions determines whether it’s cross-
examination or not, so he’s wrong there, he’s just wrong.  So he 
doesn’t need to give us a lecture.  Secondly I appreciate your powers 
Chair and I respect them and my client respects them and I appreciate 
Mr Pretorius’ mandate and powers and I have no – there is no 
interference with them but I want to say this to both of you, is that 
above both of you and all of us here, is the constitution of the country.  
So this lecture about the powers is fine, it’s well and good, it tells me 
something I appreciate but we both – we all in this room have to know 
that in exercising all of those powers he seems to boast about, he 
10 
seems to have found his courage about them, they have to be exercised 
within the prescripts of the constitutional rights of people who come 
here. 
 
Mr Pretorius doesn’t understand, he sits here like me, we – the 
people we put there have their lives at stake, all of them, from Gordhan 
to Mr Zuma, all of them must be treated fairly because we don’t know, 
we are lawyers, we come here paid hefty fees but the people who sit 
there have their lives at stakes.  This Commission has implications for 
their lives and so to simply come here and tell us about, we will do 
anything we like because we have this power.  I have stated here that, 
20 
Chair, these powers must be exercised within the prescripts of the 
constitution and it is our view that the manner – and I’m not criticising 
your decision because we responded to it because we respect you and 
we respect your bone fides.  I am criticising what – I’m stating what I 
stated on Monday, that it is – when ground rules are not followed that 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 36 of 43 
 
mistakes of this nature happen where we can’t find each other.  So 
Chair when I say we went our Courts to determine this it is because we 
felt, well if our rights, if our client’s rights are not respected then what 
choice have we got.  Mr Pretorius – Chair let me say this, because 
when I talked about the right hand and the left hand, let’s say you are 
the right hand I think, Chair, there are two possibilities here why no-
one knows who wrote this letter and o-one knows who failed to give us 
notices, there are two possibilities about this and I want you to 
consider them very, very carefully when you get a report and 
investigate this further.  One is that your team is incompetent in how it 
10 
raises things to us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please let us not clap hands I said on, I think 
Tuesday and Wednesday everybody has been very courteous and 
respectful and everybody who is attending has been very disciplined 
please let us continue in that way, thank you. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:   Sure, Chair maybe let me withdraw the 
word, because I meant inefficient, in the sense that when this team you 
have does not know who wrote us a letter, there are two possibilities 
Chair.  It’s either you as the right hand trying  your best are dealing 
with the left hand that’s either inefficient or is doing what you were not 
20 
meant to do and I’m not saying it as a statement, I’m saying it as 
something that I think the Chair must investigate whether you’re not – I 
called it (indistinct) manipulation, not of the Chair but I said, Chair it’s 
important that as the right hand of this place the Judge, the second 
most senior Judge in this country to know whether your left hand is 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 37 of 43 
 
acting in good faith without political influence and whether these things 
they are doing are a mistake or by design and Chair when you get that 
report from them, I’m asking you to truly investigate whether this 
treatment of witnesses that you did not design, it just happens is 
intended or is a mistake and I want you – I’m pleading with you sir, to 
investigate it because I trust your bone fides and I think everything 
you’ve said to us, the former President sent us here on Monday and 
said he wanted to come, precisely because that’s how he sees you, 
thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you, thank you very much. 
10 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Chair as we’ve…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:  At some stage I must put a stop to this. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  No I understand but we’ve been 
called to account as…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:  One minute. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:    Thank you, the letter of which 
my learned friend complains is one of a category of nearly 700 people 
who have been implicated where the secretariat is seeking to enquire 
whether there is any response to a 33 notice that has been sent to an 
implicated person and asking for a response.  It simply says, a notice 
20 
was sent to you in relation to particular evidence, we haven’t got a 
reply, please let us know what your intentions are, that’s the nub of it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But my understanding is that previous letters were 
sent to Mr Zuma’s attorney and not to him, what Mr Sikhakhane read 
seemed to be a letter addressed to Mr Zuma directly. 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 38 of 43 
 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  No it says former President 
Zuma care of Mantsha Attorneys and it was emailed to Mantsha 
Attorneys. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright we are five minutes into the short break, 
I’m going to take an adjournment, I think we’ll take an adjournment of 
15 minutes to have tea and then at the end of that 15 minutes, I would 
like counsel on both sides to see me in my chambers.  It’s now twenty 
minutes past eleven, so the fifteen minutes would go up to twenty to 
twelve, so let us say they can see me at quarter to twelve, I don’t want 
to specify what time we are going to come back because I don’t know 
10 
but I think maybe I should say, the one option is that we could come 
back at half past twelve, maybe I should – ja give it about 45 minutes, 
if at half past twelve we are not done, we will at least come back at 1 
o’clock to indicate what is happening.  So initially half past twelve but 
if we don’t come back then it will be just before 1 o’clock maybe five to 
one to indicate what is happening.  As I say, I meant it when I said on 
Wednesday and on Tuesday I was encouraged by the cooperation, 
respect and courtesy from all sides and that I was of the view that the 
legal team for the former President and the legal team for the 
Commission were capable of having the matter resolved.  I am 
20 
confident that given some space we might be able to find a way, either 
for – well Mr Zuma we have been talking and you have been – but you 
have been following the discussions, you understand, so thank you.  
We are going to adjourn then and either half past twelve or about five 
to one, 1 o’clock we will know what is happening, we adjourn. 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 39 of 43 
 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  I see that we managed to be back in time for the 
second timeframe that I’d given, five to one, I have had a discussion 
with counsel for the former President and counsel for the – from the 
Commission’s legal team in regard to the issue and that they were 
supposed to deal with yesterday and that we talked about this morning, 
it was a very fruitful discussion.  Again characterised by respect, 
courtesy and a high level of professionalism on both sides of the teams 
and I think a commitment to try and look at any suggestion put on the 
10 
table to try and find a way forward.  The discussions have resulted in 
an agreement that, one, the decision that the former President would 
no longer participate in the proceedings is withdrawn and that the 
former President, I’ve been told, has indicated that he wishes to 
continue to cooperate with this Commission and his legal team also 
wish to continue to work with this Commission.   
 
It has been agreed that the way in which the former 
President’s concerns may be taken care of is that the Commission’s 
legal team will indicate to his legal team what the Commission’s areas 
of interest are in each witnesses statement or affidavit on which the 
20 
Commission or they would like the former President to testify and that 
thereafter the former President will then provide, thorough his legal 
team, statements that indicate what he has to say on the incidents or 
areas of interest that will have been pointed out by the Commission’s 
legal team in regard to each witnesses statement or affidavit.  This 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 40 of 43 
 
helps because sometimes in one statement, a witness deals with a 
number of things, some of which may have nothing to do with the 
former President but there may be areas where the Commission’s legal 
team wishes to hear what he knows, or what he has to say. 
 
The agreement is that counsel, certainly the lead counsel but 
counsel for the former President will meet within the next – before the 
end of the next two weeks with a view to the Commission’s legal team, 
making available to the former President’s counsel a document that 
indicates exactly which areas in the various affidavits of witnesses they 
would like the former President to give information about.  The two 
10 
teams, counsel will agree the timeframes – the timeframe within which 
the former President’s counsel will provide the former President’s 
statements in regard to the specific areas of interest that will have 
been indicated in regard to the specific affidavits of the witnesses 
concerned.  If the two sides are not able to agree on the timeframe, 
they will approach me and I will hear both sides and make a decision 
on the timeframe.   
 
It is contemplated within this agreement that at a certain stage 
– that at a certain stage the former President will come back and give 
evidence and it is contemplated that with the process that has been 
20 
agreed to by all sides, it may well be that the time that he will need to 
testify might be shorter, might be shortened because of the exchange of 
information that will have happened including statements, affidavits 
from the former President.   
 
Therefore – we are therefore at a stage where we are not 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 41 of 43 
 
going to proceed today with the hearing of the former President’s 
evidence so that this can be done and then he will come back later on 
and I want to take this opportunity, once again, to express my 
appreciation to both legal teams for the constructive discussion that we 
have had in chambers which have resulted in this agreement but I also 
want to express my appreciation to the former President for his 
decision to agree to give the processes of this Commission a chance 
and to agree that he will continue to cooperate an he will come back 
and testify after these processes have been finalised which are aimed 
at facilitating everything.  I think that it is quite important that this be 
10 
acknowledged.  The – I am -  I have been – I a going to give the former 
President an opportunity to say something because I’ve been asked 
that he would like to say something but before I allow him, I would wish 
Mr Pretorius and Mr Sikhakhane to indicate whether they confirm that 
what I have said is in accordance with the agreement that has been 
reached. 
ADV PAUL JOSEPH PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV MUZI SIKHAKHANE:   I do confirm sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I therefore would like to allow the former President to 
20 
say something, thank you. 
MR JACOB GEDLEYIHLEKISA ZUMA:  Well thank you very much Chair 
I must thank you for the intervention you made that made the situation 
to be looked at and arrived at some common point in terms of 
continuing with the process as it were.  I think it is the right of anyone 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 42 of 43 
 
to raise concerns if there are concerns and the concerns should be 
looked at and I appreciate that you were able to meet the two teams 
and found the way forward because I think it is in the interest of all of 
us to address issues that face this country in whatever form and also 
the clarity of the way forward as it has been indicated by (indistinct) 
work done to allow a smooth process to take place in this Commission. 
 
I think no-one should have the wrong impression that the 
raising of the concerns was just done in order to disrupt or whatever, 
the processes.  These were genuine concerns that needed to be looked 
at, so I’m happy that we have found a solution that this Commission will 
10 
be able to move to it’s finalities with our contributions, I’m sure that 
adds the confidence we have on you as a Chair, that the task before 
you, you will be doing it with all honesty with an aim to find the 
solutions in the end.  So I just wanted to say thank you very much for 
your intervention that has helped us, at least to find a way forward, 
that’s all I wanted to say Chair, thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much Mr Zuma, I wanted to mention 
earlier on and I just mention now that we may have taken – you might 
think we took quite some time before we came back but reaching 
agreement in principle didn’t take longer than ten minutes after we 
20 
started talking.  There is a willingness to try and find solutions, the rest 
of the time what was left was to refine and make sure there was no 
misunderstanding. There was really no great difficulty in finding a 
solution once I met with both teams and counsel for the former 
President, came and indicated that the former President was not 
19 JULY 2019 – DAY 136 
 
Page 43 of 43 
 
opposed at all to us finding a way and it was clear to me that he would 
like a way to be found to move forward which, his remarks now, have 
confirmed.  So once again thank you to both teams, thank you to the 
former President and thank you to everybody for the high level of 
discipline and thank you.  We’ll adjourn for the day and the former 
President will come back at another time that will be arranged.  The 
Commission will adjourn for today but on Monday we’ll continue, we’ll 
start at 10 o’clock to look at matters relating to Estina, thank you very 
much once again, we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 22 JULY 2019 
10 
 
 
