 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
19 JUNE 2019 
 
 
 
DAY 115 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 2 of 196 
 
PROCEEDINGS ON 19 JUNE 2019 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Ms Hofmeyr, good morning everybody. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  Chair before we continue 
with the evidence of Ms Nhantsi I would like if I may … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh before you do that. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I must just say that we were supposed to start at ten 
but because urgent matters that needed to be dealt with relating to 
10 
today’s proceedings we were not able to do so that is why we are 
starting now.  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair before we continue with Ms Nhantsi’s 
evidence I would like to place on record certain facts in relation to the 
endeavours to communicate with implicated persons that were 
undertaken yesterday after your direction that those steps should be 
taken.  Chair the consequence of taking some of those steps is that 
contact was sought to be made with Mr Mngadi who was implicated in 
20 
Ms Nhatsi’s evidence and was to be implicated in Mr Mahlangu’s 
evidence.  Those efforts were made and no telephonic communications 
– spoken communication was successful with Mr Mngadi.  But there was 
communication received from him this morning to our investigators who 
had made the efforts yesterday to contact him.  Our move into what that 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 3 of 196 
 
communication indicates in a moment but just to recap the position we 
were in yesterday.  Yesterday’s position as I relayed it to you Chair was 
that at least in relation to Ms Nhantsi’s evidence there had been Rule 
3.3 Notices sent to implicated persons including Mr Mngadi.  The 
communication that was received from him this morning indicates that 
on his side he disputes having received any of that notification prior to 
Ms Nhantsi’s evidence.  Chair the consequence of that is the need for 
further investigation particularly on our side to understand precisely 
what did happen when.  But in the consequence – in a consequence in 
which there is communication from Mr Mngadi in which he disputes 
10 
having received any notification prior to the evidence at all.  It is our 
proposal that we take steps to uncover what the factual state of affairs 
is and take all steps necessary to ensure that Mr Mngadi receives 
copies of the relevant statements and affidavits and in particular in 
relation to Mr Mahlangu that we stand down his evidence until we can 
report back to you on the status that has been established in relation to 
Mr Mngadi.   
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine.  Let us proceed on that basis.  The 
commission will continue to do what it can to make sure that implicated 
persons are notified and that they get Rule 3.3 Notices but it does not 
20 
mean that when we have done all that is reasonably required and we 
still cannot – and somebody still disputes having received notification 
that we will never proceed.  There will be circumstances where if I am 
satisfied that all that we are required to do has been done I may give 
the go ahead that we proceed but in this particular case I think it is in 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 4 of 196 
 
order that we defer Mr Mahlangu’s evidence until we know exactly what 
has happened or until further attempts have been made to give – to 
ensure that Mr Mngadi has received notice.  I understand that all along 
the commission was under the – at least the evidence leaders were 
under the impression that he had received a Rule 3.3 Notices. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But he has now indicated that he has not and it is 
important to establish what the position is.  So that will be in order.  So 
Mr Mahlangu’s evidence will be deferred until you revert.  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  We are indebted to you Chair.  Then just in 
10 
terms of today’s proceedings our proposal is to conclude the evidence 
of Ms Nhantsi and then to move to the next investigation area actually  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  We are in the fortunate position that we had 
anticipated with some optimism I expect that we would be able to get 
there today in any event.  We have run longer with some of the 
witnesses but we will just – our proposal is to just move seamlessly 
into that area of investigation with the two witnesses who will start off 
the second focus area. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is in order. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair if we may then commence with 
the further questions for Ms Nhantsi?  Ms Nhantsi overnight you were 
requested to try and find the letters that you had referred to where you 
had followed up with BNP about the FSP licence.  You handed those to 
me this morning, is that correct? 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 5 of 196 
 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Correct Chair.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  I would like to take an opportunity 
to hand them up Chair if I may? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And provide you with a copy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Nhantsi and then we will go through them.  
Chair my proposal is that we add it at the end of Ms Nhantsi’s bundle.  
If we were to do so it would commence with the pagination 330.  We 
can take steps over the break to paginate your file accordingly if that is 
10 
in order? 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is in order.  But I think I have just paginated it. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you we are indebted to you for that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is 330 and 331? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then there is a 332.  You should have a 
third page. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then 332. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes.  Ms N�<äØ�= if you will just make those 
pagination notes as well so we can be literally on the same page when 
we are dealing with it. 
20 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Not a problem Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So Ms Nhantsi if we can just start there.  This – 
you referred in your evidence yesterday to communication with BNP 
Capital on I think it was the 13 July in which you raised a query about 
their statement at the time that they had previously alerted you to the 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 6 of 196 
 
suspension of the their FSP licence, is that correct? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And can you tell the Chair what this letter then 
contains? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes certainly.  Chair yesterday I testified that 
when Ms Fikelepi was doing the process in terms of engaging on the 
agreement he sent on the 6 t h we deal with it yesterday on the email 
where she wanted FSP… 
CHAIRPERSON:  That was 6 May? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  6 June. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of July? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  July. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  6 July. 
CHAIRPERSON:  July okay. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes.  She sent an email where she wanted 
BNP to confirm that the FSP licence is in order and we need a copy and 
also a confirmation that it is in good standing.  You recall Chair that 
yesterday we saw FSP a copy that was certified dated 23 June.  When 
we received queries specifically the letter that came from Webber 
Wentzel on the 13 t h what we distributed today Chair is the letter that we 
20 
wrote to BNP.  Allow me to read it because you just circulated today 
Chiar. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  The letter is dated 13 July 2016 attention to 
the CEO Mr Daniel Mahlangu.  It says: 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 7 of 196 
 
“We note with concern your letters that confirms that 
at the time of SAA appointing BNP Capital to source 
funds on its behalf you had communi – you have 
received communication from FSB of its intention to 
suspend BNP’s FSB licence.  As you are aware the 
critical criteria of RFP included a FSB licence.  The 
subsequent confinement of sourcing of funds was 
based on BNP having successfully met the RFP 
criteria 
particular 
holding 
a 
FSB 
licence.  
Furthermore South African Law requires a financial 
10 
services provider to hold on – a FSB licence in order 
to provide authorised services.  Holding such valid 
licence is a material condition for the provision of 
the financial services to SAA.  In the letter dated – in 
the letter received from you via email by our acting 
CEO on the 11 July 2016 you indicated that there 
was a communication sent to SAA on the 13 May 
2016 relating to the intention to suspend your FSB 
licence.  Please be advised that we do not have that 
correspondence and could you kindly send it to us 
20 
and also indicate the name of the person that you 
have sent the communication to.  In the light of the 
above SAA hereby gives you a notice to rectify the 
situation and provide us with a valid FSB licence and 
confirmation of good standing from FSB by no later 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 8 of 196 
 
than Wednesday the 20 July 2016 failing which your 
appointment including the appointment to source 
funds on behalf of SAA may be terminated.” 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Nhantsi can I clarify that you did not then 
receive the confirmation that a prior communication had been sent on 
the 13 May after this letter was sent? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes Chair I can confirm that we did not 
receive any communication or any confirmation as we have requested 
in the letter that they must give us that proof they must even tell us 
who did they send the communication to.  So we never received it 
10 
Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So as you have the facts that was not received 
on the 13 May by SAA? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes, yes Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Ms Nhantsi I would then like to 
conclude on some aspects in relation to the cancellation fee but before 
we get there I wanted to just be clear on some of your evidence 
yesterday.  One of the questions we probed was your knowledge of Mr 
Mngadi’s association with Nedbank which you indicated you were aware 
of from early early on.  What I was not clear on in relation to your 
20 
evidence is when precisely in time to the extent that you know it Ms 
Meyene would have been aware that Mr Mngadi was associated with 
BNP Capital?  When about would that have occurred?  And just to help 
you on the chronology BNP Capital gets appointed as transaction 
advisor on the 20 April. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 9 of 196 
 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  They are then appointed to source funds on the 
25 May.  What I am interest in to the extent that you know it all is 
whether prior to or in that period Ms Meyene would have known that Mr 
Mngadi was representing BNP Capital? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  I do not know Chair.  I really do not know.  I 
will really be speculating at this point in time. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  There is one email communication however 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Which you have provided us with. 
10 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  If we can find it in your file.  Well certainly the 
sms – the Whatsapp communications refer to engagements that Mr 
Mngadi is having with Ms Meyene around the sourcing of funds.  
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Agree. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So at least at that point and as I have it those 
begin around the 31 May would you regard it as the case that Ms 
Meyene would have known of his involvement then? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes Chair I would.  I think the email that you 
referring to is it the one dated the 8 June? 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes indeed. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So that is an email to yourself and to Ms 
Meyene from Mr Mngadi is that correct? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  And acting CEO yes. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 10 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And the acting CEO.  It is the four of you and it 
relates to the sourcing of funds? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Agree. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Which at that stage or was contracted to BNP? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So would you be comfortable with the assertion 
that at least at those periods in time end of May and continuing 
thereafter Ms Meyene would have been aware of his role in BNP? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes I will be comfortable Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But you do not know for a fact whether she was 
10 
aware of that prior to that point? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  No I do not know Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And just for the record I take it that when those 
decisions were made in relation to the extension of scope of the 
transaction advisor to source funds and the board voted on that Ms 
Meyene did not declare any conflict of interest in relation to that 
decision? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  I do not recall any conflict of interest that Ms 
Meyene declared in the meetings. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  If we may then just return to the 
20 
conclusion of your evidence on the cancellation fee Mr Nhantsi.  
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  As I understand your evidence of yesterday you 
regarded the cancellation fee as a scheme perpetrated by Ms Meyene 
with the assistance Mr Mngadi to enrich themselves, is that a correct 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 11 of 196 
 
reflection of your evidence? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  It is Chair.  It is a correct reflection 
especially knowing what I know now and after the testimony of Mr Van 
Der Merwe especially having said that he never claimed any 
cancellation fee from them yet the letters that we have been receiving 
from BNP as well there was one that was even saying that the 5 million 
US dollars is the – is the money that they will filter it down to SAA 
because it is claimed by Grissag AG PTY LTD. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You also were receiving sustained pressure to 
push through the approval of the cancellation fee, is that correct? 
10 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And you accept I take it that if it had been 
approved it would have cost SAA R50 million if the funding had not 
come to bear fruit? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  I accept that Chair with all the means that I 
tried to do behind the scenes to make sure that it does not get 
approved.  But if it did go ahead it was going to cost the company R50 
million. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Um… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Um  I am sorry before you proceed I meant to ask you 
20 
yesterday.  You have said that you received a lot of pressure from Ms 
Meyne. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I would like you to articulate in as clear a manner as 
you can exactly what it is that she was saying to you which you 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 12 of 196 
 
regarded as putting pressure on you on different occasions. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes Chair.  On different occasions as I have 
highlighted yesterday that earlier in – after I joined SAA she said she 
does not write anything down.  I would receive calls Chair a minimum of 
three a day from the chairperson of the board. One thing that was 
consistent in her messages is the pace that I am moving it is as if it is 
business as usual and it is not business as usual we need to move we 
are delaying things, why are we taking unnecessary documents to the 
board, why am I – the board has given us approval to go ahead with the 
transaction yet I want to keep on sending back the documents to the 
10 
board. So all the time the pressure was more on what are you waiting 
for approve.  Certain things are under your delegation and acting CO’s 
are delegation so we must approve. Specifically on the cancellation fee 
Chair especially when I send the term sheet and I included the non-
binding that is where the pressure was then mounting to say she even 
also said I was appointed and they thought I would be in the team that 
is turning around the company it looks like I do not appreciate the 
pressure that they are in as the board in terms of getting the funding.  
My pace is very slow.  I treat the business as if it is business as usual.  
There is no need for me to be – to be including certain clauses that do 
20 
not have anything to do with the funders.  So one pressure was take 
out the non-binding because the funders now have got the perception 
that SAA does not need money.  So the pressure where along those 
lines Chair also allow me perhaps because it is one of my evidence 
where she will request certain things Chair. For an example there was 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 13 of 196 
 
an event where she said to me she thought I was coming from rural 
areas which I agreed because I am Chair coming from rural areas. She 
said but under my leadership SAA Procurement spend is still 2% of the 
24 billion.  So I then endeavoured to get the information for her to say 
Chair if you look at the total expenditure of SAA which at the time was 
24 billion at the biggest 60% of that expenditure Chair was made up of 
jet fuel, of salaries, of lease rentals because SAA only owned 9 
aircrafts but had a fleet of 66 so the rest is lease rentals where you pay 
in dollars.  The other one was the maintenance reserves. So I then said 
as much as you can give the black players the job but if you do not play 
10 
into this big five of the big ticket items it will not really make a mark 
and I do not believe that there is a black player for example I did say 
we have not tested the market but who will buy the aircraft for an 
example?  She then following meeting she gave me for an example two 
names of the – of the companies and then she said now that you said 
black people do not have money to buy aircrafts do you think black 
people do not have money to even insure the aircrafts?  I said I can 
look into that Chair because insuring of the aircrafts also – is linked 
with the lease rentals because normally there is a clause on the lease 
rentals that will dictate who can insure the aircraft.  And then myself 
20 
and my team the fleet committee looked at the – we then looked at the 
different aircraft types with the insurance clauses and more – all of 
them Chair were saying the aircraft should be insured by an 
internationally recognised insurance company and that is the clause 
that is dictated by the lessors themselves because they own the 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 14 of 196 
 
aircraft. So I went back to her to say Chair I will not be able to do – to 
check and to include the local insurers because they will be in breach 
of the contractual agreement. She then said she saw it in my eye – in 
my eyes that I will not do it.  So I asked, what do you mean Chair and 
then she said she related a story to say she does have a child who is a 
chartered accountant. She does not say a lot like I do but she sees it in 
the eye if she is not going to do something.  So she said she saw that 
in my eyes when she was giving me an instruction that I am not going 
to do it.  So those were the type of pressures that I was getting Chair. 
Some of the examples I have included them in my statement. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine those that you have included.  
Now of course the – the truth is that there was a certain degree of 
urgency in finalising – in getting funds for SAA because as you said 
yesterday the maturity dates for certain loans were coming up soon.   
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ja.  Now if she were to say yes she did put 
pressure on you but the pressure she put on you was legitimate 
because as chairperson of the board she needed to make sure that SAA 
did not find itself in a situation where those maturity dates arrived and 
there were no funds and disaster would then happen.  What would you 
20 
say? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  I would agree and say yes and no Chair.  
More because one thing we were working together in terms of all of us 
knew that there are loans that are maturing but the pressure that she 
was more putting was she wanted us not to take the things to the board 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 15 of 196 
 
and that was the board transaction.  So all the decisions needed to be 
taken by the board so she was then putting pressure that there is no 
need we are bombarding the board with unnecessary approvals.  So 
she did not want us to take documents to the board Chair.  I am in 
agreement with the loans that were about to mature and I had 
appreciation of that as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes the importance of the question I was asking you 
is because – is that it is important that I know if the pressure that she 
put on you was for you to do something wrong something illegal, 
something un-procedural, something against the policy of SAA or 
10 
maybe it was not necessarily pressure to make you do wrong things but 
it was pressure that you do the right thing but you act maybe with more 
haste in the light of the emergency.  So it is important that I get the 
picture as to which pressure you are talking about.  Was it to do 
something wrong?  To do the right thing and – and to what extent are 
you basing what you say on what she said and to what extent you are 
basing what you are saying on your own impressions.  That is why I 
wanted to know exactly what she said.  
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so what do you say? 
20 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes Chair I am saying certain pressure was 
based on the performance because loans were maturing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  But the pressure that says do not take things 
to the board yet this is a board transaction.  So basically I needed – it 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 16 of 196 
 
was beyond my mandate and beyond acting CEO’s mandate Chair that 
decisions and the responsibility and the accountability needed to be 
taken by the board because in terms of DOA this is the board 
transaction so now she – in her way she was asking us to do illegal 
things that I feel if you do them she will again come back to you and 
say you did things that were illegal. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And would you – would you be able to say or what 
would you say if she were to say I genuinely believed that those things 
did not need to be taken to the board.  I would not have asked you to – 
not to take to the board things that I knew should go to the board.  
10 
What would you say if she were to come here and say that? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  I would say Chair she will be – being not 
truthful especially that the recent delegation of authority was approved 
after I joined SAA so it was very fresh to everyone’s mind in terms of 
how much is the authority for CEO, for CFO how much is the delegation 
– things that you need to take to the board.  So it was not an old 
document.  It is on the pack – it was approved when I was there Chair – 
yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you say she knew that she was – that the things 
that she was saying you should not take to the board were things that 
20 
should be taken to the board? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Nhantsi just a few follow up questions in 
relation to that engagement with the Chair if I may.  Do you know 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 17 of 196 
 
whether Ms Meyene knew about the provisions of Section 66 of the 
Public Finance Management Act which require the Accounting Authority 
of any SOE to approve any borrowing by that SOE? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Please come again? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Section 66. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Of the PFMA. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Says borrowing decisions by any public entity 
must be done by the Accounting Authority and in the case of SAA that 
10 
is the board. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  The board is the accounting authority.  Would 
Ms Meyene do you know whether Ms Meyene would have known of that 
legal provision?  It is referenced in the funding policy of SAA amongst 
other places? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Chair I would assume that she knew that. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Was it ever discussed at the meetings that the 
board always would have to approve borrowings? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  I do not recall it having discussed but having 
20 
appreciated the fact that she has been the chair of the board of SAA for 
quite some time and before becoming the chair of the board she was 
the board member of SAA I would reasonably assume that she knew. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  It certainly one of her duties as a board 
member. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 18 of 196 
 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Agree. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  To know of the applicable legislation, is it not? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes Chair I agree. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And may I ask also in relation to what was 
lawful or not at the time about the National Treasury’s instruction note 
of 3 of 2016/2017.  Ms Nhantsi you gave to me yesterday morning 
before your testimony an extract from it. Overnight I was able to source 
the full notice Chair and Ms Nhantsi you will find it in your file and it – 
that is DD2 and it commences at page 324.   
CHAIRPERSON:  What is the page number? 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  3-2-4. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair this is a note that actually came up in the 
Eskom evidence in relation to Brakfontein.  So that is why I have any 
familiarity with it.  It is an interesting practice note because it comes 
out in April 2016.  It is made operative from 1 May but you will see from 
the heading what it was directed at was Preventing and Combatting 
Abuse in Supply Chain Management System. 
So this is National Treasury in mid-2016 directing all public 
entities and departments under the PFMA about certain constraints that 
20 
they were placing on the decision making that Boards of SOEs for 
example could take and one of those constraints you will find at page 
3-2-7.  It is under Section 9. 
This was also the provision that was relevant in the Eskom 
evidence.  What it required is that if there was to be an extension of 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 19 of 196 
 
any existing contract above 15 percent of the value of that contract 
there would have to be prior written approval from National Treasury for 
that expanded contract to be concluded.  Ms Nhantsi was the Board 
made aware of this at the time that they decided to expand the scope of 
BNP to include sourcing of funds? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Chair this proposal – I mean – the Instruction 
3 from National Treasury as you rightfully say it was effective April 20 – 
May 2016. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  1 May, yes. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  1 May.  It – it talks about anything above 15 
10 
percent has to be taken to National Treasury prior.  It was not - Chair 
this was not implemented at SAA. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But was it known to the Members of the Board 
that this was a requirement? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  I am not aware Chair if it was known at the 
time.  Also I think I became aware of it later in the year.  I am not sure 
if we received at the – at the same date Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Well it is a National Treasury instruction to all 
accounting officers of departments and constitutional institutions.  So 
you – you do not know whether SAA was alerted to the existence of this 
20 
notice? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  I am not – I am – I do not know Chair and all 
the communications they come via in terms of the protocol via the 
Chairperson of the Board.  So I am – I am not aware.  I am not sure 
when she received this from National Treasury. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 20 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But if anyone received it – it would have been 
the Chairperson of the Board? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Are you satisfied that the 
expansion of the scope of BNP Capital’s contract would have been 
within the ambit of this practice note and consequently ought to have 
obtained the written authority and approval of National Treasury before 
it was concluded? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Based on this yes Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Nhantsi if we can then go back – I was 
10 
concluding on your evidence in relation to the cancellation fee.  The 
pressure that you – was exerted on you and which you have clarified to 
the Chair and your understanding at the time that it was untoward the 
insistent of the payment of the cancellation fee. 
Ms Nhantsi were you aware at the time of your obligations 
under the Prevention and Combatting of Corrupt Activities Act? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Come again. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Were you aware at the time that you 
recommended to the Board that they approve the cancellation fee that 
you had certain obligations under the Prevention and Combatting of 
20 
Corrupt Activities Act to report any knowledge of or suspicion that acts 
of corruption, fraud or theft were taking place in a company? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes I was aware. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So you accept that you are a – in a position of 
authority in relation to SAA? 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 21 of 196 
 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes I do. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So why did you not take those steps that are 
required of you to be taken under Section 34 of that Act? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  I considered that Chair but I was still going 
to take those steps and it is one of the instances where I would say it 
was overtaken by events.  Whilst you – you suspect that on this – on 
this cancellation fee there – there are foul plays and all that you then 
received – we received communication from – from Webber Wentzel and 
we have – we communicated with – with BNP. 
So there were lots of things happening Chair.  One thing that 
10 
kept me – kept my focus was to ensure that if BNP does not have the – 
the FSB Licence as it was a critical criteria my main concern was to 
safeguard the assets of the company.  I needed to ensure that I cancel 
the transaction with BNP. 
So whilst I was aware of the combat and prevention of corrupt 
activities Chair I was - I was more focusing on protecting the assets of 
the company because I wanted to cancel with the pressure as well 
because during the time that we gave BNP on 13 July and the 20 t h the 
calls kept on coming from the Chairperson of the Board saying we 
should not cancel with BNP because BNP will sue us. 
20 
So in my engagements with her I used to ask what would be 
their basis to sue us and she would say no we need to give them the 
cancellation fee.  We need to approve things.  We promised them that 
they must go source funds for us.  The funders are out there getting 
money for us and now we are cancelling. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 22 of 196 
 
So I then said no Chair but the critical criteria where other 
companies were disqualified was the FSB Licence.  So yes Chair as 
much as the combat and the prevention of corrupt activities I knew 
about it.  It was on – not on the top of my agenda.  My focus was to 
ensure that I cancelled the transaction with BNP should they not have 
the FSB Licence especially after starting to suspect as well that BNP as 
well looks like he is misrepresenting to us because on 6 July they gave 
us a copy of the FSB Licence and now they are not responding to us. 
So I agree but the focus to protect the assets of the company 
Chair. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So you accept that you breached your legal 
obligation under Section 34 of that Act? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  I accept Chair but as I have highlighted that I 
was looking at the bigger picture in terms of – of – because at the end 
nothing happened.  I safeguard the assets of the company.  The 
company was not in any financial prejudice.  I think that is what I was 
in – interested in or focusing on. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Nhantsi do you accept that you did not act 
in the best interest of SAA when you recommended approval of the 
cancellation fee? 
20 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  We – we discussed this Chair yesterday that 
I acted in the best interest of the company by – because of the 
pressure I recommended it but I did work behind the scenes in terms of 
talking to the other Board Members to ensure that the – the transaction 
or the approval does not go through. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 23 of 196 
 
So I acted with the information and the pressure that I had at 
the time.  I believe that to the best of my ability I acted in the best 
interest of the company to save it. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Nhantsi it is – in fairness I must put this to 
you for your comment.  What you could have done I would like to 
suggest to you to protect the best interest of SAA was to prepare that 
submission on 4 July that you prepared to notify the Board that there 
had been this request for a cancellation fee from BNP to set out under 
Point 2 of that template how it had been motived and under Point 3 of 
that template headed “Recommendation” acting in the best interest of 
10 
the company would have been to recommend that it not be approved. 
A, because there was no basis for it.  B, because it would be 
a cost that would not justifiably be borne by the company in its 
precarious financial position and C, because you were highly 
suspicious at that stage of the circumstances surrounding it.  What is 
your comment in response? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Thank you Chair.  Whilst I – whilst I 
appreciate the fact that I did not put the – that I am not recommending I 
think I also came to the Commission more to – to – for the South 
Africans to understand the pressure that was mounting on us.  The 
20 
environment that we were working under and I also stipulated yesterday 
that whilst we were under pressure I did not act negligently by just 
accepting what the Chair is saying and do it. 
I did under the circumstances and also if – if the Commission 
can appreciate the pressure Chair that we are under and at some point 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 24 of 196 
 
I was even scared.  I understand the – the fact that the 
recommendation is saying approve but I would also appreciate if this 
Commission can also appreciate the steps that I did in terms of 
communicating with the Board Members and ensuring that eventually 
the transaction does not go through. 
Some of the things are difficult Chair but I really want to 
paint a picture to say we were really under a lot of pressure.  If it was 
according to me I would not have even taken the – the submission to 
the Board but we were working under pressure to a point where I even 
said it yesterday that there was a point I would be scared Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I want to hear more about what you were scared of.  
What – what were you – what were you thinking was going to happen?  
What were you scared of? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Chair when I joined – perhaps let me start by 
saying when I joined SAA I was very excited to be part of the team that 
will turn around the company.  I believed that I do have the skill and the 
competency to – to work at SAA but when I was on the ground I 
realised that the work is doable but there are these political things 
where these undue pressures that are coming especially from the 
Board. 
20 
So when I joined SAA I would hear certain things.  For 
example there would be – there were certain people who were 
suspended because they were – sometimes they were saying no to the 
decision or the instructions from the Chair.  So I – I decided that I will 
stand my ground but as the pressure was mounting – as I said 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 25 of 196 
 
yesterday I even one day told my husband that I do not know what I got 
myself into when I joined SAA. 
Maybe I joined SAA at the wrong time because the pressures 
are coming left, right and centre Chair where you are given this 
instruction to do this.  You are given an instruction to do this and 
certain things are not lawful.  For example you will just be given a CV 
to say appoint this person in the procurement space and when the 
processes are done for example if I can give you that example. 
When – Chair one of the days told me that there is a guy who 
– who struggles and does not have a job and this person when she was 
10 
– when this person was praying he saw a vision from God that the 
person who will assist you in your problems is – is Ms Myeni.  So I said 
oh wow Chair and then she then said procurement area is in shambles.  
Appoint this – appoint this person in procurement. 
At the end of that discussion that I had Chair with the – with 
the Chairperson of the Board I had a missed call – I had a message and 
also a CV from this person.  So whilst we were discussing with the 
Chairperson I then assumed that she gave me his details.  So through 
the – the process - the recruitment process when I spoke to the Acting 
Chief Procurement Officer because it was his area. 
20 
He knew about it because he did not ask me questions.  So it 
means Chair spoke to him as well.  So the interviews were set Chair 
because there as a – a vacant – there were vacancies in the 
procurement space.  The – the person who came in on the interviews 
he failed dismally.  I did not attend Chair the interviews but I was told 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 26 of 196 
 
by the – Mr Lester Peters that he failed dismally. 
When I called the Chairperson to give an update that Chair 
unfortunately this person failed dismally.  Chair summoned me to take 
the – I told him in the afternoon.  He summoned me to go to Durban 
and take a first flight the following day. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How far – how far to come and talk to you about the – 
that interview? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you – you did so? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  I did so Chair.  I took a first flight the 
10 
following day. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  We met at Sibaya. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes in Durban.  A first question that she 
asked me was how a person with LLB can fail an interview.  I was still 
casual about it Chair then and then I said no – no Chairperson even a 
chartered accountant fails an interview and then she said does this 
mean you are not going to take instructions or implement instructions 
from the Board. 
20 
Again casually I said Chair did this have a Board Resolution 
and then I could see from – from her face Chair that I think my answer 
is wrong and then I then changed to say – because now I was not 
feeling comfortable and I am not in Johannesburg and I – I do not know 
Chair. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 27 of 196 
 
I just felt uncomfortable and then I then said no perhaps 
Chair I need to go back and we are going to look in the procurement 
area with a team.  Maybe there are other vacancies there that are lower 
than what we interviewed the guy for.  Maybe this position was very 
high for – for him and then he asked me are you going to do that and 
then I said yes Chair I will do it and then – that is how I got out of it 
Chair and I never implemented that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And is that all that you were called to Durban to 
discuss with her? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  The – the – there were three items Chair.  
10 
The second one that we discussed:  during the time I joined SAA … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  There was a decision that was taken by the 
Board. I am not sure whether it was coming from National Treasury … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  To vet all top 100. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you – I am sorry.  You do not need to go – to 
deal with those unless … 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  No this is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  They are examples of … 
20 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes.  This is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Pressure that was put on you. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes Chair this is another example.  This is 
one of the topics that we discussed on that day. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 28 of 196 
 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  The vetting process by Security State Agency 
was – was in – in progress at SAA.  She told me that there were - some 
candidates have been vetted already.  Some have not but in my 
Finance Department there is one person who has failed the vetting and 
I cannot have a – a person who has failed the vetting in the finance 
area because it is sensitive. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In – in whose section was that?  In the Chair’s - SAA 
Chair’s section or in yours? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  In mine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In your section, oh. 
10 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  She said in finance … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, in finance okay. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  And - and finance was - was headed by me 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  So she – I then said okay what are the 
results and then she did not give me the results but she said the 
person 
who 
failed 
the 
– 
the vetting in your area is 
– 
is 
Ms Lindsay Olitzki.  So I suggest that you go back.  Tomorrow have a 
meeting with Lindsay and – offline meeting – and you must give Lindsay 
20 
two options. 
Either she must check where else can you place her in the – 
in the organisation or you must fire her.  I then raised concerns Chair 
because it will trigger the – the labour disputes especially if it was not 
part of – of an employee’s contract.  So I also took that and I came 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 29 of 196 
 
back. 
I discussed that with the Acting CEO and raised my concerns 
to say we need to have a – a uniform of doing – of dealing with the 
results that are coming from SSA and this is what the Chair has said I 
must do on my side.  So Acting CEO as well agreed with me to say let 
us wait until the entire process is concluded and we will discuss it with 
Exco and come up with a policy on how to do the – on how to handle 
the ones that have passed and the ones that have failed the vetting. 
That day Chair I got a call from Chair in the afternoon asking 
if I spoke to Lindsay and I said no I did not talk to Lindsay but I spoke 
10 
to the Acting CE because – and I – I then explained what we discussed 
and what we agreed and then she was furious to say she gives me 
instructions and I do not follow instructions. 
Instead I go and discuss with Acting CEO.  If – if she wanted 
to discuss with Acting CEO she should have done so.  I said but Chair 
he is also my direct report and we are also protecting the company from 
the labour disputes and - and all that.  I then even suggested to her to 
say maybe she needs to talk to the Acting CEO and then we formulate a 
– a view on how to treat these and also perhaps check with the Legal 
Department and ensure that the company would be protected from the 
20 
labour disputes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So those are the matters that you – you 
discussed at least which relates to … 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Some of the pressure … 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 30 of 196 
 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That you say she put – put on you? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Nhantsi just two follow up questions in 
relation to that State Security Agency vetting. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  When did that occur? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  I think it occurred between June – I stand to 
be corrected.  I can – I can check.  I think from June 2016 but I can – I 
10 
can – I do not know the exact – but it was in 2016. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And who in SAA was vetted by the State 
Security Agency? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  The – the meeting that we had was all the 
top 100 Executives will be vetted.  I heard from – from the passages 
that some did not submit the information and some did.  I am one of the 
people who submitted the information. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Did you regard it as strange that 100 people at 
SAA were being vetted by the State Security Agency? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  I regarded it as strange Chair because that 
20 
is the – in my understanding that is the process that you do when 
especially the top secret security clearance … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Hm. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Because the – the SS - SSA was doing the 
top secret security clearance.  So it is strange because my 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 31 of 196 
 
understanding is at Executives we are a different levels and we will be 
exposed to different confidential information.  So we would not – you 
would not take the entire 100 … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Hm. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  And vet for top secret security.  Some will be 
vetted for the – the clearances that are lower than that.  So it was 
strange. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Did your position ever require you to receive 
top secret documents? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  I did not believe so but I did because I was 
10 
instructed to do it. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And I have it from your statement that you were 
told the basis on which Ms Olitzki had failed her state security vetting.  
If you go to page 21 you record there that: 
“Ms Myeni told you that she had failed it because of 
dual citizenship.” 
Is that correct? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Did you regard there as being something more 
behind Ms Myeni’s instruction to use a dual citizenship issue to remove 
20 
Ms Olitzki from the Finance Department? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes Chair.  When – when she gave me this 
instruction it was when I was suspecting that there – there are things 
that Ms Myeni is doing because first she asked me to appoint somebody 
in the procurement area and – and I assumed that she wanted 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 32 of 196 
 
somebody to be her eyes and ears in the procurement space.  Maybe 
now she wanted – she had somebody in mind that she wanted to put on 
– on Ms Olitzki’s position. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And did you raise that all with her? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  No I never raised it Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then just too clarifying relation to the 
Chair’s earlier question.  He was engaging with you about how – in 
what respects you felt scared and then you told us about this 
increasing pressure and the different instances of it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are reading my mind. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I – I wanted to go back to it because … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I – I realised she told me a lot of things but … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We did not get to that but continue.  I think you know 
exactly what I wanted. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed.  Can you clarify for us what constituted 
your fear because there seemed to be a range of options?  It may have 
been that you – your job would have been on the line.  It may have 
20 
been different types of fear that you were experiencing.  In one of your 
answers you referenced not being in Johannesburg and feeling 
uncomfortable.  Can you please try and enable us to understand what 
that fear was like? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes Chair I … 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 33 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And – and what it is you were scared of as well. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Chair I was scared.  When I was in Durban I 
was – I was scared.  I will put it bluntly Chair.  I was scared of my life 
and I am not saying Chair … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Was going to do anything … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Something came to my mind that I need to be 
careful.  I was scared of my life.  I was never scared of – of losing my 
job Chair because … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  I believed that I work hard.  I am dedicated.  
My work ethics talk for itself.  I can get another job. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You mean if you say you can get another job it means 
you would lose this one and get another one? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes, yes Chair.  It was clear to me that I was 
going to eventually lose especially after the cancellation of the – of the 
BNP.  It was clear that I was going to lose it because some of the 
instructions that Chair would give me would say you are not performing 
because you do not have KPIs. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  So when you say you are not scared of losing 
the job it is because you did not think that you could lose your job at 
SAA but you are simply saying losing the SAA job was not something 
you were worried about because getting another job would not be a 
problem.  Is that what you are saying? 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 34 of 196 
 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes Chair.  What I am – what I am trying to 
paint is I was doing my work to the best of my ability and with 
dedication and – and all that.  It was never in my forefront that I should 
please certain people because I need to protect my job.  To clarify on – 
on the one for – for - especially after the transaction of BNP. 
I knew after we cancelled the – the BNP Contract that Chair 
might do what Ms Kwinana told me earlier because Ms Kwinana used to 
relate that you – you have got a shelf life - that is what she used to say 
– you have got a shelf life with – with Ms Myeni.  If you do not do 
certain instructions and then she related instances where she will go to 
10 
Sunnyside Café and disguise herself and write whistleblowing emails. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who is she now?  Who – who was she – who is she 
that went to – used to go to Sunnyside? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Ms Myeni. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Ms Myeni used to go to – this is the – what 
was related by Ms Kwinana and it was also in the article in 2017 in the 
Mail & Guardian where Ms Kwinana stated this to say Ms Myeni if you 
are not – if she wants to get rid of you she - she sometimes goes – 
even goes to the extent of going to the Sunnyside Café and disguise 
20 
herself and write whistleblowing emails and then from there because 
the custodian of – of whistle blower at SAA was the Chief Internal Audit 
she would come and then put pressure on the Chief Internal Audit to 
either suspend you or to dismiss you or appoint – there - there is some 
– some firms to do the work. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 35 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so in the end what is it that you were scared of 
there? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  In – in Durban I was scared of my life. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  You – you thought that you could be killed? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Something like that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And on other occasions when you say pressure was 
put on you and you were scared what were you scared of? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What did you think would happen and who would do 
what?  What is it that you were scared of? 
10 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Chair I was – on all the occasions – let me 
say I was scared of my life Chair … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  And – and with all these pressures and also 
with Mr Mngadi and everyone – pressure coming from everywhere I was 
scared of my life. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And did you think that if you did not give – you did 
not carry out certain instructions or you did not do certain things that 
you were opposed to doing you could be harmed? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Come again Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you think that if you did not carry out certain 
instructions with which you did not agree or if you did not do certain 
things in regard to which pressure was being put on you – you would be 
harmed? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes Chair I – I did.  Those came across my 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 36 of 196 
 
mind.  Also Chair one thing that I had in mind in terms of – of dealing 
with Chair of the Board.  When I joined SAA I heard a story where my – 
my predecessor - in fact I think Ms Stimpel’s testimony said so that 
there was a point where Mr Wolf had a pen and – and then he recorded 
Ms Myeni. 
So you think those things that to the extent of people thinking 
of even recording you.  So what – the kind of person you are that 
people now are trying to build evidence and even recording you and all 
that.  I was scared Chair that I could be harmed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And just to clarify was there ever a direct 
threat to you to harm you? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  No Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Nhantsi I would like to go to the question of 
Ms Stimpel’s suspension. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And I propose to deal with it briefly.  It 
occurred on 5 July 2016 and the reason that you gave Ms Stimpel in 
her suspension notice on the day for suspending her was that she had 
been involved in and I am quoting here: 
20 
“The removal of company confidential documents 
without permission from procurement.” 
Do you recall that? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:  Yes I do Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  My first … 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 37 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  What page is that? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Chair you will find it in the Stimpel bundle it’s 
DD1B and it’s at page 570. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Ms Nhantsi you’ll see that at the end of the 
first paragraph, you notify her that she’s suspended from work for an 
investigation and/or the outcome of a disciplinary hearing which 
includes, amongst others, the stated reason at the time was removal of 
company confidential tender documents without permission from 
10 
procurement, you see that? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Yes Chair, I do. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Did you take this decision on your own or 
were you instructed to take it, to suspend Ms Stimpel? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     I consulted before I take the decision, 
consulted with HR and also the legal department and the procurement, 
before the decision was taken we assessed the seriousness of taking 
the confidential documents that belonged to procurement. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Ms Nhantsi in your evidence yesterday, you 
made some reference to your concerns around confidentiality of 
20 
procurement documents, do you recall that? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     I made concerns? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    You made some comments about the 
confidentiality of procurement documents, do you recall that? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     I do. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 38 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    It’s in the context of  your evidence where we 
were probing whether you could have asked for the underlying bid 
submissions when you were asked to recommend  the appointment of 
BnP after the tender, do you recall that? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     I recall it. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    I recall in your evidence, you said, you 
thought there was a provision of the Supply Chain Management Policy 
that set-out that those documents are confidential and so you couldn’t 
have seen them, do you recall that? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Yes I do. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    But we probed it and as I have your evidence 
you accepted the fact that if you had wanted to see them as somebody 
who’d been asked to recommend that decision you would have been 
entitled to see the, do you accept that? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     I said I never asked for them but I 
assumed that those would be given to me. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Correct and that’s useful because then we 
don’t need to go to the Supply Chain Management Policy, I did that 
overnight and I certainly could find no provision that said a decision 
maker in SAA who is asked to make a decision on a procurement 
20 
process cannot have access to the bid documents, so we agree on 
that? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Chair that is what I was told at SAA that 
those documents, nobody except the procurement can have them, that 
is why I was relating a narrative that says even the members of those 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 39 of 196 
 
committees, they signed a confidentiality agreement. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Yes Ms Nhantsi they signed confidentiality 
agreements because in terms of the policy they may not divulge the 
contents of any bid to any bidder, in other words, external parties to 
SAA. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Even to – my understanding even to SAA 
staff. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Well that is not in the policy and as I 
understand your evidence you regarded your role as to be responsible 
for ensuring proper process in SAA is that correct? 
10 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Yes correct.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    So did you consider the policy yourself? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     I was advised at that time, I didn’t read the 
policy. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Okay so will you accept that the policy does 
not say, anywhere, that people in a decision making role within SAA 
may not have access to the underlying bid submissions in respect of 
which they are asked to make a decision? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     It might say that Chair but it is a known 
factor at SAA that those bid documents are very confidential and they 
20 
stay at the procurement department and they don’t leave the 
procurement department Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    So was it that understanding that motivated 
you to suspend Ms Stimpel on the 5 t h of July on that basis? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Yes I was advised that it is very serious 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 40 of 196 
 
and if those documents can leak to the media or anywhere it has got 
dire consequences for the company because those documents are not 
supposed to leave procurement department at all.  I would also clarify 
Chair, to even say, we had to firm up the procurement department in 
terms of ensuring that we limit the access of other staff members 
entering into procurement.  After Ms Stimpel took the documents on the 
floor without permission, so we had to now currently, after Ms Stimpel 
took the documents at procurement we had to tighten up the security, 
so not all the SAA employees can enter now into the procurement 
department, people that are working there have to open for you. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Ms Stimpel’s evidence was that you instructed 
her not to attend a National Treasury meeting on the day because you 
were concerned that she was going to share those documents with 
National Treasury, did you say that to her? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     No I did not say that to her, I was 
instructing her to come back and not attend the meeting because I was 
even told that I’m with Silas and (indistinct) in my office and he is 
relating that she took the documents.  I wanted her to come back so 
that we can level the ground and I can understand from her side as well 
why did she take the documents that she knows that she is not suppose 
20 
to have them. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    And Ms Stimpel’s evidence is that she asked 
for an opportunity to explain the circumstances under which she took 
the documents on the day, and you did not afford her that opportunity.  
Do you accept that? 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 41 of 196 
 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     I do not recall saying that to her. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    But you don’t dispute that you might have? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:   No I don’t remember that I said that Chair.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Ms Nhantsi there’s one small final aspect and 
then my concluding propositions to put to you.  Chair I’m receiving 
notes that we  have surpassed the tea time, I wasn’t on track because 
of our slightly later start, it shouldn’t be many more minutes with Ms 
Nhantsi, I’m in your hands, we may want to complete it and then take 
the tea break. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Lets – how much time do you…(intervention). 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Ten minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:     About ten minutes, okay let’s see if we can finish at 
quarter to twelve. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    That will be helpful Chair, thank you, we’re 
indebted because there will be a new witness and we can use the tea 
time to change over. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Ja. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Ms Nhantsi, in your statement you dealt with 
the circumstances around the suspension of Dr Darwa?, I would like to 
just deal with it briefly.  You suspended him a few days after you joined 
20 
SAA is that correct? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Correct Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    And I take it a consequence of you doing it so 
shortly after you arrived, that you didn’t at the stage that you 
suspended him know whether the charges against him were valid or 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 42 of 196 
 
not? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Come again? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    When you suspended Dr Darwa, had you 
investigated whether the charges against him were valid or not? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     No Chair I didn’t investigate, in fact when I 
joined SAA I was told by two Board members, Ms Myeni and Ms 
Kwinana already at the time when I joined a legal firm was already 
appointed to deal with allegations against Dr Darwa and the charges 
were drafted already, high level, what I understood was one of the 
charges that was levelled against Dr Darwa was they attended 
10 
roadshows – the Board members attended roadshows together with the 
executives of SAA, specifically where they were explaining to black 
suppliers the process of how to do tenders and submit to SAA with the 
view of 30% set aside.  There was a resolution that was taken by the 
Board before I joined of 30% set aside, meaning all the tenders that are 
going out at SAA, the bidders should put aside 30% for women, for 
people with disability, for rural – but it’s four categories Chair.  So my 
understanding is, when they came back from all the roadshows they 
gave a list to Dr Darwa of the suppliers that he should include in the 
database and do business with and Dr Darwa was – didn’t implement 
20 
those.  So high level it’s one of the charges that he had but I gave him 
the suspension letter and after the processes were done, gave him the 
dismissal letter more because it was a direct line, he was reporting to 
me. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Thank you Ms Nhantsi, that’s all we wanted to 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 43 of 196 
 
get clarity on, Dr Darwa will be one of the witnesses but you didn’t 
have knowledge of the veracity of the charges against him when you 
handed him the suspension letter? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     No Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Thank you, Ms Nhantsi I would then, in 
conclusion simply like to draw out the essence as I will submit it is of 
your evidence and give you an opportunity to comment, it will be brief I 
think my note is that there’s about seven strands of it which are of 
particular importance it will be our submission to the work of the 
Commission so if I may do that.  Ms Nhantsi your evidence I suggest to 
10 
you for your comment indicates that there was extrodinary pressure 
brought to bear on you to support decisions in the financial interests of 
a third party, do you accept that? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     I accept that chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Your evidence also seems to indicate that 
there was a behind the scenes scheme between Mr Mngadi of Nedbank 
and Ms Myeni to enrich themselves at the expense of SAA. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Agreed Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Your evidence also seems to indicate that Ms 
Myeni shared confidential company information with M Mngadi. 
20 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Agreed Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    That Ms Myeni used State security vetting to 
seek to remove employees that she did not want in certain positions. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Agreed Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    That Ms Myeni instructed that persons be 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 44 of 196 
 
appointed in positions without foundation. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Agreed Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    And that you heard from Ms Kwinana that Ms 
Myeni used to make false whistleblowing reports against employees 
that she wanted out of the way. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Agreed Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Ms Nhantsi if  Mr van der Merwe’s evidence is 
correct and Grissag had occurred no costs whatsoever in their work on 
the funding opportunity at SAA do you accept that the entire motivation 
from BnP to be paid the cancellation fee amounted to a fraud on SAA? 
10 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Yes Chair I do. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    And I have it from your evidence that you 
accept that you failed to report a corrupt activity or a suspicion that 
one had taken place in relation to the cancellation fee at SAA. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Yes I accept it Chair, saying it was 
overtaken by events, yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Thank you Chair, unless there if further from 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Thank you, yes. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Chair if you may allow just one second the 
20 
concluding remarks from my side. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Yes before he concluding remark that you – or 
remarks that you wish to make.  You said that a cancellation fee is 
common in this kind of transaction, if I understood you correctly in 
relation to the raising of funds, did I understand you correctly? 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 45 of 196 
 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Chair I was – Chair yes I said the 
cancellation fee is common but I was not specifically saying to this kind 
of transaction …(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:    Oh okay, well I thought the question you were being 
asked was more in relation to the raising of funds, whether a 
cancellation fee to you knowledge, is common in the industry.  
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Chair the cancellation fee is common to 
the industry and I take that from the experience that I have in auditing 
this space, so the clauses of penalty and cancellation fees are normal 
but they are substantiated and they get quantified.  The reason why I 
10 
asked BnP for the quantification is – for example if we take an 
environment of a consulting space before you produce a legal opinion 
or before we produce an audit opinion there’s a lot of work that you do 
behind the scenes, your man hours, your disbursements and all that.  
So should you cancel, the person that has done the work is entitled to 
some cancellation fee, so it was in that context where I said it’s 
common in the industry, hence I was probing BnP and wanting to 
understand the basis of the cancellation fee because I would 
understand if they give me the invoice – the flight costs, the man hours 
of the expertise that they used, they took out of the other projects to go 
20 
and negotiate the investments.  So it was – for me the amount was 
exorbitant but I understood the principle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well as I understand cancellation – the cancellation 
fee that BnP was talking about, and if your understanding is different 
you must tell me, as I understand it what they were talking about was 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 46 of 196 
 
that if  SAA cancelled the idea of them raising funds for  SAA, and I 
seem to think that they were saying that even before any contract could 
be concluded between themselves and SAA then SAA would have to pay 
a certain percentage which they gave.  If the cancellation was due to 
factors beyond their control, is that your understanding as well.  In 
other words, one,  they were not saying pay us for the work that we 
have actually done and for the time we have spent on the work and we 
will give you our timesheets, how much time we spent doing this or 
doing that in order to try and get funds for you but they were simply 
saying, we don’t want you to look at how much work we have actually 
10 
done, you’ll just have to accept that we have done some work, how 
much it took us to do it is neither here nor there but if you cancel and 
it’s because of reasons beyond our control as BnP then  you must pay 
such an such a percentage.  That was my understanding of what they 
were talking about, is your understanding different? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Chair slightly because when I asked them 
to substantiate the cancellation fee, which at the end I didn’t agree with 
it, they said, they attempted to give a breakdown of - I’m not sure 
where is it on the file…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:     Maybe even before you go there…(intervention). 
20 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Chair they gave the breakdown of the man 
hours, the experience that they are using to negotiate the fees, they 
listed also the flight costs, their accommodation and on top of that they 
then said in that letter that Grissag AG should SAA cancel will charge 
them 5million US Dollars. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 47 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:     Well…(intervention). 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     So these three, that’s why I’m saying 
slightly Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Well normally if somebody is going to do some work 
for you, normally you would agree that they will be paid per hour or per 
day or per month or per week or per year for doing that work and you 
agree on the rate and that person would then do the work and that 
person will not be paid if they have not – for an hour that they did not 
use to do your work or for a month when they were not doing your work 
unless they are on leave if they are employed but if it’s an independent 
10 
contractor they are not going to be paid if they are not doing their work 
okay but you can have another arrangement.  That is an arrangement 
where the payment – their payment is not dependant on how much work 
they have put in, it is dependant on the results, like a commission to 
say, you asked me to get you 15billion rand, if I get you 15billion rand 
you will give me 5% of 15billion rand.  Irrespective of whether it has 
taken me a week to get you the 15 billion rand or a month.  Irrespective 
of whether I just made one call and got somebody to give you 15billion 
rand you will give me 5% of that, you understand the distinction? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Yes I do Chair, yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:     Now my understanding of what BnP was talking 
about was an arrangement that is along the lines of a commission that 
– that’s why it was important for them to talk about a percentage. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Yes sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Because if you base the payment on hourly rates 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 48 of 196 
 
you have got to talk about an hourly rate not a percentage, you 
understand? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Yes I do Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Yes, so – now my question is whether this 
understanding I have of how they wanted to be paid, of course with 
your understanding as well. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:    Yes it does Chair because when we 
discussed he success fee rate it’s exactly that, to say the agreement 
was, you go get 15billion and we’ll pay you the success fee of 1.5%, 
hence when they introduced this new term and this new clause of 
10 
cancellation fee, which was never part of the agreement  when we gave 
them the letter of award, we had to take it back to the Board because 
it’s a new clause and it needs to be deliberated by the Board because 
it’s an addition, basically, to what was discussed so it look like, as 
you’re rightfully saying,  if they make a phone call and then they will 
and we cancel because also SAA is a  public entity they’ve got 
challenges, we might cancel so at the back of my mind Chair, if you ask 
me, I agree with you but my question that  I had or my suspicion, which 
was  eventually then confirmed to be correct, my understanding is BnP 
knew that at the time – knew that their FSB license was cancelled or 
20 
was suspended by FSB and they wanted to get money out of SAA 
irrespective, whether it’s 256million or whether it’s 49.9million because 
one, they misled us or they misrepresented and gave us still the FSB 
license yet they knew that it’s suspended but now they then wanted 
another way of getting money out of SAA by – because they know that 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 49 of 196 
 
FSB license is suspended and should SAA know that the contract will 
be cancelled and then now they roped in a new clause of the 
cancellation fee. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but I just go back to what you know to be the 
norm and I wan this because Mr van der Merwe was asked whether a 
cancellation fee is a norm in the sector and my recollection is that he 
said it was not.  So I’m trying to establish that – so when you  said a 
cancellation fee is a norm in this sector did you – were you talking 
about a success – what you call a success or what has been referred to 
as success fee or you were talking about a fee that would be paid 
10 
under the circumstances that BnP was putting forward?  
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Chair I was talking about the success fee 
but I was then generalising on the cancellation fee to say it is the norm 
if you cancel and yet there’s goods and services, I was not specific to 
this transaction. 
CHAIRPERSON:     So now that I think you have agreed we have the 
same understanding of what BnP was talking about when they were told 
about a cancellation fee, what is your evidence is it that it’s a norm for 
that kind of fee to be charged or is it not? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     It’s not a norm Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:     It is not a norm? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Okay now you also – you told me how Ms Myeni 
would speak to you about the employment and dismissal of certain 
employees, 
somebody 
must 
be 
employed, 
somebody 
must 
be 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 50 of 196 
 
dismissed, you talked about the dismissal in the context of the 
employee who apparently had failed security clearance and she was the 
one who raised that issue – Ms Myeni, with you.   Was that an issue 
that you expected to be raised with you by the Chair of the Board or 
would that be an issue that you would expect the person you reported 
to, namely the acting CEO to raise as far as you know is that a matter 
that the Chair of a Board would really be involved in, in an institution 
such as SAA Parastatal? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Chair that’s the matter that I expected to 
be raised by the acting CEO hence I came back and discussed it with 
10 
him because the day-to-day running of the business, the acting CEO is 
the one whose responsible for that and also if you look at the structure 
of SAA the Board gets involved in appointing the CEO and also in 
recommending or – in recommending and approving the CFO only, all 
the other structures below that the Board doesn’t get involved. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Would it be fair to say that when you made the 
recommendation that you made to the Board, to approve the 
cancellation fee in circumstances where you were against the approval 
on your evidence and you went to the extent of contacting some of the 
members of the Board with a view to influencing them not to approve 
20 
the cancellation fee, would it be fair to say, you sought to balance – to 
strike a balance between the interests of the company and the interests 
of your own- your own interests in terms of what you were scared of? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Yes Chair it would be fair especially if you 
say the balance would be to protect the company and also to protect my 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 51 of 196 
 
well-being, well-being being – I was scared not to be harmed and all 
what we’ve discussed, yes Chair but also the focus, as I’ve been saying 
is, my work ethics are known Chair in the industry and I’ve always 
worked towards acting in the best interest of the company and 
protecting the assets of the company. 
CHAIRPERSON:     What did you think would happen if you wrote the 
memorandum and your recommendation was that the cancellation – the 
Board should not approve the cancellation fee and all the Board 
members saw that, that was your stance? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Chair I would discuss this with the acting 
10 
CEO, I think eventually we agreed that, let’s just put it there and then 
engage them behind the scenes. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Did you not want the Chairperson to know – to see 
it 
in 
writing 
that 
you 
were 
saying 
the 
Board 
should 
not 
approve…(intervention). 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Yes I didn’t want her to see that and also I 
didn’t – I was not comfortable and I didn’t want her to even know that 
behind the scenes I’m talking to the other Board members, roping that 
they must not approve it. 
CHAIRPERSON:     When you spoke to the other Board members did 
20 
you ask them to keep the conversation between yourselves and each 
one of them or the understanding – they did understand, the context 
was such, they did understand that you would not want them to tell the 
Chairperson what you had said to them? 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     I didn’t ask them Chair, I assumed that the 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 52 of 196 
 
content is understood. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes because you did say what the Chairperson had 
said to you and you did say what your view was.  
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Okay, alright anything? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:     No thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Thank you, I think there is counsel for, I don’t know 
who that wants to come forward and…(intervention). 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Maybe Chair before that you forgot 
to…(intervention). 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:     Yes I forgot you wanted to say something yes. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     Yes please Chair.  Thank you so much 
Chair I really appreciate this opportunity that we get in this Commission 
I appreciate it more especially from the executive point of view, for us 
to be heard of the frustrations that we go through on a day-to-day basis 
and I’d like to say, I think you tried to ask me a question yesterday and 
I attempted to answer the question where you asked if I was the right 
person, perhaps, for the job I would want to re-affirm that I strongly 
believe that I was the right person for the job and – but I never foresee 
the pressures that would come which were basically not part of your 
20 
day-to-day running of the business.  So when I joined SAA I was very 
excited to be in the team that will turn around the company but the 
challenges Chair have made me a better person, let alone the fact that 
I ended up not having a job but I believe that I’ve learnt a lot from SAA 
and any company that I’ll be joining, I’ll be  using all the wisdom.  One 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 53 of 196 
 
of the things that I take out is, when I joined I was very naïve, thinking 
all the Board members will always act in the best interest of the 
companies, thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:     No thank you very much for having come to give 
your evidence, I will still hear more evidence and there may be 
evidence that will contradict the evidence you have given and I will 
make findings that I will consider appropriate to make in due course but 
I do want you to know that we appreciate that you came to give 
evidence.  There have been other senior manager, executives from 
Parastatals and people who were employed in high positions in 
10 
government departments who came and gave evidence and shared with 
the Commission the  experiences they had – they went through when 
they insisted that the right things be done and resisted attempts for 
wrong things to be done and we want to hear from them because we 
want to know exactly what they may have gone through so that we can 
see at the end of the work of the Commission what we may need to 
recommend should be put in place to make sure that people who insist 
on the right things being done are protected and will not be victimised 
in any way.  So do encourage others that you know may have 
something that’s relevant to the terms of reference of the Commission 
20 
to come forward and to share with the Commission and with the nation 
what they know.  I still believe there are many out there who know a lot 
that happened and they include senior people in government 
departments, past and present, they include Ministers, deputy 
Ministers, DG’s, CEO’s of Parastatals, Chief Financial Officers and 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 54 of 196 
 
many others, I believe there are many who are still not coming forward 
who know a lot that they should be coming forward to share with the 
Commission and we just need everybody to urge them to do the right 
thing, to come forward and share all the information and experiences 
that they had.  So thank you very much but before I release you, I want 
to hear what counsel has to say in case it needs you, yes thank you. 
ADV NOSANDISO SOVITI ZWEDALA:   Thank you Mr Commissioner, 
when I raised the hand at the time there is a critical aspect of Mr 
Mahlangu’s evidence which I was of the view that it would enrich the 
Commission’s engagement with this witness if it was put to this witness 
10 
before she leaves the stand but on conferring with him, he is happy 
that he will deal with it in his testimony, and given the time constraints 
as well we will address it then. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Okay thank you very much, thank you.  Thank you 
very much Ms Nhantsi, you are excused. 
MS PHUMEZA NHANTSI:     It’s my pleasure, thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:     Thank you.  Well it’s about 12 o’clock. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR: 
It is indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:    The tea break is like lunch break, we’ll take the tea 
break until quarter past twelve, we adjourn. 
20 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  Chair we now move the focus 
of the evidence in the aviation stream to a transaction that took place 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 55 of 196 
 
between South African Express and the North West Department of 
Transport.  And we will hear evidence over the next number of days 
from witnesses related to that focus area of the investigation.  Our first 
witness is Mr Timothy Ngwenya.  Prior to calling him up Chair if I may 
request an opportunity for the legal representatives of certain parties 
who have an interest in the evidence placing themselves on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes let us do that. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  Thank You Mr Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Mr Chair I appear on behalf of the Mafikeng 
10 
Airport Management Company as counsel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV XOLANI NOKA:  Thank you Mr Chair.  My Chair I Xolani Noka 
briefed by [indistinct] Attorneys I appear on behalf of Ms Dludwano the 
CFO who will be implicated in the evidence.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair if I may call Mr Ngwenya to 
take up a seat at the witness table. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you let him do so.  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair just for record purposes Mr Ngwenya’s 
affidavit and annexures can be found in Exhibit DD5 if we may give it 
that reference for the record? 
CHAIRPERSON:  The lever arch file containing Mr Timothy Nhlanhla 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 56 of 196 
 
Ngwenya’s statement and annexures will be marked Exhibit DD5. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair if I request for the witness to 
be sworn in? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I am Timothy Nhlanhla 
Ngwenya. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections to taking the prescribed 
oath? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Not all all Ma’am. 
10 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on your 
conscience? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that all the evidence that you will 
give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing but the truth, if so 
please raise your right hand and say, so help me God. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  So help me God. 
REGISTRAR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you may proceed. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Ngwenya just orientate 
20 
you in front of you on the table is the file containing your affidavit and 
annexures.  It will be to that file that I will refer in the course of your 
evidence.  And where relevant if at any point you need assistance with 
reference to a document you can indicate that to me and I will assist 
you with that.  But my proposal for receiving your evidence today is to 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 57 of 196 
 
really take you through the affidavit but ask you to account the story as 
accurately as you can and where relevant we can go into the 
documents.  Mr Ngwenya if we can start with your background.  You set 
that out if we go to page 1 of the file.  You will see the pagination in 
the top right hand corner of the pages.  And you talk in paragraph 1 in 
particular about your background within South African Express.  Can 
you please tell the Chair what that comprises? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It talks to my position Chair.  I 
am employed as the Divisional Manager Security Management.  I am 
actually solely responsible for the security and investigation function 
10 
within the entity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just raise your voice a little higher. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And Mr Ngwenya maybe bring that even closer. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  If that would be of assistance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.   
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I am saying Chair I am 
employed as the Divisional Manager Security Management.  I am 
responsible for the overall security function and investigation within the 
20 
entity.  I actually joined SA Express in 2014 on the 6 January as a 
Security Compliance Officer and I operated as that until April 2015 
when I started acting a Security Specialist / Manager.  I was in that 
position until April 2018 when I was appointed Divisional Manager 
Security Management and my appointed was dated back to February of 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 58 of 196 
 
that year.  I still report to the ICEO Mr – Ms Siza Mzimela and ja that is 
basically it. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Mr Ngwenya.  Just for record 
purposes you have produced an affidavit for the commission.  
Ordinarily when witnesses prepare statements we begin by asking them 
to confirm the correctness but this is an affidavit and in that case you 
have already done so by deposing to it before a commissioner of oaths. 
I do however understand from you that there are one or two corrections 
you would like to make in the affidavit and my proposal is to deal with 
them when we get to them in the course of the evidence.   
10 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya at page 2 of your affidavit you talk 
about your reporting lines within SA Express can you please tell us 
about that? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  You mean at the time Ma’am? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  At the time indeed. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay.  During 2015 actually 
prior to the investigation I was reporting to Ms Merriam Mochoele who 
was the legal who was the legal risk and compliance general manager.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr I know that some evidence leaders help 
20 
with the spelling of some of these names. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To assist the transcriber. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  That may be useful. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that might be useful ja. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 59 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed.  Just to give it is Merriam, Merriam and 
then the surname Mochoele is Mochoele.  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes she was the general 
manager legal risk and compliance which means the security 
management fell under her wing as well.  She was also responsible for 
that.  During the time when the investiga – I started this investigation 
in particular around June there was somebody who was brought in – 
appointed as a divisional manager safety and security by the name of 
Ms Brenda Mblanene.  I think at the time when the investigation started 
10 
or when I – you know I started this investigation I think she was about 
a month old within SA Express hence in most of or rather throughout 
she is not even mentioned.  Because when this whole thing – this 
investigation was or rather the whistle blowing – when I was called I 
did not even speak to her because of truth of the matter is that the 
matter was not to disrespect but above her pay grade.  So I had bypass 
her and go back to Ms Mochoele and the CEO.  In fact what actually 
happened Chair that was the 24 June 2016 the afternoon just after 
three I received a call from a lady who claimed that she was from the 
North West and she wanted to report corruption against one of the 
20 
GM’s within SA Express whom at the time she alleged that this person 
was interfering with her company and she wanted to – he wanted to 
actually take over the company.  And she was prepared to go to media 
in particular Mail and Guardian to report this.  I was really concerned 
and I felt that you know facts may be misconstrued somehow and you 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 60 of 196 
 
know I was concerned about the company’s reputation you know getting 
tainted.  And I requested the lady to give me an opportunity to meet 
with her so I can understand exactly as what was the issue all about.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya if I may just interject there. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Could you give us clarity as to who the people 
are that you are referring to?  So who was the woman who contacted 
you on the 24 June 2016? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay it was Ms Babadi 
Tlatsana. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Just to interrupt there I do apologise but for the 
purposes of the record that is Babadi and Tlatsana is Tlatsana.  So she 
contacted you and she – as I have your evidence wanted to report 
corruption related to somebody within SA Express.  Who was that 
person that she identified? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Mr Brian Tebogo Van Wyk was 
the GM Commercial at SA Express. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  And that is Brian, Brian, Tebogo, 
Tebogo and Van Wyk, Van Wyk. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes.  I therefore pleaded with 
20 
her not to go on and I requested that we meet and the meeting took 
place the following in Mafikeng Mall where you know on the very same 
Friday we agreed we would meet between eight and half past eight.  So 
the following day which was a Saturday I left my house very early at 
approximately four o’clock am and drove to the North West to meet with 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 61 of 196 
 
this lady.  Because of – on the day she had – gave me her description 
you know to say she looks like this and she will be wearing 123.  So I 
went to the North West and I got there and I must say that I was 
pushing to get there first so I can identify her as you know she walked 
in and indeed it happened like that. Because when I got there she was 
not really there and I saw her through the window as she was coming 
in.  I suspected that it could be her and when she walked in she looked 
around and I could you know when our eyes met we could see that it 
was her and then she approached me, introduced herself to say Ms 
Babadi Tlatsana the owner or director of Koreneka Trading and Projects 
10 
and Trading something like that – that company okay which is the 
handling company for SA Express.  Then I introduced … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes Ma’am. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  If I could just interrupt there sometimes you 
will have a lot of background knowledge that we may not have. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So do forgive me.  But you say she was 
Kereneka was the handling company. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  For SA Express can you just explain to us what 
that means? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay as an airline when we fly 
to particular destinations, airports you would have a company doing the 
ground handling for us because of we are not doing the ground 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 62 of 196 
 
handling we only doing the air services, flying passengers and all that.  
Therefore we would source or rather outsource the function to specific 
companies that would provide you know [indistinct] our passengers you 
know the logistics on the ground. So in this instance Koreneka was 
doing the checking which means they were processing passengers as 
they were checking in, loading baggage you know and so forth but the 
ground services.  So this Koreneka was providing that service to SA 
Express which means there was an agreement of some sort between SA 
Express and Koreneka for this specific service where SA Express was 
expected of course to remunerate Koreneka for the services rendered 
10 
to SA Express. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And Mr Ngwenya where were those services 
being provided, the ground handling services? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  At that time Koreneka was 
providing the services in two airports.  One which was Pilanesburg and 
the other one was Mafikeng airport. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Both located in the North West? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Both located in the North West 
yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the handling part of the business refers to the 
20 
checking in of passengers and what else? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It was the checking in, the 
baggage loading, the boarding of passengers it is actually a process.  
It is a value chain of some sort Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it like taking the passenger from when he or she 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 63 of 196 
 
checks in up to… 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where he and she … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Up to the – board the aircraft. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the luggage gets put in the plane? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it that process? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely Chair, 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright thank you. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And just for the record again Koreneka which is 
not an obvious word to spell is Koreneka. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So Mr Ngwenya you identify Ms Tlatsana on 
that Saturday morning and she introduces herself and then as I have 
your statement we now at page 3 at least your affidavit at page 3 you 
then go on to recount what Ms Tlatsana told you in that meeting.  And 
can you summaries for us what that was? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay firstly I had to probe her 
pertaining the allegation that she raised the previous day about Mr 
20 
Brian Van Wyk.  Mr Tlatsana told me that like I said that she was the 
owner – the sole owner of – she was the owner of Koreneka Trading 
and Projects which was providing this ground handling services to SA 
Express and then she informed me that she had the dealings with SA 
Express in particular Mr Van Wyk because of – she got through to 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 64 of 196 
 
Express via Mr Van Wyk.  What she explained to me was that initially 
when this whole thing started about the project there was a meeting 
somewhere in the North West where she gave a proposal to revive the 
air services or rather the airports within the North West. You know that 
she was interested in reviving that and then at that time I there were 
talks between – according to her Chair – there were talks between SA 
Express and the North West Department of Transport you know to have 
a deal to have SA Express you know flown into the area and all that.  
And she said somehow somebody referred her to Mr Van Wyk to say 
she can speak to Mr Van Wyk who is the general manager for SA 
10 
Express and I must say at the time Mr Van Wyk’s department was 
spearheading the project for – this project in the North West.  She said 
to me she provided the documents to Mr Van Wyk which means that was 
the company profile and the statutory document you know to provide 
that service as it was a proposal.  Then Mr Brian Van Wyk she said 
took that stuff and later on confirmed to her that she stands a chance 
of getting you know the job.  For the simple reason that she was a 
woman number 1 and she was from the very same area which is North 
West of which the government was actually interested in giving local 
people empowering – empowering them in fact.  So Mr Van Wyk told her 
20 
that the only disadvantage was that she was the sole owner of the 
organisation of that company and therefore on those basis that would 
limit her chances of being awarded the work.  He then advised her to 
get somebody you know to be partnered with her and she suggested at 
the time to Mr Van Wyk that she would prefer to have her sister on 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 65 of 196 
 
board as a partner.  Mr Van Wyk told her that it cannot work because it 
would be seen as nepotism.  You know family members and all that.  
And Mr Van Wyk suggested that he can bring two individuals that can 
actually assist her as she did not have the experience you know 
pertaining to the service that she wants to provide.  He said he would 
bring two people that can actually create more opportunities for her 
going forward and they would assist her with the management as they 
are knowledgeable you know in relation to what she was to provide – 
the service that she was to provide.  And she agreed to that.  And then 
later on Mr Van Wyk brought two individuals to this – to her to say she 
10 
needed to add these people as part of the owners of this organisation.  
So the names that Mr Van Wyk brought I take it that also with their 
identities and everything else that needed to be done was a Mr Victor 
Thabeng who was supposed to be a partner and Ms Joyce Phiri and he 
brought the two and they held about 66%, 33/33 whilst she was the 
majority shareholder of 34%.  So that is how the Koreneka ownership 
was actually altered then they became part of Koreneka.  She said that 
they – they provided services of course but the other thing that she 
mentioned to me was that she was not actively involved.  I may have 
omitted this information Chair on my affidavit I am thinking because of 
20 
– there were quite a lot of things that were happening around that time.  
So she said she was not actively participating and this could be 
supported by one of the audio recordings where they were sitting I think 
at the Spur restaurant where she mentioned that I am not known as the 
owner of this organisation you the only one Mr Van Wyk that is known 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 66 of 196 
 
but I will deal with that as you know I continue leading with this – I 
mean with this – going through my affidavit or my testimony.  You know 
as we were sitting there she said to me there was plenty that she 
wanted to give me in terms of the evidence you know documentary 
evidence that relates to the whole thing how it started, how they went 
on and who was actually you know part of this entity and she even went 
on to mention that you know for that matter she did not even appoint a 
single person in her entity relating to this ground handling.  Now Mr 
Chair you know we were at three places around that day because of we 
had to move from Wimpy where I was having breakfast when she 
10 
arrived anyway.  We had to move from there to her house that is when I 
got to see her house. We fetched some documents and some audio 
recordings.  It was quite a lot of stuff we then went to her office where 
you know Koreneka was actually operating within Mafikeng CBD. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Mgwenya if I may just come in there.  
Before we get to your movements on the day. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  What I would like to just to conclude with is the 
full extent of the story that she told you about what had transpired after 
Koreneka was appointed to do this ground handling service at the two 
20 
airports.  But Chair just for the record purposes Mr Ngwenya’s evidence 
relays what Ms Tlatsana told him but Ms Tlatsana will be giving 
evidence in due course so there will not be a concern. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  About a hearsay aspect there. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 67 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But if we can just go back Mr Ngwenya if I can 
locate you at page 5 of your affidavit. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Page 5 okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Because you will see at the first paragraph 
there you cover the point you have already given in evidence about Mr 
Van Wyk saying to her that she would not be successful in the 
conclusion of the contract unless she had more people in the company. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And there he proposes Ms Joyce Phiri and Mr 
10 
Victor Thabeng.  And if you then go to paragraph 15 you talk there 
about the conclusion of the agreement as she relayed it you and the 
level of her involvement after that point in the ground handling services 
of the company.  Could you deal with those two aspects? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay.  Thank you.  Chair from 
point 15 of this affidavit she confirmed to me that she signed an 
agreement with SA Express that relates to the Pilanesberg and 
Mafikeng airports and that Mr Van Wyk did not give her a copy of the 
contract.  She also said to me that in actual fact the plan was that Mr 
Van Wyk was supposed to help her until she find her footing to be able 
20 
to manage that contract.  However after you know appointing the two 
directors she claimed – or – she told me that Mr Van Wyk brought a 
person by the name of Mr David Kalisilira who was the – supposed to 
be the company’s accountant as they also had to agree that she would 
run with you know the running of the finances you know.   
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 68 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  In terms of other appointees. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  At paragraph 15 you talk about the appointment 
of Mr Kalisilira that is Kalisilira. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  There is another appointment that you refer to 
in paragraph 16 and that relates to Mr Phiri and what he was going to 
do and Ms Dube.  Can you take us through what she recounted to you 
10 
about those two people? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay thanks.  I was actually 
going there Ma’am.  Chair as I said that she brought Mr Kalisilira first 
as a financial you know accountant then she brought also a person by 
the name of Mr Levy Sipho Phiri who then appointed Ms Nothando Dube 
to run with the operation as a manager you know, Koreneka’s manager 
to run with the you know administrative and operational side of things 
within Koreneka while Ms Tlatsana was not really involved. She was 
actually hands off. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And Mr Ngwenya who did she relay to you 
20 
appointed the ground handling staff? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  She said that Mr Sipho Phiri 
was also involved in the appointment of the very same ground handling 
staff.  That obviously you know they have done the check in and all the 
other functions with you know that are related to the contract. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 69 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then if you turn over the page to page 6 
you talk there – you enquired from her as I have your affidavit about 
the invoicing under the agreement and the extent of her involvement in 
that. Can you tell us what she relayed to you about that? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Can you repeat that Ma’am? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  And the paragraph that you are 
referring to with it? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes paragraph 17. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Where I am picking it up is in the middle of that 
paragraph. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Where you say she further mentioned that she 
did not put any claims either to SAA – sorry SA Express nor the 
department. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  I remember long after I had met her she asked 
me about the process of invoicing at SA Express. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes.  As I was speaking to her it 
20 
became apparent to me that she did not really know the content of the 
service level agreement because as we were talking she kept on 
referring to Mr Van Wyk telling him that this needed to be done and how 
and when and that there is money that needs to be paid from that 
account I mean from – by Koreneka you know as the facility manager.  
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 70 of 196 
 
Maybe I need to clarify quickly this.  We are talking about a [indistinct] 
relationship here where there was the North West Department of 
Transport.  There was SA Express. There was Koreneka.  Now 
Koreneka was the service provider to both entities.  Koreneka was the 
facility manager for the North West government and was appointed for 
that specific function by SAA – by SA Express on behalf of the North 
West government.  I am saying this just to clarify matters so we can not 
confuse issues.  On the other hand Koreneka was providing the ground 
handling services for SA Express.  SA Express appointed Koreneka to 
provide that service.  Now because of here I am talking about the 
10 
CCTV, I am talking about functions that had absolutely nothing to do 
with SA Express that is the reason I am giving this clarity.  So we – you 
understand Chair as to where I am coming from.  Now in this regard I 
am saying she did not understand the content of the contract.  I would 
say both contracts because she stated clearly to say she did not – Mr 
Van Wyk did not give her any contract.  She signed but she did not 
receive the copies of the contract and then she relied on him.  In this 
regard where would – I speak about the CCTV, I speak about anything 
that has to do with the airport refurbishment whatsoever had absolutely 
nothing to do with the SA Express service level agreement but the 
20 
North West.   
Now she relied on Mr van Wyk and she said to me because of 
– Mr Chair – out of the bundle that she gave me there were invoices, 
expense authorisation, money – you know – amounting to R51 million 
that was paid to Koreneka and on those invoices she said she did not 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 71 of 196 
 
prepare even a single invoice – you know – to – to claim the 
remuneration from either entity of which with SA Express she never 
even submitted a single invoice at that particular time. 
Therefore she said it clearly to me that she did not really 
submit anything and though the money went into her account – you 
know … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya you at paragraph 18 then relay 
how she explained to you that a conflict arose at a point in her 
10 
engagements with Mr van Wyk.  Can you take us through that conflict? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  At some stage of this whole – 
whole thing as I said that Ms – Ms Dube was the Manager managing 
Koreneka.  The – Ms Tlatsana actually dismissed Ms Dube – you know 
– as the Manager for Koreneka.  Maybe because of their differences or 
she did not really report to her. 
She was in fact reporting to Mr van Wyk.  He then dismissed 
her and that started this whole friction between her and - I mean 
Ms Tlatsana - and Mr van Wyk where Mr van Wyk was not really happy 
about the dismissal of – of Ms Dube.  I would assume that because 
20 
Ms Dube was brought Ms – Mr Sipho Phiri who was brought by 
Mr van Wyk. 
Hence she was not really perhaps – he was not really 
satisfied and then he threatened Ms Tlatsana to say he will take the 
contract and give it to somebody else as he was the one who actually 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 72 of 196 
 
brought this and that Mr Chair can be confirmed via either the – the 
audio recordings or the SMS’ – you know – exchanged between 
Ms Tlatsana and Mr Brian van Wyk. 
At that time Mr Brian van Wyk was utilising his own personal 
cellphone and also whatever communication that was between them via 
email it was not on SA Express – you know – email account but on his 
personal Gmail account.  So strange that you run - you know – 
company business but you – you are putting your own (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  When … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  When Ms Tlatsana said to you she had not been 
active in this ground handling business of hers what period was she 
talking about? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was it the period to her meeting with you or was she 
saying even as at the time that she was meeting with you she was still 
not active in the business? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  At the – it was actually … 
CHAIRPERSON:  As you understand her. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It was prior because obviously 
20 
as she generated the story to say these were - were the issues – the 
conflicts that – you know – happened.  It was actually prior before – I 
mean – prior our meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So when … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  So … 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 73 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  When you met … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Already. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your understanding that – was that she was active in 
the business? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  At that juncture when we met … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  She – she took charge because 
– she had fired Ms Nothanda Dube and I think at that time replaced her 
with – with somebody else – a Ms (indistinct) Lewis.  Something like 
that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, no that is fine. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then Mr Ngwenya at paragraphs 18 and 19 
you in a sense jump forward … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And tell us what happened over time when 
steps were taken to replace Koreneka with other entities in relation to 
ground handling?  Can you take us through that and then we will go to 
the topic of the recordings that you have referred to points in your 
20 
testimony already but just to complete the picture at 18 I have that she 
says conflict develops between Mr van Wyk and herself after she 
dismisses Ms Dube and then if you can take us further in time from that 
in relation to the replacement of Koreneka. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay.  Obviously Chair – no it is 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 74 of 196 
 
not obvious – because of the conflict Chair between Mr van Wyk and 
Ms Tlatsana and threatening to – to take her out I think Mr van Wyk 
took a drastic step to actually try and replace Koreneka.  Now Mr Chair 
I must bring this to your attention to say the contract that was signed it 
was for a period of 5 years. 
Now Koreneka was providing like two different kind of 
services to two different entities.  However Mr van Wyk decided to say 
no he would terminate as promised then Valoteck came into the picture.  
This Valoteck how it came into the picture Mr … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before the Valoteck just remind me what was 
10 
Mr van Wyk’s position at SA Express? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Mr van Wyk’s position at SA 
Express was the General Manager Commercial. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In North West? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  No, no SA Express. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  SA Express. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Nationally? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay alright.  Thank you. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Chair … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, you may proceed. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  He was the Head … 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 75 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Of the Commercial Department. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then you made reference to Valoteck.  I 
understand that to be name of a company.  Is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It is the name of the company 
ma’am. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  The full name is reflected on one of the 
agreements attached to your affidavit.  It is Valoteck and that is V-A-L-
10 
O-T-E-C-K Facilities Management CC.  Is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct ma’am correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So as I have your evidence at some point 
Koreneka is replaced by Valoteck … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Pursuant to a decision by Mr van Wyk.  That is 
what is relayed to you.  Is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct ma’am. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And what happens thereafter?  Is Valoteck then 
thereafter replaced itself? 
20 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  At the time - remember the - the 
contract between Koreneka and – and Express as well as the North 
West was actually still on.  It was still effective but because of this 
misunderstanding Mr van Wyk wanted to take Koreneka out. 
He then appointed Valoteck and when Valoteck came into the 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 76 of 196 
 
picture they were supposed to take over from – from Koreneka because 
at the time when she told me she said - it was June - and she said 
Valoteck was appointed effective May – I think - 1 May but when they 
were supposed to take over this – this Valoteck take over from – from 
Koreneka at that time Koreneka – you know – involved – you know – 
their legal representation. 
That is Ms Tlatsana who - who did exactly that because at 
that time she was the sole owner of the organisation.  So she told me 
that she – she threatened SA Express with the lawyers to say there is 
going – you know – they would take SA Express on – on the basis that 
10 
they were breaching the Service Level Agreement, yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you and then after Valoteck – at 
paragraph 19 you talk about the fact that your later investigations 
indicated that Valoteck had been paid an amount of 15 million by the 
department but had rendered no services.  Is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct ma’am. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And you conclude paragraph 19 by indicating 
what happened in the end to Valoteck.  What – what were you able to 
establish in relation to Valoteck? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  As I stated that Valoteck did not 
20 
conduct any services either for ground handling or for facility 
management.  However I received information.  I was told that the 
North West Government paid or the Department of Transport – the 
North West Department of Transport paid an amount around the region 
of 15 million to – to Valoteck – you know – for – clearly providing the 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 77 of 196 
 
service that they did not really do. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Hm. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Valoteck did not provide any 
service to SA Express.  There is no record within SA Express that 
would indicate that Valoteck provided a service and as far as I know 
they did not provide a service to the North West because of Koreneka 
hung onto the contract until such time they were taken out when 
MAMCO moved in which is another company (indistinct) but what I also 
established was that Valoteck after receiving the money they liquidated 
– after receiving that 15 million. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  What services did you understand Valoteck to have 
been required to render in order to be entitled to this R15 million? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  In actual fact the very same 
services that were provided or rendered by Koreneka as the contracts 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It is a cut and paste from 
Koreneka to Valoteck with different figures … 
CHAIRPERSON:  But … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  In terms of remuneration from 
20 
the SA Express side. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But has – had the contract between SA Express and 
Koreneka been terminated at the time that Valoteck was … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  No, no Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Given the contract? 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 78 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  No.  Hence I said that when I 
started the investigation it was June and the contract was stil – you 
know – ongoing - the Koreneka one.  Valoteck was appointed effective 
May of the very same year.  So Valoteck did not really take over from – 
from Koreneka. 
In actual fact Ms Tlatsana told me that Ms Nothanda Dube 
was spreading rumours that Koreneka was to leave the airport and be – 
you know – be replaced Valoteck.  So Valoteck was going to take over 
from Koreneka but that did not materialise … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Because Valoteck – I mean – 
Koreneka - you know – hung onto the – to this contract. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr … 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you said the – you suggested that there was a 
contract between SA Express and Valoteck and you said it was a cut 
and paste of the contract between SA Express and - and Koreneka.  Is 
that – is that what the position was? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely Chair.  At the time 
when I was actually investigating I discovered that Koreneka – I mean – 
Valoteck was appointed by SA Express through an RFQ process where 
20 
three quotes were requested from the market – you know – for the 
provision in fact of labour broking - you know – labour brokerage 
services. 
So that is how Valoteck was brought into Express and if I my 
memory serves me well Valoteck was the only entity that responded to 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 79 of 196 
 
that request which was sent out – you know – for quotation.  So the 
contract that was between SA Express at the time within SA Express 
the contract was not available. 
There was just an award letter – you know – for Valoteck to 
provide the labour brokerage services.  The contract – let me put it this 
way.  There was no signed contract … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  At the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I did not see any signed 
10 
contract between SA Express and even during my investigation when I 
went to different departments to try and establish as to whether we 
have a copy or not I was actually told that we do not have a signed 
contract at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is between SA Express and Valoteck? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  SA Express and Valoteck yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But what is the cut and paste that you were talking 
about – cut and paste … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Contact you were talking about? 
20 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay.  Maybe I am too forward 
Chair … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  But if you look at the Valoteck 
contract – the actual contract – that was … 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 80 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which happened afterwards? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr maybe continue. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair if I may just because one of the 
challenges with this part of the investigation is there are numerous 
companies that replace each other within a blink of an eye. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  What we will do is we will go through each of 
those agreements … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  What – what I understand of your evidence 
Mr Ngwenya and Chair I note that we are at the lunch break but if we 
could just conclude on this point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Before doing so. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  There are just two things I want to clarify 
Mr Ngwenya.  You – I understand your evidence to be there was an 
agreement for ground handling services concluded between South 
African Express and Koreneka. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 81 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  That was in about April 2015.  Correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Subsequent to that when there – after there is 
this conflict that develops between Mr van Wyk and Ms Tlatsana a 
replica agreement is signed and concluded now between SA Express 
and this company called Valoteck.  Is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Now let us just bring labour broking services in 
because it gets quite confusing.  As I understand your evidence in the 
course of your investigation the only evidence you could find within SA 
Express of an actual award of any contract to Valoteck at all related to 
some quotation that was sought for labour brokering services.  Is that 
correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then my final point of clarification.  You 
mention Ms Dube in the context of Valoteck … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But we need to unpack that a little bit because 
we had heard about Ms Dube in Koreneka. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So I understand your evidence it was when 
Ms Tlatsana dismissed her … 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 82 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  From Koreneka that the conflict between 
Mr van Wyk and Ms Tlatsana arose as she recounted it to you. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So what – what happens to Ms Dube?  Where 
does she feature again? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Thank you.  Ms Dube was the 
owner of Valoteck. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Of Valoteck? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Of Valoteck. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  You know I may have to go back 
and forth in relation to this.  Like I said that in actual fact if you look at 
it Chair Ms Dube was appointed as a Manager – you know – for 
Koreneka by somebody that was brought in by Mr Brian van Wyk.  Now 
when Ms Dube got fired by Ms Tlatsana – you know – at Koreneka she 
started a company which was Valoteck. 
Now in this company there were two.  I think it was – she was 
a 50 percent holder – you know – of the shareholding and there was 
another person by the name of – I think – Kefilwe Mogodiri.  This 
20 
Kefilwe Mogodiri also held a 50 percent part of the shares.  Now that is 
why I am saying there is a continuation with Ms - Ms Dube. 
Now Mr van Wyk was not satisfied with her dismissal and she 
appoint – he appointed Valoteck.  Now this element – Ms Dube – you 
know – continued to be part of this whole thing.  She was fired there.  
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 83 of 196 
 
Then Valoteck surfaced and Ms Dube was actually the owner of that 
entity. 
To me it was well orchestrated to say you know what we will 
continue where we – you know – you left off.  So they tried to take out 
Koreneka by utilising this Valoteck and it did not materialise. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Mr Ngwenya.  Were you able to 
establish any relationship between Ms Dube and Mr van Wyk other than 
her appointment initially in Koreneka? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Not really ma’am in that regard 
because the only thing that I can say I could see just – you know – 
10 
Ms Dube moving from one entity to the other up to – you know – your 
prime goal.  So I cannot really – I do not have anything tangible to say 
– you know – there is – they had this relationship or whatsoever. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair just to assist those who are not as 
familiar with the facts as Mr Ngwenya is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  He has made reference to MAMCO and PAMCO.  
They are subsequent companies … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Who received the same ground handling 
services agreement … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But we will come to them in the course of the 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 84 of 196 
 
evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  We will take the lunch adjournment and we will 
resume at 10 past two.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   Indeed Chair, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Chair just one procedural aspect before we 
10 
return to Mr Ngwenya’s evidence if I may. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Our second planned witness for today is Mr 
Piri.  We have engaged with him about the possibility of an early start 
tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Which he can conveniently make. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    It is my estimation that he won’t start today 
that the idea would be to complete Mr Ngwenya’s evidence and in the 
20 
light of that we request that he be excused to return tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no that’s fine, he is excused he can return 
tomorrow. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, and he returns tomorrow at eight? 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 85 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    At eight o’clock, that’s the arrangement, thank 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Mr Ngwenya we were just about to turn to 
page 7 of your affidavit before the lunch break, so I would like us to 
start there if we may.  This is where you start to detail the audio 
recordings and documents that you were provided with by Ms Tlatsana, 
can you take us through what you were handed by her on that day that 
you met over the weekend in June?  Oh Mr Ngwenya if you will turn on 
the microphone, just press that.  Oh. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Press the other one.  There are two bars there. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   There you go. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Oh, eish, I am old school. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Thank you Mr Ngwenya, not at all.   
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Chair she handed me a bunch 
of documentary evidence which consisted of the contracts, that is the 
contract between S A Express and the Northwest Government and the 
contract 
between 
S 
A 
Express 
and 
Koreneka, 
and 
the 
sms 
communication between Ms Tlatsana and Mr van Wyk.  She also handed 
me the bank statement, the Koreneka bank statement that depicted as 
20 
to how much was paid into Koreneka by S A Express and the Northwest 
Government and how it was disbursed after you know it was received.  
You know the transactions that took place after. 
 
What else did she give me, correspondence between her and 
Mr van Wyk and there was one between her and the – where she sent 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 86 of 196 
 
an email to the GM Legal Risk and Compliance, it was quite a number 
of those and the audio recordings quite a number of those audio 
recordings, some of those audio recordings were recorded over the 
telephone conversation, some it was on the recorder you know where 
they were sitting in a particular restaurant around the Northwest, so 
that’s basically what she handed over to me. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Thank you. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:   I hope I did not leave anything? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    No I was checking, I would have referred you 
to it if there was something in your affidavit that you’d neglected to 
10 
mention.   
 
Mr Ngwenya at paragraph 20 on page 7 you talk about the sum 
total of the amounts that those bank statements reflected had been 
received by Koreneka.  What are those amounts? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    R31million was received from 
S A Express, however it was not a lump sum, it was in trenches. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    We will go into that in due course. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Yes, and then the R20million 
that was coming from the Northwest Department of Transport. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    So in total R51million is that right? 
20 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    R51million, correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    And if we then move to paragraph 21, in 
paragraph 21 you start to recount the events that then unfolded after 
that weekend from Monday the 27 t h, can you take us through what steps 
you took on that Monday? 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 87 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:   The Monday of course let me 
just say the Sunday I went through the recording but I did not listen to 
all of them, then the Monday because already I had established through 
the recording Chair as to how much was Mr van Wyk implicated and all 
you know the amounts that were involved and that, and that on one of 
the recordings Mr van Wyk had implicated the Chairperson of the S A 
Express Board as well as the CEO and ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  The chairperson of? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  S A Express Board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
10 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  As well as the CEO, Mr Inati 
Ntshanga.  By the way the Chairperson of the S A Express Board, 
though he did not mention the name, his name is Mr – the then 
Chairperson Mr George Muthema.  He also implicated prominent people 
within the National and Provincial government, Ministers you know and 
the rest that I would mention as we go along, on his what you call it 
...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  On the recording. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  On the recording yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Mmm. 
20 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Then the Monday I called 
...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  What day of the week would it – was it a Saturday 
when you met with her?  
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I met with her on a Saturday. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 88 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I left the Northwest at night, I 
got home just before midnight. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Then the Sunday I went through 
the recordings in particular the one that she played for me where these 
individuals were implicated.  So I listened on that one, I played that 
one repeatedly so, so as to understand as to you know what was the 
whole story.  Then my approach the following day was that I needed to 
get the CEO and the GM Legal Risk and Compliance together so I can 
10 
deliver the news, 
 
Then the Monday morning I remember on that Monday that was 
the 27 t h of June there was an Exco meeting that was supposed to take 
place on that day, so I went to work, arrived early of course, I tried to 
get hold of Ms Mochoele and without any success, I tried Mr Inati 
Ntshanga, the CEO, I couldn’t reach him.  When I was at work I think 
she was on her way to work, I managed to reach her and I told her that 
you know what I needed to see her urgently and together with the CEO 
because I’ve got some news to deliver to them and you know it’s 
pertaining the contract in the Northwest where it is alleged that the GM 
20 
Commercial, Mr Brian van Wyk you know to a certain extent was 
manipulating this thing, you know corruption and I indicated to her that 
I heard evidence supporting the allegation and you know I sat in my 
office.  On arrival she came directly to my office to listen to what I had 
to say. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 89 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who was that now? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Sorry, sorry Chair, that’s Ms 
Mochoele. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The GM? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  The GM Legal Risk and 
Compliance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR 
TIMOTHY 
NHLANHLA 
NGWENYA: 
 
The 
boss 
of 
security 
management so to speak.  So I delivered the news to her to say this is 
what I have but I would also want to see it to be part of this, please 
10 
just get this, she left my office and she went, at that time the CEO was 
already you know at work.  She spoke to the CE, advised her to say hey 
there’s this thing that is happening and Tim wants to see us and all 
that.  Now the CE excused himself from the Exco meeting of which the 
GM Legal did say, so we went and sat in the CE’s office, excuse me – 
in the CEO’s office, Mr Inati Ntshanga and when we got there I actually 
explained to them you know as to why I wanted to see them, I told them 
that I received a call on Friday from a person who is based you know in 
the Northwest and this person alleged that Mr Brian van Wyk was 
corrupt and in a way he was trying to take over her company and that 
20 
person is actually the owner of the company Koreneka which is the 
ground service provider for S A Express in the Northwest Airports and I 
said to them I had requested this person not to go to the media, 
because she wanted to report this and I also promised her that I would 
ensure that the CE gives her a call so as to confirm that the matter was 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 90 of 196 
 
reported to the highest office within the organisation as promised. 
 
So when I got there I explained all that to say I’ve got the 
audio recordings, you know this – I actually had the evidence with me 
and these audio recordings, I explained the audio recordings to say 
some of those were recorded over you know the telecon between Mr 
van Wyk and Ms Tlatsana and other officials from the Northwest, you 
know and also there was one that I focused specifically on because it 
touched on the S A Express individual where it implicated the CE – I 
told him straight to say it implicated, Mr van Wyk actually implicated 
you on that particular recording and the Board Chairperson Mr Motema, 
10 
and that ...(intervention)  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya if I may just there to locate you in 
your affidavit, we are at page 8, and it’s paragraph 24, because there 
you are recounting what was specifically said in relation to that 
recording that you’re dealing with at the moment.   
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  What I would like you to just be clear about is 
when you say the recordings implicated people in what conduct were 
they implicated? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay one how he, Mr van Wyk, 
20 
implicated the Chairperson and the CO of S A Express, he said they 
were the ones who actually initiated the deal, who were in charge of the 
negotiations pertaining this whole deal and that they were aware of the 
transactions that were taking place you know the movement of money 
and all that, so they were privy to everything that was happening and 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 91 of 196 
 
that he said he was acting on – based on instructions he was not Mr 
van Wyk, that’s Mr van Wyk, but he was not doing things on his own. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And Mr Ngwenya there were other people 
mentioned on that audio recording, Chair just to facilitate the remainder 
of the evidence we do have the recordings and the proposal is to have 
them played during the evidence of Ms Tlatsana because she was in 
those conversations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But we’re getting in a sense the bigger picture 
of the story through Mr Ngwenya’s evidence, and so Mr Ngwenya if we 
10 
can take you to paragraph 24 you list there the other people who were 
implicated in the audio recording, could you please read for us who 
those individuals are? 
MR 
TIMOTHY 
NHLANHLA 
NGWENYA: 
 
Okay, 
apart 
from 
the 
Chairperson and the CEO of S A Express the other individuals that were 
implicated was the then Minister of the DPE, Lynne Brown, and the then 
Minister of Department of Transport, Minister Dipua Peters, the Premier 
of the Northwest, Mr Supra Mahumapelo, the HOD of the Northwest 
which I assume that was Mr Bailey Mahlakoleng and the CFO of which I 
don’t know the name it was not mentioned as to who the person was, 
20 
the MEC from the Northwest and a Mr Wolmarans whom she alleged 
that was more like a right hand man of the Premier.  Those were the 
individuals that were implicated. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And that particular recording where did you 
understand it was taken? 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 92 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  In one – according to her it was 
somewhere in the – it’s a recording, it was not a telecom, but she 
recorded while they were sitting, you know she hid the recorder 
somehow as they were talking she recorded the whole conversation. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And Mr Ngwenya just to be clear how were 
these individuals implicated in the recording, because I understood you 
to say the CEO and the Chairperson had been implicated as having 
given instructions in relation to these transactions, how were these 
other individuals implicated on the record. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay, on this recording, maybe 
10 
it’s one thing that I did not really mention, I omitted, on this recording 
Chair as Mr van Wyk was explaining to Ms Tlatsana  you know as to 
who was supposed to be -  to get paid you now on all the monies, he 
scribbled on a particular, on a document  he scribbled the names, 
because at some stage he said I don’t have to mention names, but if 
you look at the document that I am actually about to talk about and you 
listen to the recording you would realise that it’s the very same 
document that as he was talking he was scribbling.   He mentioned the 
names and the titles to say all of them they were supposed to be paid, 
in actual fact there was a bit of a disagreement between her Ms 
20 
Tlatsana in relation to the amounts to be paid to these individuals.  On 
that particular recording he mentioned that the Ministers they are 
supposed to get 20/.20 and Ms Tlatsana objected to that to say but 
initially you said it’s 10, you’re changing from time to time, you know in 
terms of how much they were supposed to be paid.  But all of it 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 93 of 196 
 
...(intervention)  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya I do apologise for interrupting.  
Chair we have been told that there is a need for some technical matter 
to be attended to, I wonder if a short adjournment might be possible, 
particularly if it relates to the recording, we need to get that right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay I will take a short adjournment and we will 
be told as soon as the technical problem has been sorted out. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
10 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes are you ready? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Mr Ngwenya we were dealing with 
how precisely the persons referred to on the recording were implicated 
in the dealings between the North West and South African Express and 
Koreneka and as I have it just before the break you were detailing how 
there had been some discussion of the amounts that were to be paid to 
these individuals, is that correct? 
20 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So was your understanding that they were 
implicated insofar as they had been recipients of funds out of monies 
that had been paid to Koreneka, was that your understanding? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 94 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  May I just take you back a little bit.  The meeting 
between yourself and the owner of Koreneke on that Saturday what did 
it reveal as the purpose for her wanting you to give you all this 
information?  Was the position that she was complaining that there 
were attempts to get rid of her business and bring in somebody else, is 
that what prompted her to want to approach you?  Or did she say it was 
simply a concern that maybe money that should be – should stay with 
her business was being paid out because there were these other people 
that needed to be paid and she had had enough of it or what had 
prompted this? 
10 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I think firstly Chair the fact that 
Mr Van Wyk wanted to take her out of the business replace her 
company and money was actually spent. There were these illicit 
transactions you know from her account where money was transferred 
to numerous accounts the R31 million.  To a certain extent I think she 
could not really account for the R31 million because of – she was not 
directly involved in the disbursement of that R31 million.   
CHAIRPERSON:  But it came into the account of her company? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It came into her account yes.  It 
came into her account. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  But she would have been the one who dispensed it, is 
it not? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I am getting there Chair.  What 
actually happened this Mr David Kalisilira who was the accountant 
according to her based on the instruction of Mr Van Wyk because of 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 95 of 196 
 
initially let me mention this.  They had an account with the FNB branch 
and she me that she was told by Mr Van Wyk to open that account in 
the first place.  She had to give her account credentials the pins and 
whatsoever to Mr Kalisilira so she – so he can operate and disperse the 
funds whichever way yes.  So she actually voluntarily  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Based on the instruction. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  You know handed that 
information to Mr Kalisilira who was responsible to handle the funds. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I interrupted you Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Not at all Chair.  So we were dealing with how 
these people were implicated that were referenced on the audio 
recording and as I have it you relayed that to the CEO and the GM of 
legal in that meeting on the Monday, is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct Ma’am. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then if we go to paragraph 25 on page 8. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You were testifying earlier Mr Ngwenya that you 
made an undertaking to Ms Tlatsana that she would be phoned. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So that she knew that this matter had been 
taken up by the highest authority within SA Express, is that correct? 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 96 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then as I have it at paragraph 25 you detail 
the precise call that you did then make to Ms Tlatsana? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Can you take us through that? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay after explaining of course 
and indicating that the CO in fact I requested or asked him to phone Ms 
Tlatsana as a confirmation that the matter was brought to his attention.  
He agreed to that and I dialled Ms Tlatsana’s contact because of in the 
room amongst the three of us I was the only one who had her contact at 
10 
that juncture.  So I dialled the number of Ms Tlatsana and I made some 
form of an introduction to say it was me and I am with the CEO and the 
GM legal risk and compliance and as promised they want to talk to her 
pertaining the issue.  They introduced themselves to her the CEO Mr 
Inathi Ntshanga and Ms Mirriam Mochoele and then Ms Tlatsana just let 
it go.  You know she was talking as if you know she had some form of 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  She poured out everything she wanted to say? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes and you know… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Repeating the same things that… 
20 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  To say she has been willing to 
speak to Mr Ntshanga to report you know what Mr Van Wyk was actually 
doing to her and you know Mr Van Wyk was sort of taking her for 
granted, playing with her, wanting to take her company and things like 
that.  She – you know she poured everything out.  She let it out. But … 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 97 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And a lot of it was – had – was in the recording as 
you… 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Even telling him… 
CHAIRPERSON:  What was in the recording as you had listened to it? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes, yes in actual fact that 
conversation was recorded as well Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay when she was pouring out? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That recording was … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That conversation was actually 
10 
recorded. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya by whom? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Recorded – [laughing] I am 
sorry.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  That [indistinct]. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  By Mr Tlatsana. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Right.  But you did obtain. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh [laughing] 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes, yes. I… 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Tlatsana was at this stage recording many 
conversations. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  She was not playing with fire 
she was recording almost everything.  When you talk to her you know 
that she was recording. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 98 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But you did subsequently obtain that recording 
from her did you not? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely in fact it is two 
recordings. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Because during the course of 
that conversation we were cut off somehow and the CEO stood up and 
left the room.  I take it that he went to the bathroom.  And I redialled 
the number Ms Tlatsana and Ms Mochoele had to indicate where to say 
hey you know what we were cut out and the CEO just left the room but 
10 
he will be back he went to the bathrooms.  While she was explaining 
that the CEO walked in and then the conversation went on again.  And 
she gave it all.  Then we were done. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Hm. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Later on I requested those 
conversations, the recordings from Ms Tlatsana and then she forwarded 
those to me via Whatsapp. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya  
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It was two sets of recordings. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You have that conversation it is in two parts 
20 
and it is recorded as I have it you got those from her later.  But if you 
go to page 9 of your affidavit you will see that towards the bottom of 
that page paragraph 28. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You talk about how seriously you took the 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 99 of 196 
 
allegations and what you then said to Mr Ntshanga in the light of what 
had been recounted to you previously and on the call.  What did you 
say to him? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Can I step back a bit and get 
back. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Of course. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  The document that I was talking 
about the scribbled document. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes just for the record if we may?  Chair there 
is a photocopy of that document which appears as Annexure 1 so it will 
10 
be behind Tab 1 at page 32.  This is also a document Chair that we 
propose to deal with in Ms Tlatsana’s evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Because she was actually presentl 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  As we have her evidence as this was being 
drawn out. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  By Mr Van Wyk. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But it did come to Mr Ngwenya when those 
documents were first handed over. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And absolutely you are correct there is an 
interaction you have with Mr Ntshanga. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 100 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  About the handwriting on this page, is that what 
you wanted to go to? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely.  That is what I want 
to raise yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Chair as I have explained that 
you know I brought the evidence, the recordings and all that and I 
specifically mentioned the parts that was actually relevant to them in 
terms of the recording.  I also produced this documents – this document 
10 
which was scribbled you know and it was – Ms Tlatsana alleged that it 
was Mr Van Wyk who wrote on this document.  So I produced this 
documents – this document and I showed it to the CEO and the GM 
legal. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At that meeting? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Come again? 
CHAIRPERSON:  You showed it to them at that meeting? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  At that meeting yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  And the meeting was on Monday? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It was on Monday the very same 
20 
Monday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The first Monday after the Saturday meeting with Mr 
Tlatsana? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 101 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes Chair.  So when I produced 
this document the CEO looked at it and he confirmed the writing on this 
document as that of Mr Brian Van Wyk the CM Commercial and the GM 
Legal Ms Merriam Mochoele concurred with this – with Mr Ntshanga to 
say indeed this was the handwriting of Mr Van Wyk.  Then it was clear 
definitely that Mr Van Wyk was somehow involved in this whole thing.  I 
then said to or rather advised the CEO to say based on the nature of 
these transactions the amount involved and the fact that Mr Brian Van 
Wyk was an employee of SA Express and the GM for that matter I mean 
the amount that was involved in this regard was the R31 million that 
10 
came out of the SA Express account – I mean – account.  I advised the 
CE based on Section 34 of The PRECCA Act 12 of 2004 that she had a 
responsibility as a person who is in the position of authority to report 
these transactions to the authorities.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And Msr Mgwenya just to be clear PRECCA is 
the Prevention and Combatting of Corrupt Activities Act is that right? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct Ma’am. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So you advised him to make a report? 
20 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  In accordance with the obligations set out in 
Section 34 of that Act, is that right? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely, absolutely Ma’am. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then if you pick it up at the bottom of page 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 102 of 196 
 
9 paragraph 28. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  I understand that Mr Ntshanga then suggested 
you should investigate the matter, is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct Ma’am. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And what was to be the scope of the 
investigation? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I think there were three facts 
that I had to establish and all those were around the appointment of 
Koreneka and the allegations that were made by Mr Tlatsana pertaining 
10 
to Mr Van Wyk.  I had to establish if what she alleged was true or not.  
I also had to establish if the appointment of Koreneka was as per I 
think the procurement process within Express and also the appointment 
of Koreneka as a facility management was as according to the 
agreement between SA Express and the North West government. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Hm. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I think I am correct in saying 
that. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  When he gave me that mandate 
20 
it was not a written mandate Chair it was a verbal.  As far as this is 
concerned I think you know in any case when you are given a mandate 
it has to be written especially when you dealing with people you know 
who are on a higher level than yourself.  So that I did not get.  But then 
I raised two issues with him to say much as you have given me this 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 103 of 196 
 
scope and the mandate I want to make it clear to you that  
1.  I can only be able to investigate all the transgressions that 
occurred within SA Express and that secondly 
2. I will not be able to investigate any party that is outside SA 
Express because I do not have any authority towards those 
individuals. 
And the fact that prominent people were implicated I may not be able to 
establish the facts around that including the implication of the SA 
Express board chairperson.  That is what I said to him in relation to the 
scope. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And Mr Ngwenya I then have your affidavit to 
be picked up at page 11 because some of what is still contained on 
page 10 you have already dealt with in your oral testimony.  But what 
you say at page 11 paragraph 33 is you talk about as I have it after the 
conclusion of that meeting what you then started to do still on that 
same Monday to further investigate the matter.  And Mr Ngwenya just to 
frame the next bit of the evidence.  As I have it you start with the legal 
department. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You then go and make enquiries of the finance 
20 
department and then you engage with procurement. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So if we could take each of those in order.  
What do you seek to establish with the legal department first? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  The legal department at the time 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 104 of 196 
 
was responsible for the contract management which means every 
contract that SA Express was involved in they were kept at legal, the 
files were kept at legal.  So after the meeting with Ms Mochoele the GM 
Legal and the CEO.  After we listened to the recordings and you know 
giving everything I went to the legal department after being given the 
mandate to say – to try and establish as to whether there was a 
contract in place in the first place you know.  So when I got to legal at 
the time there was a person who was the legal advisor by the name Ms 
Nasiphi Mkentane.  I went and spoke to her pertaining the issue and I 
said to her I was actually looking for the contract for the North West 
10 
which involved Koreneka you know.  Ms Mkentane said to me North 
West I do not have the contract that relates to the North West you know 
ground handling services but one thing that I can tell you is that I 
drafted the contract in relation to the ground handling services in the 
North West in particular the Pilanesberg.  However on that contract she 
did – she was not aware as to who was the company that was to you 
know provide the service.  So she drafted the contract and forwarded it 
to Mr Brian Van Wyk without a company name and if my memory serves 
me well without the figures as to how much was you know to be paid to 
this actually to this entity.  And she indicated somehow to say it was an 
20 
instruction that she received either by Mr Van Wyk or Ms Mochoele and 
she said to me she will forward everything to me.  I then left her office 
on that day.  Then the following morning I recall because of you know I 
went through that email.  I think it was around twenty five past eight 
that was on the 28 t h she emailed me… 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 105 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  28 t h of what month? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  June, June, sorry 28 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  2015 still? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was it 2015 of 2016? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:  16. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the Saturday when you saw Ms Tlatsana? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Tlatsana. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Tlatsana ja. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was it June? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It was June the 24 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay so it is still the same month? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It is still the week. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Exactly yes.  So it is the day 
20 
after I met – it was the 27 t h I met with the CE and I met her then the 
following day on the 28 t h June the Tuesday Ms Mkentane forwarded me 
the contract relating to the draft actually relating to the service in 
Pilanesberg. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya I would like us to go to that email 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 106 of 196 
 
if we may?   
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You will find it under Annexure 3 it is page 36, 
36.   
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And you will see at the top of that page I take it 
the forwarding that Ms Mkentane engaged in to get the draft agreement 
to you as well as the email that is contained lower down on that page.  
And that is an email as I read it of the 10 April 2015, is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct Ma’am. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And who is it from and to? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  You mean the email? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  The email is from Ms Meriam 
Mochoele to the then GM or General Manager Operations Mr Brian – I 
mean Mr Dave Allenby.  Also to Mr Brian Tebogo Van Wyk who was the 
GM Commercial. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And copied… 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  At SA Express. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And copied to Ms Mkentane. 
20 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA: And copied to Ms Nasiphi 
Mkentane. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  What I am interested in in relation to that email 
Mr Ngwenya is what Ms Mochoele says to first of all Mr Allenby 
because she first of all asks that somebody in his department look at 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 107 of 196 
 
the attached agreement to ensure it is sufficiently and appropriately 
captures what needs to be captured. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  She says it is still very much a draft.  We will 
still need to polish it up. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  However in the interest of time I suggest that 
your department also have a look at it at this stage.  That person can 
work with Nasiphi who will be responsible for finalising the draft.  And 
then what does she say at the bottom @brian – what do you understand 
10 
the @brian to mean? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Oh she was directly speaking to 
Mr Van Wyk. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Right and what does she say there? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I can simply read this part? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Hm 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:   
“@Brian I guess we need to ask the province to 
advise us as to who the management company is 
going to be so that we can meet with them just to 
20 
make sure that there is an understanding on what is 
expected.  As well as go through the financial 
aspects.” 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Right and then if we can return to your affidavit 
and we are now at page 12 the top paragraph there 35.  You deal there 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 108 of 196 
 
with your impression of the email. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Can you tell us what your impression was at 
the time? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  My impression at the time 
especially pertaining to that email is that Ms Mochoele was well aware 
– let me just explain this.  Ms Mochoele as a GM she was also the 
chairperson of the BAC the Bid Adjudication Committee, she was the 
chairperson.  Now the impression that I got was that she had a 
knowledge already around in April that there was no procurement 
10 
process followed because as a matter of fact this was supposed to be 
brought to the BAC because of the figures on the contract.  They 
exceeded the R500 000.00 which is RFQ so it was RFP.  There was 
supposed to be a request for proposals.  Now as the chairperson of the 
BAC she knew at the time that nothing was brought to her attention and 
yet she continued you know to entertain the issue and further you know 
allowing her department to draft a contract you know to that effect 
knowing this or that there was no procurement process that was 
followed and that was a violation. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And Mr Ngwenya at paragraph 36 on the same 
20 
page you then talk about your next step as I have it and the sequence 
was to go to the finance department.  What did you want to establish 
there and what did you establish? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay remember there were – I 
mentioned that there were payments made to the amount of R31 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 109 of 196 
 
million.  So already at that juncture I had established that with legal 
there was no file or agreement that was there.  My next step was to go 
to the finance department so as to establish as to how was this money 
paid to Koreneke and that much as well.  So I went to the finance 
department and I interviewed the supervisor there by the name of Ms 
Busisiwe Mavuso.  Ms Busisiwe Mavuso confirmed to me that yes 
indeed there were payments that were made to the – to that R31 million 
and that there were invoices submitted to the department. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what did you say was her position? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  She was the supervisor at 
10 
finance.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  The – she is supervising the 
creditors clerks. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  And all that.  Yes.  The payment 
processes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That stuff. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  The payments are processed 
and all that and they go to treasury.  So now she said to me she was 
20 
given the invoices and the expense authorisation.  Now the invoices 
were Koreneke invoices claiming you know payments from SA Express 
and also there were expense authorisation.  Expense authorisation it is 
an internal documents – SA Express internal document where when 
there is money to be spent you know payments or whatsoever you know 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 110 of 196 
 
certain individual who are designated to sign as per the DOA, 
Delegation of Authority Chair in terms of the amounts that are reflected 
on that document they would sign that document.  So in that regard Ms 
Busisiwe produced those documents.  It was four invoices and four 
expense authorisations which were approved by Mr Van Wyk you know 
and Mr Inati Ntshanga the CEO also endorsed you know he appended 
his signature sort of approve these what you call – these payments. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And Mr Ngwenya we will go to those payments 
in detail. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  They total the R31 million that you were 
concerned to uncover the sort of tracking of the funds out of SA 
Express. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But before we get to that just at the conclusion 
of paragraph 36  
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You are able to establish how Koreneke came 
onto the SAPS system of SA Express.  How did that happen? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  This when I interviewed Ms 
20 
Mabuso she stated that she was verbally instructed by the CFO Mr 
Mark Shelly the then CFO Mr Mark Shelly to say she needed to load the 
details of Koreneka on our vendor – you know as a vender on the SAPS 
system and once information is uploaded there it is definitely for the 
purpose of payments. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 111 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Hm. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Now this actually happened on 
the 5 May.  Now Mr Chair on the – one of the invoices and expense of 
you would see that was prepared day before for payment and on the 5 t h 
Mr Mark Shelly instructed her to say load on the system.  She did 
exactly that and there is a document in this – on the bundle that gives 
an indication to say this was actually done on the 5 May where 
Koreneka’s details were uploaded on SAP. The following day 8.5 million 
was transferred from SA Express account into the Koreneka account. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Mr Ngwenya we will come to your 
10 
investigation as to whether there was a basis for that payment but 
before we get there if we may you do this engagement – or you have 
this engagement with the finance department on the 28 June. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You only go to the procurement department a 
few days after that but what I would like to do in the middle is just talk 
about what happened on the 1 July because there were certain plans in 
anticipation in relation to Mr Van Wyk and then Mr Van Wyk took certain 
steps in so far as his relationship with SA Express is concerned.  Can 
you tell us what that is? 
20 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes.  On this instance we had a 
plan.  I must indicate Chair that I could hardly recall the number of 
meetings that we had between myself, Mr Inathi Ntshaga and Ms 
Merriam Mochoele.  Now there was a plan on the day – there was a 
disciplinary hearing on that day against a subordinate of Mr Brian Van 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 112 of 196 
 
Wyk and of course I gave – I testified on that day. But the plan was that 
we needed to suspend or the company needed to suspend Mr Brian Van 
Wyk.  So we had a plan in place and the plan was only known to 
myself, the then employee relations senior specialist Ms Nomfusi 
Dakene and it was also known to her boss the GM of HC Human Capital 
which is HR Ms Kgatile Nkala and of course the CEO.  Now the plan 
was that he would be suspended and I would confiscate his access card 
and – you know – the laptop all those gadgets and therefore walk him 
out except for the cellphone because he needed still to report. 
He was still an employee and I needed to escort him out of 
10 
the premises.  Then we planned to say we are going to execute.  Now if 
my memory services me well because Ms Dagenie was sitting in that 
and we had plotted it to say once you are done you give me an 
indication.  So I can come up and we can execute as planned. 
I remember at that time when she – I think she sent me an 
SMS.  I cannot recall how she – she – but I think it was an SMS or a 
WhatsApp.  Now – to say we are ready.  We can action.  I went to – to 
the ACGM because she needed to be present and advised her to say we 
are ready.  We can go. 
I walked with her to Mr Brian van Wyk where the disciplinary 
20 
hearing was actually taking place of his subordinate.  When I got there 
as we were walking – you know – at third floor because he was busy at 
third floor.  From the second floor we went to the third floor.  Ms Nkala 
stayed behind.  She spoke to somebody. 
I think that was deliberate Mr Chair because I ended up 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 113 of 196 
 
walking into the office alone and as we were talking and about to 
execute the plan I heard Ms Nkala talking towards the door of 
Mr van Wyk.  She was talking to somebody within – you know – the - 
the company around the third floor. 
I could hear her voice and because of Mr Brian van Wyk how 
he was seated he could see – you know – in between the gap of the 
door and the other side of his office.  Now I saw him looking towards 
the door and back to us and I just said excuse me.  He said excuse me.  
That was the last time I saw him.  So my view … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, he left the room? 
10 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  He left – he said excuse me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And never returned? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Now the GMHC did not enter the 
room.  He stood right at the door.  He looked towards the door and he 
looked at us and he said guys excuse me.  He stood up and went out of 
the office.  That was the last time I saw him.  So what it means 
Mr van Wyk disappeared from the premises. 
He ran away literally ran away.  He was advised and honestly 
I can certainly bet the GMHC advised him accordingly.  So he 
disappeared. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya you do not have any direct 
knowledge of that advice been given.  Do you? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Come again? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You do not know for a fact … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 114 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  That that advice was given? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I do not – I do not know for a 
fact. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I do not know for a fact, know.  I 
cannot say that.  It is just that he looked at where she was standing 
and he stood up.  Then he did not come back and she did not come 
back too.  She did not come back too. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And she was supposed to go into the room with you? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  With me. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  For purposes of execution. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Hence my assumption is that 
she is the person that gave the information to Mr van Wyk. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But did you see her again? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes.  She remained in the 
company. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And did you confront her? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To say what happened to you? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I did not even confront her 
20 
because we waited there and we - we noticed that he was not coming 
back.  We stood out to try and look and he was gone.  I did not even 
confront her really.  I did not.  That was it.  That is how it (intervenes). 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya you were thereafter asked to write 
up charges against Mr van Wyk.  Is that correct? 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 115 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  That was a few days later as I have it.  If you 
go over the page to page 13.  You will see that your first paragraph 
there 38 talks about the fact that you were asked to write up charges.  
Was any disciplinary process ever conducted in relation to Mr van Wyk? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  No disciplinary action was taken 
against Mr Brian van Wyk.  However I was requested by the GM Legal 
Risk and Compliance Ms Mochoele to write up charges in relation to the 
transgression that Mr Brian van Wyk has committed for the purpose of – 
you know – dealing with the matter. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Hm. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Disciplining him.  I did exactly 
that with the assistance of the Employer Relations Senior Specialist 
Ms Dagenie.  We tabled those charges and later on I handed the hard 
copy to Ms Mochoele. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And you also - as I understand it – then 
suggested to Mr Ntshanga that it would be best if the matter was to be 
handed over to external forensic investigation.  Is that right? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is right ma’am. 
ADV KATE HOFMYR:  When did that – sorry – and what was his 
20 
response to that? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  When I indicated that - you 
know - the best way was to hand this over to a forensic investigator.  
Firstly the purpose was that – you know – I could see that there was 
something deeper than I thought on this whole thing.  So I wanted – 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 116 of 196 
 
you know – the whole thing to be exposed. 
Moreover it was becoming clearer to me that he was 
definitely involved - the CEO was definitely involved.  So I said you 
know what I recommend that you give the matter to a forensic 
investigator.  His response to me was that no it is not a good idea 
because the forensic investigator was definitely going to go – to blow 
this whole thing out of proportion. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Ngwenya you then at paragraph 39 on page 
13 talk about your efforts at the Procurement Department and as I 
understand your evidence in relation to your endeavours with the 
10 
Procurement Department you were able to establish that there had 
been no notification of a tender or other RFP process that was 
embarked upon prior to the award of the – well – the conclusion of the 
agreement with Koreneka.  Is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct ma’am. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And if we go over the page to page 14 you will 
see at paragraph 41 you even went so far as to check whether there 
was not some sort of deviation from the ordinary tender process that 
might have been followed in order to legitimise or give some legal 
underpinning to the contract with Koreneka.  Were you able to find any 
20 
such deviation authorisation? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Not at all ma’am.  I – I – Chair 
when I went there – in actual fact I interviewed two people.  The first 
one it was on the - I think – the 4 t h. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 117 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I spoke to Mr Zakaria Rabotata 
who is the Procurement Officer as SA Express and he is still there.  I 
inquired about the tender issued or advertised pertaining – you know – 
this ground handling in – in the North West.  He said he was not aware 
of any – you know – of such.  He looked on his system. 
He did not find anything no deviation no business case.  
Nothing in relation to the procurement process.  So he confirmed to me 
that there was nothing.  Then later on I went to his boss Ms (indistinct) 
who was the Divisional Manager of the Procurement Department.  I 
interviewed her pertaining to two issues. 
10 
The first one was Koreneka in relation to the procurement 
processes whether you – she was aware.  Whether she had any 
documentation within the procurement space that she can provide to me 
– you know – as proof that somehow the process was actually followed 
and she said she was not involved in – in any of such. 
Probably her predecessor was definitely involved because of 
now the second element was this Valoteck.  Remember I had already – 
I was already informed about Valoteck taking over and I wanted to know 
about Valoteck and I said to her okay the Valoteck Contract what 
happened. 
20 
Do we have a contract first within our procurement space?  
She said SA Express does not – does not have a signed contract to that 
effect – Valoteck/Express.  I remember at that juncture there was a file 
and that file spoke to the RFQ process where she requested the quotes 
from the three companies. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 118 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Three companies yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Can we go to that document because it might 
be helpful just to look at it as you … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Refer to it in your evidence? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You will find it as Annexure 5 and it is at page 
41 – 4-1. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Now this is – as I understand it – what you 
were referring to.  It is a letter from SA Express addressed to Valoteck 
Facilities Management.  Is that as you understand the letter? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  The date of the letter? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  19 May 2016. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And what is the heading of the letter? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It is “Provision of Labour 
20 
Broking Services/Three Quotes”. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So can I just pause for a moment.  I take it that 
labour broking services is something different to ground handling at 
airport? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 119 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you and the first paragraph says: 
“The above mentioned three quote system in which 
you participated has reference.  This letter serves 
to inform you – to inform that you have been 
selected as the preferred bidder.  This letter of 
appointment is effective from 19 May 2016.  Further 
to this letter SA Express Airways and Valoteck 
Facilities Management shall enter into a Service 
Level Agreement for the duration of the contract as 
agreeable to by both parties.  We trust that this 
10 
award shall be beneficial and fruitful to both 
parties.” 
So do I understand that this was in the Valoteck file? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  There was no record of the Valoteck/SA 
Express Contract in the file? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It was not there. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But you have subsequently been shown that.  Is 
that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But you were not told of any process that was 
followed in relation to ground handling services prior to the conclusion 
of the contract with Valoteck.  Is that right? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So is this – is this letter about labour broking 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 120 of 196 
 
services literally all that you could find in relation to Valoteck in the 
records of the Procurement Department? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA: 
 
Yes 
and 
of 
course 
the 
correspondence.  The emails – you know – requesting quotes from … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Three entities of which the 
respondent was only – or the company that responded was Valoteck. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But all again just to be absolutely clear related 
to labour broker services? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes because when the quotes 
10 
were requested it was about labour broking services not ground 
handling. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you and then if we return to your 
statement at – at least your affidavit – at page 15.  We now come to the 
point at paragraph 45 because you have now been to Legal 
Department.  You have been to Finance Department.  You have been to 
Procurement Department. 
You have interviewed a number of people – as I have your 
evidence – and then as I read at paragraph 45 you prepared a 
Preliminary Investigation Report.  Is that right? 
20 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And the report is contained as an annexure to 
your bundle.  I do not suggest we go there now but you then took steps 
to present these reports to the GM of the Legal and the CEO.  Is that 
correct? 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 121 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And what happened when you provided it to the 
CEO, Mr Ntshanga? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  As I recall – in fact on 
6 October after finalising or compiling that report I took it and showed 
it to the GM Legal to say I am done with the report.  This is it.  I am 
about to hand it over to Mr Ntshanga and I did exactly that.  If I am not 
mistaken I handed over the document not on that day. 
It is either the following week – I am – I cannot remember 
clearly on that but when I gave that report to him I told him that it is – 
10 
it is the report and it is a – a Preliminary Investigation Report.  I – I 
indicated to him at the time to say but we have sufficient to actually 
charge Mr van Wyk – you know. 
We had sufficient evidence against him.  So we can deal with 
that.  However there are issues that – you know – I could not sort of 
reach.  Therefore hence it remained a Preliminary Investigation Report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In terms of the timing was this after he had 
disappeared – Mr van Wyk - or was it before? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Long, long, long after.  Long 
after Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Long after? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Long after.  Long after he 
disappeared. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Like two months, three months? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  He disappeared … 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 122 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  In June? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  In July. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In July. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  1 July as I have it … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  1 July he disappeared. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And we are now on 6 October. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  October. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Is that right? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes.  Now … 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you are still talking about whether to charge him 
10 
or not. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes, yes Chair.  It was – it was 
on that.  One, I must indicate Chair that as I said that I was responsible 
to run security.  I was the sole member of the Security Department 
responsible for different areas within the security space.  I can break 
them … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  You know – break it down to 
aviation security.  Now aviation security deals with the regulation. Now 
there are parts that I was actually supposed to deal with within the – 
20 
the civil aviation – you know – regulation which is Part 108 that deals 
with (indistinct) security. 
I was responsible for that and I was the designated officer for 
(indistinct) security within the entity.  Number two, I was also 
responsible for a Part 109 to ensure that every single employee 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 123 of 196 
 
involved in the operation was trained – you know – the security training 
was provided to those individuals. 
It was my responsibility to ensure that everyone within the 
company - now Chair you must understand that my operation was not 
limited to OR Tambo.  I was actually responsible entirely for the – you 
know – operation within and outside South Africa.  All those airports I 
was actually responsible singlehandedly. 
Now there was also the Part 111 which is aviation security – 
you know – that talks to the designation as well - you know – as a – as 
a Security Manager.  You know which somehow is in – is in line with the 
10 
Part 121 in terms of the AOC.  The AOC which is the Airline Operator 
Certificate. 
So – you know – I am all over the show.  Now there was 
Corporate Security that I was responsible for.  There was physical 
security that I was also responsible for and – you know – investigations 
as well.  So (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I guess you – I guess you are saying that to say 
there was a lot you had to do. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I was not asking you because I was thinking you 
20 
were slow.  I was just trying … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  No, no I am just trying to clarify 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I was wondering … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  So that you can get the picture. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 124 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I was wondering you would be talking about whether 
to charge somebody that has – that left about – what – four months 
previously … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Well … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Under the circumstances in which he left. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Anyway yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya I do – I do take it that after – from 
your affidavit – after you delivered this Preliminary Report to 
Mr Ntshanga your evidence at page 15 indicates you raised again with 
10 
him your Section 34 PRECCA concern and as I understand paragraph 
46 on that page he then told you that he wanted you to report to him.  
Can you tell us about that? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes.  In fact at that time I was 
already reporting to him directly. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Hm. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I was a direct report.  So based 
on the instruction from the (indistinct) Authority to say as a designated 
person I have to report to the highest office in the – in the company.  
So based on that I was already reporting to him.  So Ms Maleni and 
20 
Ms Mochoele were really out of the picture. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Hm. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  So I was directly reporting to 
him.  Now on that day when I spoke to him on that meeting I – I 
reiterated the Section 34 to say you have a responsibility.  You need to 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 125 of 196 
 
report this and that was in the presence of Ms Merriam Mochoele who 
perhaps here there is nothing that can substantiate that but just for the 
interest – you know – of this evidence Chair. 
Ms Mochoele 
confirmed 
to 
a 
Board 
Member 
– 
Mr Trevor Abrahams – who confronted us after before he actually 
opened a case in relation to this – you know – (indistinct).  She 
confirmed that I actually advised the CE about this section.  So ja that 
was- that was it. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And Mr Ngwenya you then – so let us just get 
right in time.  This in October 2016? 
10 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  I understand that there was one addition you 
wanted to make to the affidavit and in your evidence about a further 
interaction you had with Mr Ntshanga in early 2017 about the report 
and what concerns he raised with you in relation to the relationship 
between South African Express and the North West Department of 
Transport. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes Chair.  In fact I omitted part 
of that information because it was quite a lot.  In this regard Chair after 
we have discussed this report and I have already explained to him to 
20 
say what the reason was for me to hand him the preliminary.  I have 
explained that.  The investigation was not concluded even though we 
had enough to deal with Mr van Wyk when I gave him that report. 
Now I waited as I was busy not that I sit back and look at 
what he was actually doing but – you know – I thought he would act on 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 126 of 196 
 
the recommendation of my – you know – on – on the Preliminary Report 
recommendation and I actually realised that – you know – he was not 
really acting and Chair I must indicate that he wanted us – you know – 
to discuss the matter throughout verbally so.  No email (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  To discuss or to discard? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Discuss, discuss. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh to discuss, oh. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes.  That we discuss whatever 
issue the updates and all that I must not send emails.  We must sit and 
talk about it.  Now I handed this report to him.  You know – I delivered 
10 
– hand delivered to him.  Now I am waiting and I see the clock is 
ticking.  No action is actually taken. 
Now – you know – at that time I figured out to say – you know 
– this might place me in a very awkward position in that there was no 
trail – you know – paper trail or emails showing that there was an 
interaction – you know – between me, him – you know – in relation to 
this. 
I therefore decided on the very same month to email the very 
same report to one of – or at the time I was not really aware.  I emailed 
to – to him.  On 8 November a lady who was working … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Still 2016 hey? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Still 2016 yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  The very same month Chair.  
The following month on 8 November after the 31 s t after I forwarded.  I 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 127 of 196 
 
received a call from a lady who was a communication specialist – she – 
she still is within the company.  She said to me I am sorry I am not 
interfering with your investigation whatsoever but I can see that you 
have sent a report onto this email – you know – which belongs to 
Mr Ntshanga but this email is also used by the Communication 
Department – you know – to communicate whatever – you know – that 
is received from Mr Ntshanga. 
Therefore – you know – we have access to this report.  
However I have deleted it.  I can swear - you know - I am not privy to 
the content.  Therefore sent this email directly to the – I mean send 
10 
this report directly to this email.  She gave me the email which was the 
correct one.  I therefore … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  For Mr Ntshanga? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  For Mr Ntshanga yes.  I then 
sent that report to Mr Ntshanga.  I must indicate that Mr Ntshanga had 
four 
email 
addresses 
within 
SA 
Express. 
 
There 
was 
inatintshanga@flyexpress.  There was intshanga@flyexpress.  There 
was ntshanga@flyexpress.  There was inati.ntshanga@flyexpress. 
So four email addresses.  So she directed me as to which one 
I should use.  I therefore sent that report to – to that email 
20 
(intervenes). 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And Mr Ngwenya that is at the end of 2016 - as 
I have it? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That – that was – that was 
8 November. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 128 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  November? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes, 2016. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then you have an interaction with him in 
early 2017. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  About the report and he says – as I understand 
your evidence – he has a concern about the relationship between SA 
Express and the North West.  Can you tell us about that conversation? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes.  In fact prior to that after 
sending that report I think on 12 December the GMHC - and I think I 
10 
omitted that information on this – followed up pertaining the 
investigation where she asked me as to how far are you with the 
investigation and I said to her as far as I am concerned I completed the 
investigation and I since delivered the report to the CEO with the 
recommendations and you can touch base with him to establish the 
facts and I guess she went back to him because she did not come back 
to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But was the report not that you had sent to 
Mr Ntshanga … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is exactly the one. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Preliminary Report? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is – that is exactly the one 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well that – what is confusing me is that you are 
saying you have completed the investigation … 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 129 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you have only prepared a temporary … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  As … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or Preliminary Report. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  As I have stated Chair to say we 
had grounds to deal with Mr van Wyk … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Who was the subject – you know 
– subject of the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes the matter.  Now in that 
regard Mr van Wyk part – in actual fact I had … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, you had completed that part? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It was completed in that regard 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  But because of there were other 
parties … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Involved … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That I could not – you know … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Expose or … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 130 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes, in that regard then … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I felt that it was proper of me to 
submit it as a preliminary investigation … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANLA NGWENYA:  Because if I was to submit - 
submit it as a final investigation report that would close everything that 
is limited to this.  So yet I wanted continuity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  So it was preliminary only insofar as there were other 
people who you still needed to investigate but insofar as Mr van Wyk is 
– was concerned it was completed? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was – it was a final report? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely.  Not that I am 
investigating those parties but the third party investigating … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay alright. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  As per the recommendation in 
the … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Preliminary. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You were to have no further role in the investigation? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely because of … 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 131 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And if I may just remind you Mr Ngwenya your 
recommendations – you find them at page 50 – 5-0 – which is under 
Annexure 6 and those recommendations are consistent with the 
evidence that you have given I suggest but you will let me know if you 
have a different view.  At page 5-0 … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  There is a paragraph number 12. 
10 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes.  Okay, okay (intervenes). 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And you will see there that there are two 
recommendations.  You say: 
“Even though Mr Brian van Wyk has resigned that 
should not prevent SA Express to pursue the matter 
in case of litigation.” 
And then the second is. 
“The matter must be handed over to an external 
forensic investigator or the Special Investigation 
Unit for further investigation.” 
20 
That is consistent or is it not with your point initially when you got the 
mandate? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You said to Mr Ntshanga as I have your 
evidence – I can investigate but my scope is limited … 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 132 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Because of my limited access to people 
etcetera and so you run that investigation on the terms that we have 
described.  Is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Culminates with what you term a Preliminary 
Report 
– 
as 
I 
understand 
your 
evidence 
– 
because 
your 
recommendation was somebody else needs to take this further to 
finalise. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But just to clarify did – was your sense that 
they needed to take it further in relation to Mr van Wyk or the greater 
ambit of the investigation? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  The greater ambit ma’am. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you – you proceed just two – two things.  You 
say in – under your recommendations you say Mr van Wyk had 
resigned.  Was that because there was a formal resignation letter that 
20 
he – he put in or was that simply because you – you labelled his 
disappearance and never to return as resignation? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  No Chair.  There was a letter 
that he submitted but at that time I was not privy to the letter.  I heard 
this from the CEO himself, Mr Ntshanga. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 133 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay and did you recall how soon after his 
disappearance he put in a letter of resignation, or is something you 
don’t know? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Chair after he disappeared on 
the 1 s t, on the 6 t h there’s a communication platform within S A Express 
called Corporatecomms, it was pronounced that or announced on the 
Corporatecomms to say he has been suspended effective the 1 s t of 
July.  Yet the 1 s t of July he disappeared, probably you know they met 
10 
somewhere and he was suspended.  Then later on he told me about his 
resignation 
and 
that 
he 
was 
not 
really 
you 
know 
satisfied 
...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr van Wyk told you? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    The CEO, the CEO told me, Mr 
Ntshanga, that you know he had resigned and ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  But you never saw the actual letter of resignation? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    I saw it later on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you saw it later on. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    I saw it later on yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:    Oh okay. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    It was dated August 2016, no 
specific date to say on the 6 t h or whatever it says 2016 -  I mean 
August 2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Okay just before you proceed I want to understand 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 134 of 196 
 
something, the colleague of yours with whom you had gone to see Mr 
van Wyk on the day he disappeared, what was the name again – what 
was her name? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:   The?  
CHAIRPERSON:   The person who you had gone to…(intervention). 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    No that’s not my colleague 
actually, that’s Mr Brian van Wyk’s colleague so it was the GM, you 
know …(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but you – employed by…(intervention).   
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:    What was the name again: 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Mrs Gatiele Tlatsana. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes now as you continued with investigation all 
these months, did anything happen to her, did anything happen or was 
she asked in any way to account as to what happened with her in terms 
of the decision for the two of you to execute what you needed to 
execute? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Okay I recall Chair at some 
stage, because it wasn’t clear at the time whether he resigned or 
whatsoever, way after, you know, he disappeared and I kept asking the 
20 
CEO and at some stage I also asked here, because at some state, you 
know they were sending me from pillar to post to say when are we 
going to execute the disciplinary that was prior the resignation and the 
CEO said no, Mrs Tlatsana must action that and I said but Mrs 
Tlatsana, you know, they’re equals and you actually the person that’s 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 135 of 196 
 
supposed to …(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is a higher authority.   
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Ja absolutely yes and to 
discipline, they said no speak to her and I went to her and she sent me 
back to Mr Ntshanga so there was this game that was actually played 
and I recall at some stage trying to find Mr Ntshanga, I think it was 
around the time when – just after Mr van Wyk disappeared, I cannot 
recall but I think around that time and I could not find him and he told 
me, that you know what he was not around, he did not pick up actually 
my calls. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON: Mr Ntshanga?    
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Mr Ntshanga yes and you know 
because I already suspected, I remember going to the (indistinct), the 
CCTV room within SAA and review the footage backwards and 
I…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:    Around the time of Mr van Wyk’s disappearance? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    After Mr van Wyk disappeared 
because there was something that we spoke about with the CE and I 
was actually following up and he avoided my calls and eventually when 
I got hold of him he said he was gone, he was not in the premises at 
20 
the moment – sorry on that particular day and I recall going back 
because I lacked trust on him, honestly at that juncture and I went to 
the CCTV room to review the footage on that day just to check on his 
movement and I realised at the time when I called him he was actually 
at the office of the GMHR on that day and he was within the premises, 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 136 of 196 
 
so he actually avoided my calls.  So I guess to a certain extent I was a 
pain to quite a number of people around that time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Mr Ngwenya if we can go to page 16 of your 
affidavit. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    16? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    16 and I’ll pick it up at paragraph 47 but just 
before we get there, you were going to tell us about the conversation in 
early 2017 with Mr Ntshanga in relation to his concerns about the 
relationship between SA Express and the North West Government, can 
10 
you tell us about that conversation. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Okay, sorry about that. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Not at all. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Chair the conversation that I 
had with him at that juncture it was about the damage control of the 
relationship between SA Express and the North West Government.  Mr 
Ntshanga was not even talking about my report and recommendation, 
instead what he was concerned about was me writing or rather giving 
him a write up, you know that would say the relationship between SA 
Express and the North West can still go on because we are in charge, 
20 
you know, we’re taking charge of all the other issues, you know, driving 
me to rectify  all the, you know, the wrongs that actually happened and 
I said to Mr Ntshanga, Mr Ntshanga that’s not my responsibility, you as 
the CEO you have to write that and hand it over to the North West, that 
is not my responsibility.  My responsibility is to provide the 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 137 of 196 
 
investigation reports as I actually investigated the matter in this regard 
and you know, when I responded like that, he said to me, you know, 
there’s one thing that I don’t understand with you, you ‘re conducting 
investigations as if you’re investigating for Koreneka and all I want 
from you is a write up and stop telling me stories and all that and he 
left me, we parted ways and he said you make sure that you submit the 
write up and I went back to my office, I thought about it to say, but what 
is this, what is it exactly that is expected of me because I’ve played my 
part and all that.  I then figured out to say, you know what, here, maybe 
I will lose my job but as far as this whole thing is concerned, he doesn’t 
10 
have any grounds, therefore I’ll stand my ground.  I’m going to write a 
final investigation report which will be similar to the preliminary 
investigation report, the difference would be that, you know the prelim 
most of the stuff were in bullet point format.  Now I changed that to 
paragraphs where I elaborated as to how I went about the investigation 
and on top I wrote it, final investigation report, with the exact same 
date that was on the preliminary report, 6 October and then I handed 
that – I did not sign it for a simple reason, that was deliberate because 
I had confirmed to him  that I cannot compile a final investigation report 
because of – the investigation was not actually concluded, you know, in 
20 
relation to other parties that were involved, I therefore handed the 
exact same report, and I think it was around February at the time, I 
gave him that report which reminds me of something to say – there’s 
something that I actually omitted Chair, pardon me. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Indeed. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 138 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    The whole evidence – I just 
want to indicate a part that was also played by GM Legal Risk and 
Compliance. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Chair Mr Inati Ntshanga the 
last time I played the clip and provide any piece of evidence to him it 
was on that meeting when I showed them the documents and all that 
but later on the GM Legal and Compliance requested that evidence to 
say, I need to go through that, and if my memory serves me well, it was 
around October/November I cannot recall clearly as to the specific 
10 
date.  She requested that file, I gave the file because I sealed that file 
and I just not keep it within the premises I kept it somewhere, when she 
requested, I said, no I’ll bring it, you know the following day to you.  I 
brought the file to her it was in a brown envelope and you know, it was 
properly sealed with a sellotape, a clear sellotape and the audio 
recordings were outside that file that brown envelope but they were in a 
smaller envelope also sealed properly, you know, placed on top of that 
documentary evidence.  I gave those to her, she went and looked at 
that, I think she kept those documents for almost two weeks with her, 
then later on she called me to say, no I’m done you can come pick up 
20 
those documents and I went and picked it up from her she gave it to 
me, that envelope and I left.  When I got to my office you know, instead 
of placing this in a drawer whatsoever I checked to say okay is 
everything still in tact.  I cannot say anything in relation to the 
documents, I cannot confirm if there was any document taken out of 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 139 of 196 
 
that bundle of whatsoever and I’m not implying that she did that, but 
the audio recording were not there, they were missing. 
CHAIRPERSON:    All of it? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    All of the audio recordings 
were not there, they were missing. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Had you kept copies? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    No, no I don’t know what was 
with me but I guess I was comfortable because I knew I could obtain 
copies from Ms Tlatsana.  So I went back to her and I said, ma’am all 
your recordings are not part of this now, you did not give back she 
10 
said, no I didn’t, oh I thought they were there, you know and when you 
speak to a person you look at them, the gestures, the responses, if 
there’s something suspicious to say they know that they did not give 
this, she said, no okay I’ll look at my house, just like that, I said, no 
okay fine and later on in the week she came back to say no Tim I could 
not find those recordings, so I had to go back to Ms Tlatsana you know 
to request the copy of the recordings and she personally brought those 
recordings to our premises, you know she stood at the visitors parking 
and she called me, I went, she gave me and she gave me more than 
what she gave me initially, you know because there were other 
20 
conversations with other individuals on there, that’s how I actually 
obtained those recordings again. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s when you found the recording of the 
conversation when you, the CEO and …(intervention).     
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    No, no, no, those are 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 140 of 196 
 
separate. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Not that one oh okay. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    In actual fact the recording 
that were added it was between the HOD Mr Bailey Mahlakoleng, Ms 
Tlatsana of which on the initial recordings that was not part of it and 
some other recording yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Okay but you got all the ones that you had lost? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:    And then you got more and more. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    And more yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Mr Ngwenya, then at page 16 paragraph 47 
you talk about the next two companies in this progression of successive 
companies who are contracted to provide ground handling services, 
they are referred to in paragraph 47 as MAMCO and PAMCO, I just for 
the record like to get those full names…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:    I wonder, Ms Hofmeyr whether before you get into 
that section whether it wouldn’t be useful to kind of sum up what was 
wrong with Ms Tlatsana’s business did they provide the service but 
20 
were paid more than they were supposed to be paid or were they being 
paid what they were entitled to but she was required to give money to 
other people but if not now then maybe later on, I thought it might be 
convenient before you move into another section, just to have a picture 
of what it is that was wrong. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 141 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Mr Ngwenya your investigation in relation to 
the Koreneka agreement, what did you establish in relation to the 
services that were being provided by Koreneka at Mafikeng and 
Pilansberg, did you establish that they were providing ground handling. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    I did. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    And did you establish that they continued to 
provide those at the time when you met with her in June 2016? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR: 
   And did you establish that despite Valoteck 
being appointed to replace Koreneka in the Mafikeng airport they 
10 
actually had never provided any services there. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    That’s correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR: 
   Thank you, then if we just move to get to 
the nub of the Chair’s question as I have it, and we’ll do that in relation 
to the payments but as I have it there were a series of payments 
totalling 31million that were received, there – we break them down into 
four invoices in the course of your evidence but the sum total as I 
understand your affidavit is that what was reflected on the invoices for 
each of those payments were not services related to the contract at 
issue between Koreneka and South African Express, is that a fair 
20 
summary? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    That’s correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR: 
And were there ever invoices from Koreneka 
related or making reference to the actual terms of the agreement that 
had been concluded between Koreneka and South African Express?    
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 142 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Nope. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR: 
   Chair my suggestion is that we maybe go 
now to the Koreneka agreement, just so we can look at some of it’s 
provisions. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR: 
   And then we’ll come back to the successive 
parties. 
CHAIRPERSON:    That’s fine. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR: 
 Let’s do that and Mr Ngwenya it’s effectively 
through you that we’re going to look at these clauses because I’m not 
10 
suggesting and asking you to go through them that either you were 
involved in concluding the contract nor that you have a legal 
background at all but it’s useful for us to understand at least what on 
its terms, the contract envisaged…(intervention).   
CHAIRPERSON:    She said Mr Ntjanga. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR: 
   Oh I do apologise Mr Ngwenya, I do 
apologise.  Alright we’ll find the first agreement Chair, under tab 7 and 
commencing at page 52.  Now Mr Ngwenya this agreement that we’re 
looking at, at page 52, who is this agreement between? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    It’s the Department of 
20 
Community Safety and Transport Management and South African 
Express Airways.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR: 
   I’m going just for reference purposes to 
talk about this as the main agreement if I May, it’s the agreement that 
sets up the relationship as I have it between SA Express and the North 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 143 of 196 
 
West Government in relation to those two airports.  If we then – I’m 
going to come back to it but just to orientate ourselves, if we then go 
over to page 91 which is under tab 8 that is another agreement and who 
is that between? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    South African Express Airways 
and Koreneka Event Managers – Koreneka Trading and Projects. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR: 
   So can I call this the Koreneka agreement 
because that’s the one that South African Express then concludes with 
Koreneka. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Correct. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR: 
   And with reference to your evidence earlier 
that’s why you have tri-partheid or a triangular relationship here.  
There’s a relationship between South African Express and the North 
West Government reflected in the main agreement and then an 
agreement between South African Express and Koreneka, is that as you 
understand it? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR: 
   Thank you, what I’d then like to do is go 
through just a few provisions Chair of  the main agreement which 
commences at page 52, I just, so that we get a sense of what this was 
20 
envisaged to cover, and for that purpose I’d like to start at page 59, 
Chair with respect it’s fairly critical that we do this because the 
evidence over the next few days is going to have to fit into the 
structure of these agreements so it’s useful just to go through them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja that’s fine.  
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 144 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR: 
   If we start at page 59 and it’s clause 2.1 
there, what this main agreement between the North West Department of 
Transport and SA Express provides it that at clause 2.1, 
 
“in response to the request for proposal for re-introduction  of 
 
a air transport service between OR Tambo International 
 
Airport, Cape Town International Airport, Pilansberg and 
 
Mafikeng Airport, defined as the Airports issued by the 
 
Department of Community Safety and Transport Management, 
 
the airline SA Express responded to  request for proposals for 
 
the supply of airline service subject to a subsidy from the 
10 
 
Department which request for proposal was duly accepted by 
 
the Department Executive Council”.  
There are a number of parts there that we will pick up in later evidence 
Chair but at least what this agreement is recording is that there was a 
proposal as I have it, there was a response from SA Express who would 
provide the airline service and that was subject to a subsidy.  If we 
then go over the page to page 60 we then at clause 4 get told what 
those airline services are and at 4.1 it’s recorded that SA Express and 
the Department hereby agree that SA Express shall, with effect from 
the effective date commence the airline service on the designated route 
20 
that’s been defined as routes between OR Tambo, Cape Town and those 
two North West Airports, for a period of five years calculated from the 
effective date and then at 4.3, 
 
“as a contribution towards the costs of SA Express in providing 
 
the airline service the Department shall grant to SA Express 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 145 of 196 
 
 
the subsidy as more fully described in clause 6 hereof and on 
 
the terms and conditions as more fully set out in the 
 
agreement”, 
 
So I’d like to suggest we next go to that clause 6, it’s over the 
page at page 61 and under clause 6.1 is an important clause because it 
reflects is that the Department shall pay to SA Express the subsidy and 
the management company the operational costs of both airports, 
annually in advance as stipulated in annex A.  Now we need to just look 
at a few clauses to unpack that.  First of all this is the first time we’ve 
heard about a management company in the course of this agreement, 
10 
so we need to go to clause 15 which is on page 73 to find out who the 
management company or what the management company is as 
envisaged in the agreement.  So if we go to clause 15 on page 73, 15.1 
provides, 
 
“The 
Department 
mandates 
SA 
Express 
to 
appoint 
a 
 
management company responsible for managing the operations 
 
at Pilansberg and Mafikeng Airports”, 
 
At 15.4 – well let’s go 15.2 first, 
 
“The Department shall be liable for the payment of operational 
 
costs of the operations of the said management company, 
20 
 
15.3, the management company will be responsible for  
 
operational and other additional services as required and 
 
agreed with the Department and airline and 15.4, SA Express 
 
shall 
enter 
into 
a 
service 
level 
agreement 
with 
the 
 
management company in terms of which the performance of the 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 146 of 196 
 
 
management company will be monitored and evaluated and 
 
15.5 for the purposes of development and skills transfer, a)SA 
 
Express shall train the employees of the management company 
 
and b) to be able to perform the functions of the service level 
 
agreement referred to in the clause above”.  
 
So Chair at this point in the structure of the agreement, just to 
summarise is as I read the clauses we’ve got the Department agreeing 
to pay SA Express a subsidy for flying the routes and also to pay a 
management company that’s going to be appointed by SA Express in 
relation to the operations at the airport and there were also to be, over 
10 
the page at 62 – sorry I’ve gone back to 61 so at 62 clause 7, I won’t 
read the whole of the clause but that’s a clause about quarterly reports 
that had to be provided by SA Express to update it and significantly 
Chair, we should go to Annexure A and that is at page 88 because Chair 
that is the subsidy structure that we had a reference to earlier in the 
subsidy clause.  I see that this copy of that page is not all that good, I 
know that there’s a better one in the file of Mr Phiri who’s coming 
tomorrow but I’m fairly familiar with these figures so I’ll do my best just 
to indicate…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:    I think what could be done in due course is to 
20 
replace it with a clearer copy. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR: 
   Indeed we’ll do that then it’s in the file, I’ll 
make a note about that but the upshot is that in terms of this subsidy 
structure, Chair as this – we understand this table you’ll see a 
reference in the top line under the heading, North West Concession, 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 147 of 196 
 
that there’s a Pilansberg entry and then a few lines down a Mafikeng 
entry and then two or so lines down from that you have total subsidy, 
that half of this table is what the North West Government was going to 
be paying to SA Express.  The second half of the table you’ll see on the 
left-hand side in the first column, there’s a heading, Management 
Company Subsidy, and so the amounts in the second half are the 
management company subsidies.  These amounts, Chair, are in the 
millions so what you see in the first year, if we move along the columns 
is in year one, the total subsidy that’s going to be paid to SA Express in 
the first half is 58million and a bit and the amount that’s going to be 
10 
paid to the management company is 51million, if you go down.  In year 
two the subsidy to SA Express is 51milllion and a bit, I’m just rounding 
off for the purposes of this discussion and in year two to the 
management company is going to be 31million paid.  In year three, 
43million to SA Express and 31million to the management company.  In 
year four 46million to SA Express and 31million to the management 
company and in year five, 38million to SA Express and another 
31million to the management company.  As I’ve totalled that up it just 
exceeds about 400million over the course of five years in relation to 
flying routes on SA Express’ part and then on the management 
20 
company’s part, doing some ground handling.  So that’s the 
arrangement of the main agreement.  If we then go over to the 
Koreneka agreement, Chair what appears quite striking about this 
agreement is that it has a totally different structure for how Koreneka is 
going to deliver its services of ground handling and how it’s going to be 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 148 of 196 
 
remunerated and so I’d just like to highlight those two clauses.  It talks 
in it’s introductory parts about the fact that it’s a ground handling 
agreement, that Koreneka is contracted to provide those services at 
Pilansberg and Mafikeng and then if we go to page 99 you’ll see in 
clause 20, it says at 20.1, 
 
“In consideration of the ground handling company providing  
 
the services, the carrier, which is a reference to SA Express 
 
agrees to pay the handling company the charges set out in the 
 
relevant Annex B hereto including any additional expenditure 
 
incurred for providing the services referred to in this 
10 
 
agreement and the charges set out in Annex B hereto are not 
 
inclusive of any of the following”, 
 
And that is just an exclusion about charges that would be 
levied really by airport and customs and other authorities but then the 
next important clause is clause 21, because this is talking about, well 
how are they going to account, how is the handling company, Koreneka 
going to account to SA Express and to summarise there’s an invoicing 
system.  Monthly there will be invoices and within 30 days there’ll be 
payment and the last important thing to go to then is Annex B, which 
commences at page 108.1, that lists all of the multitude of handling 
20 
services that are going to have to be provided and finally at page 108.5 
are all of the rates that are applicable to the provision of those 
…(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:    Sorry page 10? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR: 
 108.5 Chair.  
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 149 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:    Oh okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR: 
And Chair, you’ll see under clause 1.2 there, 
there’s a heading for the services set out above the applicable rate 
shall be as follows.  And then there are rates for ground-handling 
turnaround cost, for ground-handling labour, there’s a sub total, there’s 
a bit of a management fee put in there.  And there’s a total of R 
116 443.  If you then go down to the breakdown in relation to the 
management fees in the next paragraph so now we’re talking about 
management fees in particular.  There is an annual total that can be 
accumulated for management fees, that’s about the fourth column 
10 
along.  And what you’ll see there Chair is that management fees in 
relation to the turnaround of aircraft, the total annual amount is 
approximately R 425 000 and the total for the other services which are 
customer service agents and general workers is R 846 000.  Chair, 
what is striking we will suggest in the course of the evidence is the 
discrepancy between those figures.  You’ve got figures in relation to 
subsidy under the main agreement in the region of 400 000 million and 
a portion of that just under 200 million that over the five years is 
envisaged to go to the management company.  But then in the actual 
agreement that’s concluded between Koreneka and SA Express, you’ve 
20 
got much more modest rates. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, it’s very strange. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  It’s very strange. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because they both relate to the same services. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed.  That will be explored with the 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 150 of 196 
 
witnesses Chair.  But that at least gives us the framework for the 
agreement that was concluded, a main agreement but a reference in it 
to the management company and an entitlement to those millions worth 
of subsidies and then the agreement between SA Express and 
Koreneka.  Mr Ngwenya, as I have your evidence though, the sort of 
invoicing that the Koreneka agreement envisages monthly in these 
much more modest amounts are not invoices you ever uncovered, is 
that correct? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That’s correct, yeah. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So if we may then move to the invoices that 
10 
you did uncover because they are in the millions and there are four of 
them.  And Chair, with your guidance I’m not going to go to (inaudible) 
collectively, let’s conclude if it’s convenient the Koreneka position. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that’s fine.  Yeah, that’s fine. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So we will do that picking it up at page 18, Mr 
Ngwenya of you affidavit 18. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I see that you are making sure. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed, I’ve got a note here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You don’t make a mistake again. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair, I will not make another mistake.  I might 
20 
even attach it to the microphone so there’s no chance.  But we are at 
page 18, Mr Ngwenya and paragraph 53 there you start to tell us about 
the first payment.  Mr Ngwenya, you give us it seems to be the style of 
your affidavit, an enormous amount of details.  My sense is that Mr 
Ngwenya, you’re a very detailed person and so you have set out in 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 151 of 196 
 
scrupulous detail the tracking of the invoice and then who authorised it 
and then how it was paid and when it was paid.  We have that on 
record, I’d like to just to highlight the important points of it.  Paragraph 
53.1 records that on the 4 t h of May 2015 Koreneka issued an invoice of 
8.5 million to SA Express and then will you tell us what description was 
used on that invoice? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It was the Airport refurbishment and 
compliance maintenance and operational setup cost. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Now if you jump down to paragraph 53.4 on 
that page you make the point that the expense authorisation which 
10 
follows 
that 
invoice 
reflects 
the 
same 
description, 
Airport 
refurbishments and compliance maintenance and operation setup cost.  
And then will you just tell us what you make of that description on the 
invoice? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Look Chair, this description you know had 
nothing to do with SA Express sort of responsibility. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Nor the agreement between SA Express and 
Koreneka. 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes, the agreement between SA Express 
and Koreneka because of none of the services mentioned there you 
20 
know SA Express requested that Koreneka provide but this they’re 
related to the Facility Management agreement where Koreneka was 
acting as the management company providing services to the Northwest 
Department of Transport in managing the Airports.  This has absolutely 
nothing to do with SA Express. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 152 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So are you saying that these types of services that 
fits this description, they fell outside of the agreement between SA 
Express and Koreneka. 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That’s correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But they did fall within the agreement between 
Koreneka as Management Company and the Northwest Department of 
Transport and Community Safety. 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That’s correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, but SA Express was being invoiced for those 
services? 
10 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In terms of the invoice? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya, I do need to indicate this to you 
in terms of the evidence that will come in due course.  It is not clear 
certainly to me that that description even falls within the envisage 
subsidies under the main agreement.  On what basis do you say you 
are satisfied that it falls under the main agreement? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  At Airport refurbishment? 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mm. 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Compliance maintenance. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think maybe let me put the question this way.  In 
saying that that description in the invoice falls within the services 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 153 of 196 
 
contemplated in the agreement between Koreneka and the Northwest 
Department of Transport, are you saying that because you did have a 
look at that agreement or are you basing your view on something else? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Chair, this information is also contained 
on the audio recordings where Mr Brian van Wyk was actually you know 
describing the type of service to Ms Babadi Tlatsana, it’s on record. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Where he mentioned to say they need to 
refurbish the Airport, they need to put on the CCTV, the fire trucks and 
all that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yeah, but that’s fine that’s one thing but did you have 
a look at the agreement and saw that it does fit in or you assumed that 
it does because of what you heard? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I assumed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Because if I knew for a fact that it was not 
part of the agreement between SA Express and Koreneka. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And Mr Ngwenya, if I may suggest your 
20 
personal knowledge in relation to the agreement between SA Express 
and Koreneka and what you managed to uncover in the invoicing 
etcetera is particularly relevant for our purposes.  We have also 
listened to some of those recordings and indeed we will play them in 
the course of the evidence.  Mr van Wyk is often on those recordings 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 154 of 196 
 
indicating the need for refurbishment and fire trucks but Mr Ngwenya, 
that’s precisely part of our investigation because it is not at all clear to 
us that those were in fact envisaged services under the main 
agreement at all.  Right.  So the first payment is 8.5 million, we’re at 
page 18.  And they are for this quoted airport refurbishment and 
compliance maintenance and operational setup costs.  That 8.5 million 
is paid by SA Express to Koreneka, is that correct? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You have the date of that over the page at 19, 
it was paid on the 6 t h of May, correct? 
10 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes, that’s correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And what you can certainly say is that 
description of services is not covered by the SA Express Koreneka 
agreement, correct? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  The second payment you’ll pick up at page 19.  
It was to the value of a further 8.5 million and it was dated the 17 t h of 
August at least the invoice was.  Do you see that at 54.1? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  What description was given on that invoice? 
20 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Airport refurbishment and compliance 
maintenance and facility upgrade. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And I then expect your evidence will be the 
same that that was not covered by the SA Express Koreneka 
agreement? 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 155 of 196 
 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That’s correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And none the less at 54.4 I pick up that the 
payment was made on the 27 t h of August, correct? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  In the amount of 8.5 million? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That’s correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And generally you gave us evidence earlier but 
there is authorisation for these payments being provided until this point 
by Mr van Wyk, is that correct? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That’s correct. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Right.  And then we go to the third payment.  
Chair, what’s interesting about the third payment from Mr Ngwenya’s 
evidence is that the payment was for 14 million and it was a single 
payment on a single day.  But the way it came into SA Express was in 
the form of two invoices for less each than 10 million.  And Mr Ngwenya 
has some views about why it was broken up into two invoices but none 
the less paid in one payment.  Mr Ngwenya, you’ll find that at page 20 
paragraphs 55.  What is the point- well let’s go first, the description on 
the first invoice which was for 5.84 million, what was that? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Facility Security Management and Facility 
20 
Management. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And the second invoice, what description was 
given for it? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Airport fire truck lease. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And that was for an amount of 8.16 million, is 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 156 of 196 
 
that correct? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That’s correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then at 55.2 you make the point about the 
payments falling under 10 million rand, what is that point? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  As I’ve explained earlier ma’am, to say 
you know there is a delegation of authority in terms of signing off the 
money and all that.  Now on the expense of it is clearly depicted as to 
how much can the CEO and the GM sign off?  Now anything above 10 
million because of I think he’s got the signing power for 10 million rand.  
Now at that time you know its 14 million that was supposed to be taken 
10 
out of the account.  Now the CEO didn’t have lead delegation of 
authority you know in terms of (inaudible crosstalk) of authority to say 
he can sign for anything above the 10 million rand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Beyond 10 million. 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  In that regard the Board was supposed to 
be involved in this so as to approve and sign it off.  But the amounts 
were broken into two smaller amounts which were below the 10 million 
threshold so that you know to circumvent the ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  The need to approach the Board. 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  The need to approach the Board and their 
20 
approval.  And I must say that the Board was never even informed of 
this transaction as the money was flowing out of the company.  So the 
separation was just to ensure that it’s below the 10 million threshold 
and that obviously it enables Mr van Wyk the authority to sign it off and 
ja. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 157 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So these payments were they all authorised by the 
CEO or is that something you are not sure about, you might know only 
one? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay, let me put it this way Chair.  On all 
these transactions the CEO appended his signature on the ... 
(intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  On the relevant documents to. 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Expense authorisation form. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Now Mr van Wyk was approving so he 
10 
endorsed you know the CEO, he also signed on that on all these 
expense forms. 
CHAIRPERSON:  All this transactions, ja. 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  He had knowledge because of earlier he 
informed me that this money was deposited to SA Express by mistake 
you know, it was not intended for SA Express.  It was intended for 
Koreneka hence they were taking that money out of SA Express. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair, just to pick up that point.  If we just look 
at one of the expense authorisations you’ll see those signatures.  We 
can go to the one under tab 13 page 123.   
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Tab 13. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 158 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair, you’ll see in the right-hand half of the 
page at the bottom there’s a place for recommended by and a signature 
and a name to be printed and then approved by.  Mr Ngwenya, who’s 
signature is on the approved by line there? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It’s Mr Brian van Wyk signature. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then the name beneath that reads BT van 
Wyk, is that right? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That’s correct, Mr Brian van Wyk, its Brian 
Tebogo van Wyk. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then is that signature under additional 
10 
signature below there the one that you identify as Mr Ntshanga’s? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That’s correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  And that’s repeated throughout in 
relation to the expense authorisations, is that right? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So those complete the four invoices but three 
payments.  The first of 8.5, the second of 8.5, the third of 14 which 
total 31 million, is that right? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That’s correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And you were satisfied after your investigation 
20 
that none of the descriptions on the invoices related to matters covered 
by the SA Express Koreneka agreement, correct? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That’s correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And if we go back to page 20 of the affidavit ... 
(intervenes) 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 159 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry.  So on the basis that the services that were 
reflected in the invoices for which Koreneka wanted to be paid fall 
outside of the services that were the subject of the agreement between 
SA Express and Koreneka?  These payments were all not supposed to 
have happened? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That’s correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That’s correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  At page 20 of the affidavit Mr Ngwenya, you 
10 
talk about a discussion with Ms Tlatsana that you reference at 
paragraph 55.3 and you state there that in my discussion with Ms 
Tlatsana she said that she did not know about these invoices and 
payments.  Is that correct, did you ask her about them? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That’s correct, yeah.  That’s correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  And then you ... (intervenes) 
CHAIRPERSON:  So she said she never prepare these invoices and her 
office never even prepared them or just that she didn’t prepare them? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  She did not submit any invoice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  And for that matter Chair, she did not even 
know how to prepare an invoice at the juncture. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yeah, is that something you- that’s what she told 
you? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  She told me.  At some stage she asks me 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 160 of 196 
 
as to how to submit an invoice, how to go about. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Was your understanding from her that that was 
the role that Mr Kalisilira played. 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Is that what she conveyed to you? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely and obviously the recordings 
also it is actually mentioned that Mr David Kalisilira was responsible for 
you know preparing invoices and all that.  And that came out of Mr 
Brian van Wyk’s mouth that was his exact words. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya, you made the point a moment ago 
10 
that you went to Mr Ntshanga to ask him about why SA Express was 
paying Koreneka in relation to matters as you understood it covered by 
the main agreement, is that right? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That’s correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And what was Mr Ntshanga’s response to that? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  His response was that the money was 
erroneously paid to SA Express when it was intended for Koreneka so 
based on that they had to pay it to Koreneka. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Because when we looked at that main 
agreement you’ll recall that clause says the department shall pay SA 
20 
Express the subsidy and the Management Company.  Is that where you 
draw the conclusion that it was for the department to pay the appointed 
Management Company which in this case is Koreneka? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That’s correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So you raise it with Mr Ntshanga as I have your 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 161 of 196 
 
evidence and he says, yes it was erroneously paid to SA Express and 
so SA Express had to pay it out to Koreneka, is that right? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That’s correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I assume that suggest that the Department of 
Transport and Community Service or Safety in Northwest is the one that 
he was saying had paid the money to SA Express instead of Koreneka. 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That’s correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if that was the case they didn’t pay back to the 
person who erroneously paid to them for that person to pay it exactly 
10 
where they were supposed to pay it.  Why were they the ones paying 
Koreneka? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That was my view Chair, to say it’s 
unlawful to divert money that is transferred to your account 
erroneously.  It was not intended for Express therefore why divert it 
instead of advising the Northwest Department because of you got a 
relationship to them to say you know sort of reverse the payment and 
redirect it to the intended entity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it’s not for you to pass it on, you don’t know 
whether that Koreneka is entitled to it or not and if you pass it on to 
20 
Koreneka in circumstances where the Northwest Department of 
Transport says, no but you shouldn’t have done that it’s our money.  
What do you say? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That’s exactly my point that those are 
issues that are raised with the CE Chair. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 162 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Because of I was concerned about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I want us to take a break at 16h30 but if it’s 
already a convenient time in terms of what you want to ask we can take 
it now otherwise within 5 minutes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  I was just going to direct you to one aspect 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, then that’s fine let’s go up to 16h30 that’s fine. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Excellent.  Chair, it was just to reassure you at 
page 21 of Mr Ngwenya’s affidavit that he had exactly the same 
10 
question as you had.  As his paragraph 57 of the affidavit reads, he’s 
recounted in the precious paragraph what Mr Ntshanga’s response was 
and he says in his affidavit if I may Mr Ngwenya, I was disturbed by 
that response.  The lingering question was why didn’t SA Express 
refund the money to the Department if it was paid by mistake but 
instead pay it to Koreneka.  So Mr Ngwenya, it’s fair to say to was 
precisely your concern, was it not? 
MR NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed.  Thank you Chair, we can continue 
after the break. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, let’s take a 10 minutes break up to 16h35. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 163 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may proceed. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Ngwenya I would like to 
pick it up at the point where Valoteck is now contracted to SA Express 
to replace Koreneka in relation to the Mafikeng Airport.  You have given 
us the background already to that in your testimony.  As I have it in the 
course of your investigation you tried to understand on what basis 
Valoteck had been appointed.  Is that correct and Mr Ngwenya if you 
will turn on the microphone?  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja before – before that – I am sorry to interrupt you.  
In your investigation did you ever try and establish whether there was 
10 
any correspondence SA Express and the North West Department of 
Transport relating to this erroneous payment – so called erroneous 
payment to SA Express of money that was supposed to be paid to 
Koreneka?  
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I tried Chair but I did not get 
evidence to that effect.  In … 
CHAIRPERSON:  But did you ask the CEO … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If there was and what did he say? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  He said they were notified by 
20 
the North West to say they erroneously deposited the money but … 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the notification was not in writing? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It appears so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  So he did not provide any proof. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 164 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya as I have your evidence Valoteck 
is appointed but the only record you could find of any process that was 
embarked upon before the contract was concluded related to labour 
broking services.  Is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair I propose we just look at and 
Mr Ngwenya the Valoteck Agreement and then we can be quite swift 
with the PAMCO and MAMCO Agreements thereafter because the point 
to be made is that they are replicas of the Koreneka Agreement.  You 
10 
will find the Valoteck Agreement under Tab 19 at page 1-3-7. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So what you see here Mr Ngwenya is an 
agreement.  Just tell us who the parties are if you may? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It is South African Express 
Airways and Valoteck Facilities Management. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And Chair I do not propose to spend time on it 
but you can rest assured and if anyone wants to take us up on this they 
will.  It is a replica.  The only – there are one or two oddities.  The 
annexure referred to in this agreement we have not been able to 
20 
source. 
The one that sets out the ground handling services.  This is 
the only version of the agreement that the commission has able – has 
been able to find and then if you go over to Tab 20 … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that would be the cut and paste that … 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 165 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Ngwenya … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was talking about? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So you get the first Koreneka Agreement which 
is then replicated effectively in the Valoteck Agreement and then you 
will see if you turn over to the next tab at page 1-5-9.  Mr Ngwenya who 
are the parties to this agreement? 
10 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It is South African Express 
Airways and Halcogen which is PAMCO. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  What I am interested in – sorry – 
and let us just go to MAMCO to close it off and then I want to ask you 
about when these two agreements were concluded.  You will find the 
MAMCO Agreement as over the next tab at 21 starting at page 1-8-7 
and who are the parties there? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It is South African Express 
Airways and Mohican Airport Management Company – MAMCO. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Now these two agreements 
20 
Mr Ngwenya when were they concluded? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Mr Ngwenya. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Oh my goodness.  It has happened again. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Because I was not looking at my notes at the 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 166 of 196 
 
time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think – I think he must charge you a fee now. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  He must and if I do it again please correct me.  
Mr Ngwenya … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Ngwenya – Mr Ngwenya she is counsel you can … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed there is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Put your rate quite high. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya please tell the Chair when these 
two agreements - and Chair we refer to them for short the Mafikeng 
Airport Management Company is MAMCO.  The Halcogen Trading as 
10 
Pilanesberg Airport Management Company we refer to as PAMCO and I 
suggest those will be our abbreviations for the next … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Evidence session. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  When were these two agreements concluded 
Mr Ngwenya? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  We heard about this way after 
the departure of Mr Ntshanga from SA Express but they were concluded 
within his last three or two days before he exited SA Express … 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA: 
 
Which 
is 
the 
28 t h, 
29 March 2017. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Right.  So let us just place ourselves in time if 
we may.  You get the call from Ms Tlatsana on 24 June 2016.  Correct? 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 167 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You move to investigate.  You have your 
meeting on the Monday thereafter.  You produce your report on 
6 October 2016.  Is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You do not see action on it but you give a final 
report later in that year not signed subject to the caveats that you have 
described.  Then you have an interaction with Mr Ntshanga in early 
2017 – as I recall it – where he is asking you to write a letter to the 
North West Government to reassure them about the relationship … 
10 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then when does he leave SA Express? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  The following month. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  When was …? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Which is March 2017. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And was it at the end of the month? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It was definitely at the end of 
the month. 
CHAIRPERSON:  March 2017? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  March 2017. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And these two agreements – as I have your 
evidence – are signed by Mr Ntshanga within two or so days of that 
departure? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  They dated the 28 t h and 29 March 2017.  Is that 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 168 of 196 
 
correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Mr Ngwenya I then … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  It might be appropriate to just check.  You 
may have dealt with this before.  With regard to the Koreneka – it is 
Koreneka?  The (intervenes). 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Koreneka. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, Koreneka that company. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was Ms Tlatsana the only owner/shareholder/Director 
10 
that was in it or is that something you do not know? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  According to the information and 
the document that she handed to me … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Prior to Mr van Wyk bringing the 
two partners … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  She was the sole owner of the 
company … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  And after Mr Victor Thabeng 
resigned and she had to take out Ms Joyce Phiri out of the company.  
She remained alone again. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay alright. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So there is a period of time Mr Ngwenya – as I 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 169 of 196 
 
have it – where there were three members of the CC herself, 
Mr Thabeng and Ms Phiri? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But then Mr Thabeng resigned and then 
Ms Phiri there was litigation over her removal.  Is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And can I just ask about whether your 
investigation established any relationships between Ms Phiri whom you 
referred to and who was appointed into the company Koreneka, Mr Phiri 
who was responsible for certain appointments within the company and 
10 
Mr van Wyk? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes I did establish ma’am. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And what are they? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Chair Ms Phiri is the mother to 
Mr Levy Sipho Phiri and Mr Levy Sipho Phiri is the life partner of 
Mr Brian van Wyk – boyfriend yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But there is a personal relationship? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  There is a personal relationship.  
They are in – yes – romantic relationship. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you. 
20 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And … 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I guess Ms Hofmeyr you will also explore the 
issue of who were the owners/members/shareholders of MAMCO and 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 170 of 196 
 
PAMCO? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  We – we have – I think on your evidence 
already Mr Ngwenya that Ms Dube moves from Koreneka where she was 
appointed as the Facilities Manager by the Mr Phiri we have been 
speaking about.  Correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  She is then dismissed by Ms Tlatsana.  
Correct? 
10 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  That Ms Tlatsana relays to you is the reason 
for the conflict emerging between her and Mr van Wyk.  Correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then Valoteck is given the Agreement.  The 
same agreement that was concluded with Koreneka and does Ms Dube 
feature there again? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Ms Dube featured there as the 
owner or 50 percent shareholding and the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of Valoteck? 
20 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Of Valoteck … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  And Chair just to mention for 
the 
purpose 
of 
this 
hearing. 
 
The 
other 
owner of 
Valoteck 
Ms Kefilwe Mogodiri is also related to Ms Phiri because of Ms Phiri’s 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 171 of 196 
 
maiden name is Mogodiri as well.  So I guess Mr van Wyk wanted to 
keep it in the family. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But when you say they are related is that because 
that is – you know that to be a fact or you just saw the surname that … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It was confirmed.  I was told 
that it is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was confirmed, oh. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So there is another personal link as I have it 
10 
within Valoteck’s ownership.  Ms Dube appointed initially in Koreneka 
by Mr Phiri and then appears again in Valoteck.  Correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then her co-partner in that business 
Ms Mogodiri is related to Mr Phiri and Ms Phiri.  Is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  That just for the record is at page 22 paragraph 
59 of your affidavit and in terms of the ownership of PAMCO and 
MAMCO were you able to establish any links there Mr Ngwenya? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Honestly speaking I did not 
20 
actually investigate that because I had actually concluded and it 
happened when – you know we discovered after Mr Ntshanga left but 
what I have established in the ownership of PAMCO was that 
Ms Notule Dudu was also an owner of PAMCO. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And let me just get one other point of clarity.  
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 172 of 196 
 
Valoteck was never paid by SA Express.  Was it? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  It was paid directly by the North West 
Department of Transport.  Is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And do you know what the payment position is 
in relation to MAMCO and PAMCO? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Not really ma’am.  As I have 
said that I did not (intervenes). 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  We will traverse that in other evidence.  So 
10 
Mr Ngwenya if we may then go - subject to any other queries Chair that 
you may have in relation to the agreements – I would like to take us to 
page 25 of your affidavit … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Page 25. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And before we begin with the last paragraph on 
that page I would just like your confirmation.  You – you indicated a 
moment ago you did not investigate PAMCO and MAMCO extensively … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Ja. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But I do recall from your affidavit that you were 
able to establish that no procurement process had been followed in 
20 
relation to their appointment at the end of March 2017.  Is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Okay and that is as SA Express’ procurement is 
concerned.  Correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct.   
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 173 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  We now have a section of your affidavit 
Mr Ngwenya that is headed “The Lithuli House Ambush and the R3 
million Bribe”.  Mr Ngwenya I would like to go through that.  Can you 
tell us what happened on or about 18 August 2016?  I know that in the 
course of the remaining pages of your affidavit you go into a great deal 
of detail about the steps you took to identify the people who you were 
dealing with.  Feel free to – to explore that but in essence tell us what 
happened on 18 August 2017 – 2016. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  2016. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Apologies. 
10 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  At that time I was still running 
with this investigation.  I had not yet concluded or … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just raise your voice again.  I know it has been a 
long day but just try and raise your voice. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay Chair.  I am saying at that 
time I was still – you know – running with the investigation and all that 
and on that particular day I received a call as … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is 18 August 2016? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes and I hope my memory 
serves me well on the day but anyway I have indicated to say the – the 
20 
itemised billing can be – you know – retrieved to actually … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Check the date? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you are mistaken. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  On that day Chair I received a 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 174 of 196 
 
call.  Now I have got caller ID on my phone.  So even if I do not have 
your number for as long as it is Rica’d it will reflect as who you are.  
Now on that particular day I received a call from my counterpart at 
Absa which is the Head of Security – Mr Jason Tshabalala – who 
happened to 
be the 
former 
bodyguard 
of 
the late 
President 
Mr Nelson Mandela. 
He gave me a call and at that time when – when he called in 
that period I was dealing with quite a number of investigations and we 
had suspended a lady who was working for SA Express and during that 
time the lady alleged that Mr Tshabalala was actually the cousin.  In 
10 
actual fact she tried to influence me to turn a blind eye on that 
particular investigation. 
She went on to mention that I must not worry with the footage 
if it is available.  Mr Tshabalala was he cousin and he could assist – 
you know – to erase the movement and all that.  So when i received 
this call … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  You are too fast.  I think I have missed 
something. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please go – go back a little bit. 
20 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I am saying … 
CHAIRPERSON:  On that day you received a call and you – you could 
tell who it was who was phoning you. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, just take it from there. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 175 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Now my thinking when I saw 
that it was Mr Jason Tshabalala who was calling my mind – in my mind I 
thought he was to ask me about the lady - Ms Suzeka Lokwe – who was 
suspended at the time.  I thought he was going to ask me about her – 
you know – talk about her because before we suspended her there was 
a matter that I was investigating and - you know – she mentioned that 
Mr Jason Tshabalala – because of that part spoke to her movement – 
you know – to the airport and all that and I indicated to say there is a 
footage movement and all that. 
So she persuaded me to turn a blind eye and she then 
10 
mentioned to me that Mr Jason Tshabalala the Head of Security was her 
cousin.  So according to her Mr Tshabalala was going to make the 
footage disappear.  That was according to her.  Now when I received 
the call and … 
CHAIRPERSON:  This was a footage covering what? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  No it is something else. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Something else. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Hence I am saying it is another 
thing.  So it was my (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright okay.  We do not need to go into it but 
20 
… 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it is footage that you were interested in looking at 
or not really? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Hm. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 176 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe you do not need to … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It was a separate case.  It was 
not … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  It was a separate thing, ja. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I am just trying to relay the 
story … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Of my thinking. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  So I thought he was to talk 
10 
about that because of what she told me but that was not the case.  
Mr Tshabalala in fact said to me – he greeted me nicely.  Tim how are 
you?  I said no I am okay and he said to me there is a guy who wants to 
talk to you chief. 
You know – I said talk to me about what.  He said no man.  
He just wants to talk to you.  I said who is this person.  He said no he 
is a brother man.  I mean you can – you know – chat to the guy.  I can 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you knew Mr Tshabalala before (intervenes)? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  l knew Mr Tshabalala … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  But we are not close. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  We are in the very same space 
… 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 177 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  And the last time I spoke to him 
it was – way back.  Approximately 2013/ 14 when I was – I was still 
working for previous company. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes.  It was then about a certain 
investigation anyone.  So it is not a person who we – you know – now 
when he called me that also was like – Jason calling me.  Where did he 
get – get my number and all that.  So he told me know this person is a 
brother and casually so – you know – and – and honestly speaking he 
10 
was nice. 
He is a nice guy.  Ja, he wants to talk to you.  I said okay but 
who is this guy.  I said no do not worry.  He is a brother.  He wants just 
to talk to you.  I said okay fine.  Not a problem.  You can give him my 
number but I got worried somehow to say I mean he did not speak 
about what I thought he would raise.  What is going on here? 
Could it be about this North West issue?  Well I did not know 
at the time.  Approximately 30 - 20 minutes or so later I received a call 
from an unknown person and this person indicated to me that I got your 
number form Mr Jason Tshabalala.  I would like to meet you around the 
20 
Midrand area this afternoon.  In actual fact when I know off – you know 
– from work- around five. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But from your phone you could tell who the caller 
was? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  No I could not.  I could not tell. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 178 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I could not – it showed the 
number.  It did not show the name. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes.  It showed the number.  It 
did not show the name and I said to - to this person chief I do not know 
you in the first place and you want to meet with me in Midrand.  You do 
not even greet me.  I felt that he – he was rude actually - you know.  
You are telling me that you got my number from somebody and the next 
thing you want to – you want to meet with me. 
10 
I do not know you and all that.  He said to me no I need to 
talk to you Chief.  I have got a mandate.  I need to – to talk to you.  I 
said Chief what- what mandate are you talking about.  He said no I 
have got a mandate from Lithuli House.  I just want to talk to you.  Can 
we meet?  I said I cannot meet you in Midrand. 
I can meet you in the airport precinct or in the East Rand mall 
towards my way home because I am a (indistinct) boy.  I stay in the 
(indistinct).  Therefore I cannot be driving to Midrand and all that and 
you want to talk to me therefore you have to sort of come to me.  He 
said okay fine. 
20 
No it is fine I can meet you.  I said where can we meet.  He 
said no I will let you know.  I am in Cape Town right now but as soon as 
I get to the airport I would tell you exactly where we can meet. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 179 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  If I may just interject there.  At page 26 
paragraph 73 you record in your affidavit that you said something else 
to this caller when he said to you that he had been given a mandate 
from Lithuli House. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  To come and speak to you.  What you record 
there is you say: 
“I told him that I am not a politician …” 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  “…and cannot be talking about Lithuli 
10 
House mandates.” 
Is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct ma’am.  That is 
correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Please continue.  So you said that.  
You then had a discussion with him about where you could meet - as I 
have your testimony … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And he said he is going to get onto a plane and 
come into Johannesburg and so you could meet at the airport. 
20 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That – that – that is correct 
ma’am.  That is exactly what I said and that is what he told me. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And – and then if we – on page 27 … 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 180 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You – you then pick up that point about the – 
the indication that he gave you that he was going to be flying up from 
Cape Town.  You will see that at paragraph 75 because three you say: 
“In the space of about an hour and 30 minutes the 
caller called me again and said he was in 
Johannesburg and asked if we could meet.” 
Do you attach any significance to that period of time? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is correct ma’am.  There is 
no way that you can fly from Cape Town to Johannesburg and be 
10 
outside a terminal building within a period of one hour 30 minutes.  It is 
impossible. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But nonetheless … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  So … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  He was calling you from the terminal building.  
Correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  He was actually – absolutely.  
He was at the terminal building and the story that he was in Cape Town 
clearly it is not true.  There is no way there is no way.  I think that is - 
that is the part that I had actually exposed him to me that he was not 
20 
really telling the truth because I mean I am working in that space.  I 
know the duration … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Hm. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  And all that of the flights and all 
that. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 181 of 196 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  But … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  (Intervenes). 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  You then did agree to meet him in the 
Intercontinental Hotel foyer.  Is that right? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely.  That is where he 
told me that he would be waiting for me. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then as I have your affidavit you – you 
went to meet him.  On your way however you told Ms Mshwele that you 
were going to meet a person who had called you.  Is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is – that is correct.  That is 
10 
correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then tell us what happened when you went 
to the Intercontinental? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  When – as I went to the 
Intercontinental – at that juncture I must say I was a bit worried and - 
you know – I thought that you know what I need to play smart – smart 
and safe – you know – in approaching this whole thing.  So I moved 
from the airways part towards the airport but there is – there is an 
entrance to the air side where workers – you know - only workers – you 
know – are actually entering the air side. 
20 
I went to that air side – you know – just to be safe to walk 
within the air side – you know – towards the Intercontinental. Obviously 
I would get into the terminal building and go out through the terminal 
building but while I was walking there because he had already given me 
the description and the location. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 182 of 196 
 
I phoned my associate as - I mean - I am in the security 
sector so I phoned my associate to say guys I have got a situation.  I 
need to cover for me because in this regard I think this may be an 
ambush of some sort.  I really do not trust.  Can you kindly establish as 
to whether this person is there and – you know – and the guys as I 
walking. 
It took me some time.  As I was walking they went and 
checked and they called me as I got onto the terminal building or 
approaching the terminal building.  They informed me to say – you 
know – yes the person is sitting there in the foyer but there were two 
10 
guys who were standing – you know – right next to him.  Just a few 
metres away from him and it appears that they are – you know – 
together with this guy.  So be weary of that. 
Now as I came and obviously they – they were watching 
because of – I was not really – I felt that – you know – I cannot really 
compromise my safety just like that.  So as I – I came in I phoned the 
guy while I was inside the building – the terminal building – but I could 
see him through the glass to say hey chief I am here. 
Where are you and I could see when he picked up the phone 
and when I looked on the side I saw the two guys.  Then I went through 
20 
but I was wearing – you know – a coat with that cap – you know – trying 
to disguise in a way.  You know – so that if walking from airways park 
to the gate if there is someone perhaps who is waiting for me there to 
do something they may not be able to sort of recognise me. 
So I went to him and he was sitting there.  I greeted him.  He 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 183 of 196 
 
greeted me back and he said – I think his name if I am correct – I think 
he was Sipho.  He mentioned – I think - a surname but I cannot just 
recall the surname.  Then we sat and he said to me chief I am from 
Luthuli House and I have been given a mandate to talk to you 
pertaining your investigation in the North West and I said to him Luthuli 
House. 
What do I have to do with the – the mandates from Luthuli 
House because I am not a politician?  I am not interested in politics.  
He said no it is about this investigation that you conducting.  Listen 
chief the money that is siphoned – you know – the Express the money 
10 
that is in question here … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry and this was in August 2016? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  That is in August 2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And Mr van Wyk had disappeared on 1 July … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  July yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  2016? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Your investigation was still ongoing? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  This is a person that I did not 
know.  I did not meet this person – you know – even previously.  So he 
said to me he was given this mandate because of the money that was 
involved.  The money that was taken out – you know – siphoned from 
this – was meant to – to finance the political activities of the ANC. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 184 of 196 
 
I said chief that has absolutely nothing to do with me.  My 
concern here is Mr Brian van Wyk who manipulated the system and 
transgressed.  My focus is on everything that happened within SA 
Express.  As to who else is involved out of SA Express that has 
absolutely nothing to do with me and I do not want to know anything 
about it.  He said chief come on.  We need you to talk this.  Do you 
know how Mr Brian van Wyk got this surname?  I said (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  And – and – I am sorry.  When he said the money that 
was taken out did he – which money was he talking about and being 
taken out from where? 
10 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  The money that was in question 
it is all about the R31 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Now he is saying I must drop 
the investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, he was saying you must drop the investigation? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I must drop the investigation … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
20 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Because the money involved 
was to fund the political activities of the ANC and I said I am not a 
politician.  I have nothing to do with that and as far as this whole thing 
is concerned Mr Brian van Wyk manipulated the system and he 
transgressed. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 185 of 196 
 
My concern was Mr Brian van Wyk because of – you know – 
he was working for SA Express and anything out of SA Express was 
actually none of my business and I was not interested because I am not 
a politician.  I do not even intend to become one.  So … 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Can I just clarify?  You – you indicated in your 
testimony a moment ago that he was referring to the money siphoned 
out of the North West. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Is that right?  Is that the word he used? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Come again ma’am. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Is that the word he used? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely ma’am, absolutely. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And – and what … 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  To say – to be – to be precise.  
He said the money that was moved out of North West. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And then he went on to say was to be used to 
fund the ANC’s political campaign. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Campaigns, exactly yes. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, just before we leave that point the 
significance in the question Ms Hofmeyr was putting to you whether the 
word that this person used was siphoned out, money was siphoned out, 
and you initially said yes, but then you said, he said money that was 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 186 of 196 
 
moved. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now I want you to indicate whether you are using 
when you say it was moved you are using the word that this person 
used or you are using your own word to describe what he said to you. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Okay siphoned it is my own 
word. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Siphon is my own word. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are expressing it the way you understood it. 
10 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Yes, yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that’s fine. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    The money that was moved 
from the Northwest yes, yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    But Mr Ngwenya did you have any doubt in 
the course of this conversation that you were talking about that 
R31million? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  No I didn’t have any doubt 
ma’am for the simple reason that he spoke about Mr van Wyk and Mr 
van Wyk was involved in the R31million. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    And then you ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry, it’s quite an important part, so just go back 
to the conversation, did you greet, you find him there, you greet, and 
what does he say to you? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    He had a mandate from the 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 187 of 196 
 
Lutuli House to talk to me pertaining the investigation that I’m running 
against Mr Brian van Wyk which involved the money that was moved 
from the Northwest and that money was used to finance the ANC 
political campaigns you know those activities, so in a way he was 
saying this was not Mr Brian van Wyk’s money, it was actually the 
ANC’s money. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I know that it’s been what three years or four years 
since then, I just want to understand the to’ing and fro’ing of the 
conversation between the two of you, if possible, but it might not be 
possible.  You say this money, this investigation that you are involved 
10 
in, that you are conducting concerning Mr van Wyk, concerns money 
that was moved from the Northwest Government which was meant for 
funding ANC activities. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And does it say you must drop the investigation or 
what happened, I just want to follow how the conversation between the 
two of you ...(intervention)  
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Yes Chair, I was about to get 
to that part as well.  The intention of talking to me at that juncture he 
said this money was to fund that, and then he said Mr Brian van Wyk in 
20 
actual fact was actually that’s my interpretation he was the vehicle to 
get the money out and channel it towards those activities of the ANC, 
because he even went on to say you know how he obtained the 
surname van Wyk, because he is very dark you know, and I said I don’t 
want to know, he then said to me we can offer you R3million to drop 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 188 of 196 
 
this investigation.  My response to him was that S A Express was 
paying me adequately, therefore I need not take any money from 
anyone.  He tried to persuade me and I told him straight that I wasn’t 
really interested.  Now he moved from that subject to talk about the 
R20million that was still you know in the Koreneke account and at that 
time Mr Gully Sillira[?] and Mr Brian van Wyk they had no access to 
that money because Ms Tlatsana moved that money to another account 
because of when the conflict started between them later on there was a 
deposit of R20million from the Northwest, so she moved that money so 
they could not have access preventing them to that access.   
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Mr Ngwenya could I just stop you there if I 
may, because it’s a part that comes up in the recordings but it’s not an 
aspect that you traverse in your evidence yet, so could we just get it 
clear you have by this stage, you’re in August 2016. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    You have been able to account for the 
R31million. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Because you have gone back to the records of 
S A Express and you’ve seen that total amount being paid out of S A 
20 
Express pursuant to four invoices and three payments, is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely, absolutely. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    But Chair you will recall and we were looking 
at that subsidy page under the main agreement, the first total annual 
amount that Koreneka was supposed to receive or the management 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 189 of 196 
 
company to be appointed was a total of R51million, so at this point 
you’ve accounted for R31million of it which was paid out of S A Express 
but there’s a remaining R20million. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    But as I understand the recordings and what 
Ms Tlatsana told you that R20million came then in a payment directly 
from the Northwest to Koreneka correct?  
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:   That is correct ma’am, that is 
correct.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   And as I recall that recording which we will 
10 
listen to that occurred in the Spur Restaurant part of the conversation 
between Ms Tlatsana and Mr and Mr van Wyk is about R20million. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:   Absolutely. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    Which Ms Tlatsana was not giving Mr van Wyk 
access to, is that correct? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:   That is correct ma’am. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    So Chair that’s important background because 
now we move to a point in this conversation as I have it with this 
person you’ve been called to meet with where he moves from offering 
you R3million to drop the investigation to this R20million. 
20 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:    Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:    And what does he say about that? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:   He said on the R20million that 
there’s a R20million of course that was within the Koreneka contract 
and it was clear that they did not have access to it.  He said to me he 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 190 of 196 
 
understands that I have got a better understanding with Ms Tlatsana so 
I needed to persuade her to let go of the money, release the money or 
she must move out of the airport, you know to leave that space, and my 
response to him was that I have nothing to do, I am not part of 
Koreneka and I cannot entertain such, I don’t have even the mandate to 
deal with such, I blatantly refused you know to entertain those issues, 
so he said to me I mean think about it chief, you know the R3million, I 
said listen chief I do my job without fear, favour or prejudice and my 
mandate has nothing to do with the political dealings and getting 
involved in other companies affairs, so I am not interested.  He says 
10 
you must think about it, I said to him even if I can think about it the 
answer would remain the same, no.   
 
And we ended up parting ways, he left and I left. 
CHAIRPERSON:  For the duration of your discussion with him were the 
two other people that before you came to talk to him had seemed to be 
with him, were they with him or were they in the vicinity or were they no 
longer there? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:   You know Chair to be quite 
honest with you as I arrived they were there, but at the time when we 
were talking I had actually forgotten about them.  My mind shifted, I did 
20 
not ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  And you don’t know whether when you finished they 
were there or not? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:   I did not think about them but 
yes. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 191 of 196 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Mr Ngwenya you are now as I have your 
evidence at page 29 of your affidavit, I have been following what was 
contained there as you’ve been giving your testimony where I would 
like to ask you to pick it up and really in conclusion of your evidence is 
paragraph 80, because at paragraph 80 you talk about the steps you 
took in the following week and what the reactions were of Ms Mochoele 
and Mr Ntshanga to what you told them, can you take us through that 
please. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes.  On that week, it was 
10 
around the 23 r d or 25 t h you know of August and I was with Ms Mochoele 
and Mr Ntshanga, it was in his office actually where I think Mr 
Ntshanga actually asked as to how did my meeting and the guy that I 
met from Lutuli House went because Ms Mochoele informed him that I 
was meeting some guys and all that, because I did not talk to him about 
you know me meeting the guy, so I informed Ms Mochoele, so Ms 
Mochoele told him that I met the guy,  so he was asking as to how it 
went and I narrated the story as to what transpired what was the guy 
you know what exactly did he want from me and all that, and I indicated 
that you know the connection between me and the guy was created by 
20 
Mr Jason Tshabalala who is the head of security at ACSA, and Mr 
Ntshanga’s reaction was that Jason Tshabalala who is t his Jason 
Tshabalala, and I explained to him that he is the head of security at 
ACSA.  He said I don’t know the guy, oh  you don’t know the guy, ja, I 
don’t know the guy, who is that, and you know while I was trying to 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 192 of 196 
 
explain we ended up talking about the movie Invictors, you know the 
Invictors the rugby, and Madiba in that movie where Mr Jason 
Tshabalala and Mr Linga Motsane from S A Express is the bodyguard of 
the President they were played by Tony Kgoroge and Patrick Mofokeng 
so we spoke about that you know where he presented as if he didn’t 
know, but little did he know that I was aware that they were quite close 
because I have seen them before you know seen together, within the 
airport precinct, so he pretended as if he didn’t know, but later on he 
made a mistake by saying hey Jason anyway he lost his father and you 
know I could not attend the funeral because I engagements, and so that 
10 
nullified everything that he said before you know that he didn’t know 
this guy, pretending as if he didn’t know him, so it was all about that, 
but to a certain extent it gave a different picture to me you know about 
him. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair those are the questions from our side. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, thank you.  Would there have been cameras to 
capture you and this man talking about the R3million bribe that would 
have been there? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I’m not sure Chair but there’s 
plenty cameras around that space, so whether area is covered I am not 
20 
really sure but also it’s not going to be possible to retrieve those 
records because of the ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Because of the timeline. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Because of the timeline yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What’s the time lapse, what’s the time within which 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 193 of 196 
 
one has got to get them before they lapse, before they  become 
unavailable? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  It all depends sir and in most 
cases 
the 
footage 
that 
if 
we 
request 
(inaudible) 
yes 
and 
...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Two and a half years or so from August 2016 isn’t it? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Come again sir? 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are two and a half years or so away from the date 
when this incident occurred in August 2016, isn’t that within time? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  No you can only retrieve 30 
10 
days back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that so? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Dating back to 30 days. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you’re sure of that. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  And some of – yes because of I 
viewed the footage and got plenty of investigation that I conduct that – 
where we also retrieved the footage and all of that, so I am certain 
around that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I’m wondering why you might not have 
considered it necessary soon after the encounter with this man to try 
20 
and at least get his picture because this was somebody who was – who 
sought to bribe you. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Chair I did not think of it 
however when I received the call before I went and met the guy, 
because of 30 minutes after I was called by Mr Tshabalala 30 minutes 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 194 of 196 
 
later I received a call from this guy and he told me that he will tell me 
about his location at the airport.  I started to think as to who might 
have you now gave Mr Tshabalala my contact and the person that I 
thought about at the time was Mr Linga Moonsamy who is the head of 
security at SAA and we were very close, and I figured out that both the 
body bodyguard of the late president, Nelson Mandela, therefore I 
decided to go straight to Mr Linga Moonsamy to ask if he had given Mr 
Tshabalala my contact and he agreed, he confirmed to say ja no he 
called me and he requested you contact, I gave the contact to him.  I 
said to him you know there’s a problem, this is the situation, there’s a 
10 
guy that called me and because of Jason created you know the platform 
for the guy to have access to me and you gave the number, he said 
what is this all about, I said no I don’t know but there is a matter that I 
am busy with which I think to a certain extent you might have a bit of a 
knowledge and he was really concerned to say you know what I gave 
the number to Jason because I thought we are in the very same 
security you know – what’s the word that I want to us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You’re both in the security sector. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Sector absolutely yes, that we 
are all in the security sector. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So Mr Jason Tshabalala would know the identity of 
this person that you met ...(intervention)  
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because he is the one who arranged for the two of 
you to meet. 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 195 of 196 
 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Absolutely sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but did you ever ask him what’s the name of that 
person you wanted me to meet, did you ever ask Mr Tshabalala? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  At the time when I asked him he 
did not disclose the guy’s name, he said it’s a brother that wants to talk 
to you he didn’t even say as to what was the subject. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but that was at the time before you met the guy. 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I mean after you had met the guy did you go back to 
him to say ...(intervention)  
10 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  To date I haven’t spoken to him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mmm, I would have thought that he would want to talk 
to somebody who sent somebody who sought to bribe you? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I did not talk to him to date, 
sometimes we meet in these workshops you know, but we’re not close.  
He is the one ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, and the number that he used to call you would it 
still be available somehow? 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  I suppose so, I didn’t have his 
number Chair at that particular juncture however I went back to sort his 
20 
contact which I think is the very same number that  he used, and I gave 
to the Commission’s investigation for the purpose of retrieving the 
itemised billing to reflect the connection between the guy, myself and 
him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, no that’s fine.  Thank you very much for having 
19 JUNE 2019 – DAY 115 
 
Page 196 of 196 
 
come to give evidence in the Commission, we have had over the past 
two days or so, or three days, I’m not sure, no two days, two days, 
three people, two of whom are past officials of a parastatal who have 
given evidence about what happened at SAA and so on and today you 
have also given evidence about things that happened at S A Express, 
and you dealt with investigations that relate to taxpayers money being 
diverted away from where it should go, so thank you very much.  You 
may be asked to come back in the future, and I have no doubt you will 
come back if you are asked but thank you very much for coming to 
share your evidence with the Commission, and you are excused. 
10 
MR TIMOTHY NHLANHLA NGWENYA:  Thank you Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are done? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  We are done, I understand we have an early 
start tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes tomorrow we are going to start at eight o’clock 
and we will go up to eleven o’clock because for the rest of the day I will 
not be available, so we are starting early to try and make use of 
whatever time is available and then on Friday we will start at some 
stage later than usual, but I will indicate maybe tomorrow what time we 
20 
will be looking at.  We will adjourn then for today and then tomorrow e 
start at eight.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 20 JUNE 2019 
 
