STATE CAPTURE INQUIRY 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
19 SEPTEMBER 2018 
 
 
 
SESSION 1 – 2. 
 
 
DAY 14. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 2 of 90 
 
Contents 
Session 1 ................................................................................................................................. 3 
Session 2 ............................................................................................................................... 43 
 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 3 of 90 
 
Session 1 
CHAIRPERSON: Good morning Mr Pretorius, good morning everybody. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC: Good morning DCJ. This morning Chair, Advocate 
Hofmeyer will lead Mike Brown of Nedbank that will be followed by the expert Dr 
Kaufmann after the short adjournment. May I just place on record that Alfred Cockrell, 
Advocate Cockrell is representing Mr Brown here today. 
CHAIRPERSON: Okay, thank you.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you Chair. Chair, Mr Brown’s evidence completes the 
evidence under Term of Reference 1.7. May I request your Registrar to swear him in? 
CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. 
10 
REGISTRAR: Please state your full names for the record? 
MR MIKE BROWN: Michael William Thomas Brown. 
REGISTRAR: Do you have any objection with taking the prescribed oath? 
MR MIKE BROWN: No I don’t. 
REGISTRAR: Do you consider the oath to be binding on your conscience? 
MR MIKE BROWN: Yes I do. 
REGISTRAR: Do you swear that the evidence you will give today will be the truth, the 
whole truth and nothing but the truth. If so, please raise your right hand and say, so help 
me God. 
MR MIKE BROWN: So help me God. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON: Thank you.  
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 4 of 90 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Mr Brown, you have in front of you a file which we will refer to 
today as Exhibit H1. If you turn to page 202 in Exhibit H1 you will see a document 
headed: Statement to the Inquiry into State Capture, and your name appearing beneath 
that. Can you confirm that that is your statement provided to the Commission? 
MR MIKE BROWN: That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And it runs as I have it, to page 206 where a signature 
appears. Can you confirm that that is your signature? 
MR MIKE BROWN: That is my signature. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And can you confirm the contents of that statement as being 
correct? 
10 
MR MIKE BROWN: I can. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you, the statement does go over the page to 207 but 
that is an annexure and I will make reference to that in due course in your evidence. Mr 
Brown, you also, in matters related to Term of Reference 1.7, depose to an affidavit in the 
Minister of Finance vs Oakbay matter, is that correct? 
MR MIKE BROWN: That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: We explained to the Chair on Monday that we have not 
included the full text of the affidavits in the bundle but I may well for the purposes of 
setting the background to your evidence today ask you to provide testimony on some of 
the aspects traversed in that affidavit. In terms of introductory matters Mr Brown, can you 
20 
please clarify for the Chair what your position in Nedbank is at the moment? 
MR MIKE BROWN: I am the Chief Executive Officer of both Nedbank Group and 
Nedbank Limited which is the registered banking entity.  
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 5 of 90 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And for how long have you held that position? 
MR MIKE BROWN: I was appointed in 2010. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And prior to that where were you? 
MR MIKE BROWN: Prior to that I was the Chief Financial Officer and Executive Director 
from 2004 up to that date, prior to that I have worked for businesses that are now part of 
the Nedbank Group since 1993 and prior to that I qualified as a Chartered Accountant. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And Sir, in terms of professional qualifications, is it simply a 
Chartered Accountant qualification that you hold? 
MR MIKE BROWN: That’s correct, I have a B.Com Diploma in Accountancy and a 
CA(SA). 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you, so many decades in banking, is that a fair 
description? 
MR MIKE BROWN: 25 Years to be precise and prior to that I actually spent several years 
auditing banks. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Mr Brown, I propose to deal with your evidence really in a 
chronological order which will require me at times to move around your statement 
because it was presented thematically but for the purpose of todays’ evidence, a 
chronological approach will be taken. And so with that in mind I would like to start with the 
events in February 2016 because as I have it in your affidavit in the Minister of Finance 
matter, you indicated there that it was in February 2016 that Nedbank began reviewing its 
20 
relationship with the Gupta family and associated entities. Can you please tell the Chair 
about that? 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 6 of 90 
 
MR MIKE BROWN: Chair, that refers to a specific request that I made to our Chief Risk 
Officer in February 2016 to escalate reviews of the Gupta-related accounts. At that stage 
I would have been certain that there were already ongoing reviews taking place within our 
business units that had the direct relationships with any Gupta entities but at that stage it 
was clear to me that there was an escalation in negative media activity and reporting 
around the Gupta family and the related entities and as a consequence of that escalation 
in media-related activities, I perceived there was an escalation in reputational risk to the 
bank and asked our Chief Risk Officer to aggregate the work that was already being done 
so that it could be presented to group Exco to enable us to opine on the reputational and 
business risks. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And then you referred in your affidavit to an event in March 
2016 which was a statement by the then Deputy Finance Minister. Of what relevance was 
that to the work of the bank at the time? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So I think that was of particular relevance in the escalation of 
negative reporting around the Gupta family. In particular what made it of particular 
importance to us was that it was a statement that was issued on the letterhead of the 
Ministry of Finance and it contained an allegation from the then Deputy Minister of 
Finance that members of the Gupta family had offered him the position of the Minister of 
Finance to replace the then Minister Nene. So for us that was certainly an extremely 
serious allegation. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Mr Brown, you then moved to April of 2016 where certain 
institutions severed ties with the Gupta associated entities. Can you explain to the Chair 
the relevance of those events in early April 2016?  
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 7 of 90 
 
MR MIKE BROWN: Certainly Chair. So on the 4th April 2016 there were media reports 
and indeed reported from the underlying companies confirming that that both KPMG who 
were the auditors to these companies and SASFIN who at that stage were the sponsoring 
broker, had terminated their relationships with the Gupta family. I think from Nedbank 
point of view again these were particularly significant terminations given that we would 
assume that the auditor of a set of companies is privy to information that Nedbank who 
were not the main transactional bankers to the Gupta family would not have been privy to 
and there must have been a reason for them to make their decision and in fact, the then 
Chief Executive of KPMG was quoted as saying that the association risk was too great for 
them to continue and while there was no direct quote from the sponsoring broker, I also 
10 
presume they would have had access to more information than we would have had at 
that stage. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And what did that lead Nedbank to do in relation to the 
accounts it held for Gupta associated entities? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So, in terms of the process that we followed, we constituted a sub-
committee of our group Exco. That sub-committee was appropriately represented 
including myself, our head of risk, our head of legal and compliance, our head of our retail 
and business banking unit in which these accounts were held, the head of some of the 
other of our frontline businesses as well as our group legal counsel that sub-committee of 
our group Exco was mandated to review our ongoing relationships with the Gupta 
20 
families. That sub-committee actually met on the 6th April and in addition to the media that 
we have spoken about already during the course of the 6th April, there were also media 
reports of both FNB and Barclays ABSA having terminated and we concluded that group 
Exco meeting with the outcome that we believed that the reputational and business risks 
to Nedbank of continuing with our banking relationships, would be too great and as a 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 8 of 90 
 
result and in addition to that we also have the contractual right to terminate our banking 
relationships, the underlying contracts that we enter into with our clients have a notice 
period. If our clients want to move they can give us notice and move to another bank, we 
are also entitled to give clients notice. So as a consequence of that group Exco meeting, 
as a consequence of our review of the reputational and business risks, we concluded that 
we would give contractual notice on the Gupta accounts that were held by Nedbank. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Mr Brown, I would like to ask you to go to page 1 of Exhibit H1 
which is the Notice of Motion in the Minister of Finance Application. You will see on page 
1 listed as respondents a number of the Gupta-related entities. Could you please clarify 
for us which entity’s accounts were held with Nedbank and were closed by Nedbank with 
10 
the decision on the 6th April? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So, turning to page 1 Mr Chair, the first respondent, Oakbay 
Investments (Pty) Ltd., termination was given on the 7th April following the meeting on the 
6th. The 11th respondent, Island Site Investments One Hundred and Eighty, the 12th 
respondent, Confident Concept and the 14th respondent, Sahara Computers. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you, and how long was the termination period given to 
those entities? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So the termination period was 30 days. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you and how was that decision of the bank 
communicated to the entities? 
20 
MR MIKE BROWN: So the decision was communicated in a meeting that was held on 
the 7th of April. I was not personally in attendance in that meeting, Nedbank was 
represented by people who dealt directly with these accounts and that meeting was held 
with a Mr Nath of the Gupta entities. I am advised that Nedbank’s decision to terminate 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 9 of 90 
 
was communicated in that meeting. Mr Nath refused to accept the delivery of our 
termination letters and we subsequently delivered them by registered post. He also asked 
that Nedbank didn’t make any media statements around the termination. I think perhaps I 
would just like to add, coming back to your previous question, in addition to the accounts 
that are listed here, the account of VR Laser Services which is the 10th respondent was 
closed by Nedbank but that notice was given on the 4th of May so it was not part of that 
first set of notices. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you. Your affidavit in the Minister of Finance matter then 
referred to the publication of a Government announcement on the 13th April 2016 about 
the constitution of an inter-ministerial committee to investigate the closure of the Gupta 
10 
accounts. How did you come to learn of this closure, at least this constitution of the 
committee? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So I came to learn of it through I think, two mechanisms. Firstly, 
there was an announcement by, I believe, Jeff Radebe in the Presidency that dealt with 
the constitution of the IMC and then subsequent to that when we were invited to attend 
the IMC. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you and then on the 14th April, your affidavit traversed 
an engagement with Mr Nazeem Howa who requested an urgent meeting with Nedbank. 
Can you please tell the Chair about that development? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So having given notice of 30 days for Nedbank to close the 
20 
accounts, in the intervening notice period it’s not unusual for clients to approach the bank 
to try and have a conversation as to why the account should subsequently not be closed 
and again I did not attend that meeting but I was advised that we were requested to 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 10 of 90 
 
reiterate to reconsider our decision which we duly did and concluded that we would not 
change our decision to close the accounts. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you, as I have it from your affidavit where you traverse 
in the affidavit the events of these meetings which you did not attend, you did provide 
confirmatory affidavits from those representatives of Nedbank who attended the meeting, 
is that correct? 
MR MIKE BROWN: That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And so your testimony today is based on what they have 
confirmed about those meetings, is that correct? 
MR MIKE BROWN: That is correct. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: I would then like to move to page 205 of Exhibit H1. You will 
see in the second half of that page a heading: The ANC Meeting, and as I have it on the 
chronology that is the next event that occurs after the meeting with Nazeem Howa on the 
14th April. You then refer ... [interrupted]  
CHAIRPERSON: I am sorry, I think it is the aircon that is making some noise. I don’t 
know whether without it we are going to feel too hot so maybe if they could see what they 
can do. I think technicians will see what they can do. If it becomes too hot we might have 
to restore it. Okay, alright let’s, you may continue. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you Chair. Mr Brown, at paragraph 8 on page 205 you 
talk about the 20th April and a request that you received to attend a meeting at Luthuli 
20 
House. Can you please tell us about that request? 
MR MIKE BROWN: Yes, I received and well, my personal assistant was on leave at that 
stage so the stand-in personal assistant received a request from Enoch Godongwana. 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 11 of 90 
 
That request didn’t have within it the topic of any conversation but it was a request to 
attend a meeting which was subsequently set up by the secretaries and I attended that 
meeting on the 20th April. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Had you been requested to attend Luthuli House before this 
request? 
MR MIKE BROWN: Yes, I have attended meetings at Luthuli House before so for 
example, when there was national discourse in South Africa on the nationalisation of 
mines, given the importance of that to our economy and the safety and soundness of our 
banking system, I presented on Nedbank’s view on that as input into that national 
discourse. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Had you ever been requested to attend a meeting to discuss 
the closure of Nedbank’s accounts with any of its clients at Luthuli House? 
MR MIKE BROWN: No, I hadn’t. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And can you tell us when that meeting was held and who was 
in attendance? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So the meeting was held on the 20th April, the records that I had after 
the meeting of my notes showed that Gwede Mantashe and Jesse Duarte were in 
attendance. It is also my recollection that Enoch Godongwana was in attendance 
however, my notes didn’t have that so I am therefore uncertain as to whether he was or 
wasn’t in attendance, he did however set up the meeting. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you and what was the purpose of the meeting and what 
was explained to you would be the purpose when you arrived? 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 12 of 90 
 
MR MIKE BROWN: So the purpose that was explained to me was to try and gain a better 
understanding around the circumstances why banks in general close bank accounts. I 
thought quite deeply beforehand as to whether I should or should not attend the meeting 
and my conclusion was that in the environment at that stage, there were at least two key 
narratives or discussion points. One of them was around the specific matters of the 
closure of the Gupta accounts and I was very clear that I would not be able to talk at all 
given client confidentiality around the specifics of the closure of the Gupta accounts. 
However, there was an intersecting and growing narrative around more general 
statements around the bank’s ability to close accounts generally, what is the legislative 
environment around FATAF and FICA, what impact is this having on investor confidence 
10 
and did the banks collude in closing the Gupta accounts and I certainly felt that in my 
capacity as the Chief Executive of Nedbank, it was very important that I addressed that 
second narrative around closure of accounts in general, the legislative framework, the 
impact on investor confidence and the fact that Nedbank took its own individual decision 
to close the Gupta bank accounts. I felt that that was incredibly important for the safety 
and soundness of the financial system in general and for Nedbank in particular. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Were you provided with an agenda for the meeting in advance 
of it? 
MR MIKE BROWN: No. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And in paragraph 9 of your statement you, from the second 
20 
line, record there that you were advised of concerns that had been raised to the ANC 
from the general population and businesses around the ability of banks to just close client 
accounts unilaterally. What did you say in that regard at the meeting? 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 13 of 90 
 
MR MIKE BROWN: So I explained that in the banking system in South Africa we 
compete with all of the other banks to try and grow our businesses and actually to open 
as many accounts as we possibly can so banks certainly are not in the business of 
closing accounts unilaterally. I then went on to explain the broad framework around the 
FIC Act in South Africa, I spoke in particular about Guidance Note 3, I then also in that 
meeting took the attendees through a particular extract from the JP Morgan Chief 
Executive and Chairman’s Report around closure of bank accounts to demonstrate that 
this is not an unusual activity in a certain set of circumstances. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you, you have made reference to the JP Morgan 
Chairman’s Report of 2015. That was an annexure to your affidavit in the Minister of 
10 
Finance matter but is not part of Exhibit H1 and so I would like to beg leave to hand that 
in Chair. It will be Exhibit H6 with your leave if I may request your Registrar just to take a 
copy and also to the witness? Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Well, while you are looking at that Mr Brown, you said that 
banks are not in the habit of closing client’s accounts unilaterally. Whenever they close 
accounts, certainly I would imagine based on what I have heard from other witnesses 
from banks, when they close them in circumstances such as those that prevailed in 
regard to the particular accounts we are talking about, they do so unilaterally in so far as 
they don’t consult with other banks so they don’t collude but also they do so unilaterally to 
the extent that their decision to close the accounts, is their decision and theirs alone in 
20 
the sense that it’s based on their view and from what I have heard in regard to the other 
banks, it’s not that they will discuss with their client in advance but it looks like they make 
an assessment of the situation and make a decision but after having made the decision, 
they don’t close the door to the client if the client wishes to discuss the matter but the 
decision does appear to be unilateral. What would you say to that? 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 14 of 90 
 
MR MIKE BROWN: Sir, I would say that the decision is a decision of the bank. It is a 
decision of the bank, as I said earlier, based on our assessment of business and 
reputational risk as well as our contractual right in our underlying legal documentation 
and inevitably what happens in circumstances such as this and there are many accounts 
that we choose to close, in circumstances such as this, we give reasonable notice and it 
is during that reasonable notice period that the client has the ability to come and talk to 
the bank about the reasons for closure and there are certainly instances where, for 
example, we are trying to complete for a high risk customer, something that is called an 
extended due diligence that we are required to complete and if we are unable to get the 
required documentation from the client to enable us to properly complete that due 
10 
diligence, we would give notice. If in that notice period the client delivers the required 
documentation and that documentation is persuasive in the nature such that the 
assessment that we had made prior to having that documentation is now no longer 
correct, we would overturn our decision to close those accounts. 
CHAIRPERSON: The only reason I was raising the issue of unilateral with you was that I 
wasn’t sure that you were not contradicting what I thought you intended to say by 
seeming to run away from unilateral because as I understand it, unilateral means simply 
that the decision of one party is one side, “uni”, unilateral, it’s one side, it’s not a decision 
you take jointly with anybody, with the client or with another bank, it’s just one side and 
you take it, as I understand it, on the assessment of the situation as you see it in terms of 
20 
the reputational risk to the bank but from what I understand, after you have taken the 
decision, if the client comes forward and wants to try and persuade you to change it, you 
leave the door open but it seems to me it remains that it is a unilateral decision in that 
sense, it’s yours and yours only as the bank.  
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 15 of 90 
 
MR MIKE BROWN: Chair, that is correct, although that unilateral decision is taken by a 
broad grouping within the bank. 
CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Mr Brown, just to pick up on an aspect of the Chair’s questions. 
You indicated in the termination notice to the Gupta-related entities that you were closing 
those accounts because of reputational risk associated with the accounts and then there 
was the meeting that we referred to previously with Mr Howa on the 3rd May, 2016. Is it 
your understanding of that meeting that there were not adequate reasons presented by 
Mr Howa at that meeting to remove the reputational risk that Nedbank regarded as 
associated with those accounts? 
10 
MR MIKE BROWN: That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And can you tell us what that reputational risk really means for 
a bank such as Nedbank? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So, the reputation of a company or a bank is essentially how that 
business is perceived by stakeholders in general so how we are perceived by clients, 
employees, competitors, media, investors, regulators and particularly important for banks 
would be depositors for the safety and soundness of banks and the system so probably 
for banks more than most other businesses and there would be some that would also fall 
into this category and I think here of auditors in particular, reputational risk is extremely 
important. Our business relies on the trust of members of the general public in the safety 
20 
and soundness of our bank and the system to enable us to become the custodians of the 
nation’s savings in the form of deposits so if one thinks through reputational risk, it has 
inherent in it a level of cascading, it could escalate depending how bad it gets. There is 
you know, inevitably certain pieces of reputational risk that would be business as usual 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 16 of 90 
 
and we would deal with that on a normal basis in the bank but there are examples of 
where reputational risk becomes so great to a particular business that that has a material 
and in some instances terminal effect on that business to continue to operate and I would 
point obviously to the public examples around the material impacts reputational risk has 
had on the likes of KPMG and Mackenzie’s and the terminal impact the reputational risk 
would have had on the likes of Bell Pottinger.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you, if I may return to page 206. Chair was there 
reflection from you, I am trying to anticipate here? 
CHAIRPERSON: You are doing well to keep one eye on me. I just want to clarify this. 
From what you say Mr Brown, it would seem to me that your evidence is consistent with 
10 
the evidence I have had from one, if not more, of the witnesses who have come here and 
testified about the role of the banks and decisions they took. Now one of the things they 
said was that in regard to a specific account holder, you could have or then could have a 
situation where it considers that it should terminate its relationship with that account 
holder, not because that account holder has committed any crime or is in breach of any 
laws of the country but simply because there is a certain perception in the public domain 
about that account holder. Would that be consistent with your understanding of 
Nedbank’s position as well? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So Chair, broadly yes, however I would like to amplify a few issues 
there. There would certainly be accounts that sit on international sanctions lists that 
20 
would automatically be closed and in respect of the perceptions, I think certainly we take 
a lot of time to try and understand where the underlying news flow comes from and 
therefore as a consequence how reliable that is likely to be. So if I went back to my 
previous examples, you know there is clearly an enormous amount that gets put out on 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 17 of 90 
 
social media that would have a lot less, it would have some weight but a lot less weight 
than for example, a statement coming out of the Ministry of Finance as we saw in March 
or the resignation of auditors or sponsoring brokers. 
CHAIRPERSON: So it would be taking into account of everything you consider relevant 
to the bank’s reputational risk and how much weight you attach to any particular factor 
would differ from one case to another with the result that maybe in some case, somebody 
who has not actually breached any laws of the country, you might close the accounts 
because there nevertheless is some serious reputational risk but in other cases, 
somebody who has not breached any laws but has some reputational risk to the bank, 
you might decide on balance not to close their accounts, it would just depend on the view 
10 
you take of everything, is that right? 
MR MIKE BROWN: That’s correct. That’s why we manage these decision processes 
through committees at the bank which enables input into that decision from a legal 
perspective and from a business perspective. Perhaps also important to add is that we 
would not only consider the reputational risk up to that moment in time when we take that 
decision, we would also be forward looking in respect of the potential future reputational 
risk and how that could escalate and in particular in respect of this set of circumstances, 
Nedbank was not the main transactional bankers to the Gupta entities and it would have 
been a concern to us that if all of the other banks had closed, the transactional banking 
facilities with the Gupta entities we could have by default become their main transactional 
20 
bankers and therefore inherited an escalating level of reputational risk as a consequence 
of that. 
CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 18 of 90 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Mr Brown, if we can go to page 206 of Exhibit H1. In the top 
paragraph on that page you conclude your description of the meeting at Luthuli House 
with members of the ANC and you reference there the Bredenkamp case. How did that 
come up in your discussions? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So as I said earlier in my discussions I made it very clear that I could 
not talk about matters related specifically to the Gupta-related accounts but what I felt 
was important was that I spoke about the legal framework in general around the closure 
of bank accounts and you know, of particular relevance there is the FIC and the related 
Guidance Note as well as the Bredenkamp judgment which and I am not a lawyer but 
which essentially in my understanding said that a bank is, Standard Bank in that case is 
10 
entitled to close the Bredenkamp accounts as a consequence of the reputational risk that 
Bredenkamp posed to Standard Bank and in particular what that may mean for its 
international and other banking relationships. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And Mr Brown, can you give us a sense of your impression of 
that meeting at Luthuli House? Did you understand the meeting to be designed to place 
pressure on the bank to reopen the Gupta associated accounts? 
MR MIKE BROWN: I did not leave that meeting feeling that I was placed under any 
pressure to reopen the Gupta accounts and in fact the meeting closed with me being 
thanked for providing information that was helpful in understanding and answering 
questions that the attendees get. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you, if we can then move to page 202 of Exhibit H1? 
You will see that there is an introductory section on that page and then a heading, 
Interactions between Nedbank and the IMC. That is I have it the shorthand for the inter-
ministerial committee that you referred to previously there were public announcements of 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 19 of 90 
 
it having been constituted on the 13th April, 2016. And if you can go to paragraph 2 on 
that page, talk about an event on the 4th May, 2016 where your Executive Personal 
Assistant received an email from Ms Zarina Kellerman. Please can you tell the Chair 
about that email? 
MR MIKE BROWN: Yes Chair, it was an email that I received that said:  
“I write to you on behalf of the IMC set up by Cabinet to look into certain allegations made 
against certain financial institutions. The IMC consists of the Ministers of Mineral 
Resources, Finance, Labour and Communications. I have been requested to make 
contact with Mr, they said, William Thomas Brown but I presume they forgot the Michael 
or alternatively a suitable alternate with requisite authority and request that he makes 
10 
himself available for a discussion with the IMC on Thursday, the 5th May from 12.00 to 
12.30. There is no set agenda for the discussion but I am advised it is anticipated to be a 
discussion to gain clarity on the current media reports and public statements made by 
Nedbank with regards to closing the bank accounts and/or termination of relationships. 
Should Mr Brown not be available, person teleconference could be accommodated”, and 
then there were some admin around if, you know, the dates could move and finally, 
“should Mr Brown not be willing to participate, please advise me accordingly so that I may 
indicate the same to the IMC. I look forward to your response”. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you. I would like to unpack some of the details that you 
have provided us with there. First of all the Ministers who were identified as constituting 
20 
the IMC, I would like us just for clarification purposes to identify who the people were who 
held those Ministerial positions at the time. The Minister of Mineral Resources, who was 
that? 
MR MIKE BROWN: Minister Zwane. 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 20 of 90 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: The Minister of Finance? 
MR MIKE BROWN: Minister Gordhan. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: The Minister of Labour. 
MR MIKE BROWN: Minister Oliphant. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And the Minister of Communications? 
MR MIKE BROWN: Minister Muthambi.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And can you tell me whether you had received requests like 
this previously to meet with representatives of Government? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So I have certainly received requests to meet with representatives of 
Government, largely representatives of National Treasury around banking and banking 
10 
system related matters but I had certainly never received a request to attend an inter-
ministerial committee, in fact I had to try and find out what it actually was. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And when you have had those meetings previously, where 
have they generally been held? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So I have attended meetings with Government in Parliament, I have 
attended meetings with Government at the Ministry of Finance in Pretoria or at the 
Reserve Bank by memory. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you and just for clarification, when you referenced the 
Minister of Communications, were you intending to reference Minister Muthambi? 
MR MIKE BROWN: That’s correct sorry, my pronunciation was incorrect. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you. In terms of the notification that was given to you 
about the purpose of the IMC meeting that you were called to attend. At paragraph 2 on 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 21 of 90 
 
page 202 there is a reference there to the purpose of the discussion being, and I quote 
here: “To gain clarity on the current media reports and public statements made by 
Nedbank with regards to the closing of bank accounts and/or termination of 
relationships”. Did you regard that as being a broadly focused purpose for the meeting or 
specific in its nature? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So I think in the first instance I regarded it as being quite a strange 
statement because I knew at that point in time Nedbank had not made any public 
statements given client confidentiality around the closure of these accounts but I certainly 
assumed there would be a conversation around accounts in general. I suppose I knew 
that in attending any of these meetings, I would not be able to speak about the Gupta 
10 
accounts specifically so therefore I would only be able to provide general input into that 
meeting. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Where were you told that that meeting would be held? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So the meeting was held at the offices of the Minister of Mineral 
Resources in Pretoria. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: When you provided us a moment ago with your recollection of 
where you have met previously with members of Government. As I recall your testimony 
you referenced Parliament, you referenced the Minister of Finance’s offices and you 
referenced the Reserve Bank. Have you ever previously had occasion to meet at the 
offices of the Minister of Mineral Resources in relation to banking matters? 
20 
MR MIKE BROWN: No, I haven't. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And what was your response to the request for the meeting?  
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 22 of 90 
 
MR MIKE BROWN: So similar to the request of the meeting from the ANC, I debated and 
spoke to colleagues internally about whether I should or should not attend given some of 
the strange elements that you have recently alluded to and again I concluded that I 
should attend on the basis that I would not make any statements or references around 
the Gupta accounts specifically but as an engaged corporate citizen and as a leader in 
the banking environment, it was important for me to make sure that I could input into 
these conversations my views around the bank’s ability to close accounts, the processes 
that we follow generally, the legislative process to reference the JP Morgan Report that 
we spoke about earlier and to very specifically point out that there was no collusion 
amongst the banks in this process so on balance I felt it was appropriate for me to attend. 
10 
I also felt it would be disrespectful not to attend but that I would make sure that the 
conversation was in that second area of the narrative and not the accounts in particular. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And did you regard it as strange that the meeting was to be 
convened at the Minister of Mineral Resources in Pretoria? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So I did regard it as strange, however, when I was given up front 
who the members of the IMC were likely to be, one of those members was the Minister of 
Finance who I thought would be the natural go to person for matters to do with financial 
services so I suppose presumed that I assumed he would be in attendance and felt 
perhaps that was just the most logistically easiest place to get the meeting done on that 
day. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Precisely who attended was of concern to you wasn’t it? 
MR MIKE BROWN: It was of concern to me. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And so what did you do in that regard? 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 23 of 90 
 
MR MIKE BROWN: So prior to the meeting taking place, my secretary emailed as to who 
would be in attendance and the first email listed the full, all of the Ministers in the IMC 
including the Minister of Finance and then if you give me a minute to find it, I think there 
was then a subsequent email to say that as a consequence of it being an ad hoc meeting, 
they could not at that stage confirm the exact attendance. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Yes, maybe I can give you the reference. If we go to paragraph 
3 on page 202, what you say towards the bottom of the page there is that Ms Buckley, 
your personal assistant, confirmed your attendance in an email to Ms Kellerman on the 
5th May and requested her to confirm that the Minister of Mineral Resources, Minister of 
Finance, Minister of Labour and Minister of Communications would be in attendance and  
10 
then in the next sentence which is over the page at 203, you record and I quote: “Ms 
Kellerman responded advising that she was unable to confirm exactly which Ministers 
would be in attendance due to it being an,” and I think this is what you refer to, “an ad hoc 
sitting”. I would like to pause there. What did that mean to you? 
MR MIKE BROWN: I suppose at that stage it meant to me that this was either an initial 
sitting, a sitting that had been set up in contemplation of a number of future sittings that 
would take place and/or a sitting that had been set up at relatively late notice to get a 
process going. That it wasn’t one that had been planned, you know, meticulously in 
advance. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And then you go on in that sentence to say that Ms Kellerman 
20 
provided assurance that, and I quote, “the committee will be appropriately represented.” 
What did you understand that to convey to you? 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 24 of 90 
 
MR MIKE BROWN: Well, so I presumed that any committee set up like this would have 
within its mandate a quorum and that when I got to the meeting that it would be 
appropriately quorate in terms of its defining mandate. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you and then further down on page 203 at paragraph 4, 
you talk about the meeting which you attended on the 6th May. Can you please indicate 
who attended the meeting with you from Nedbank? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So from Nedbank I was accompanied by Ms Anna Isaac who is our 
Chief Legal Counsel and Mr Ciko Thomas who is the Managing Executive in charge of 
our Retail and Business Banking Operations which is the client facing business within 
Nedbank the bank that housed the Gupta-related accounts. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And who attended on behalf of the IMC? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So they, just give me a second and I will give you that?  
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: If you would like to look at page 203 of your statement in 
paragraph 4 there, you indicate from the fourth line who was attending on behalf of the 
IMC. 
MR MIKE BROWN: So page 203? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Paragraph 4 and then from the end of the third line.  
MR MIKE BROWN: Thank you. So the attendees were Minister Zwane who chaired the 
meeting, Mrs Kellerman who acted as secretary to the meeting, a Mr Herbert Mkhize who 
joined the meeting as Minister Oliphant’s representative and then two other people who 
20 
joined the meeting but were not introduced and I assumed that at least one of them was 
representing the Minister of Communications, Ministers Oliphant and Gordhan were not 
present neither was the Minister of Communications. 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 25 of 90 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you. You then indicated paragraph 4 that you raised a 
query about the quorate nature of this meeting and you have referred to that previously. 
Why was that of concern to you? 
MR MIKE BROWN: I think it was of particular concern to me because I expected given 
the nature of the meeting for the Minister of Finance to be present given that it is the 
Finance Ministry that has over arching, oversights of the financial services sector and 
banks in particular. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And what was the response when you raised that concern? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So I was assured by Minister Zwane that the Minister of Finance was 
aware of the meeting and that we should continue given his previous response that the 
10 
meeting was quorate. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Have you gained any subsequent insight as to whether the 
Minister of Finance was in fact aware of the meeting and had delegated his authority to 
Minister Zwane for the purposes of it? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So I have no subsequent insight of that other than having read 
numerous documents and I believe there is a letter that forms part of one of the bundles 
from the Minister of Finance where he disputes that. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Right, if I could just take you to that that is in Exhibit H1 at 
page 144? That we heard from Mr Sinton who gave evidence on Monday was a letter that 
was made available by the Minister of Finance in the course of the litigation in the High 
20 
Court involving the Oakbay companies and the pressure that had been exerted on the 
Minister of Finance in relation to securing a re-instatement of those accounts for those 
companies. If you look at this letter, it is headed from the Minister of Finance and over the 
page it appears to have been signed by him. Of course Minister Gordhan will be giving 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 26 of 90 
 
evidence to the Commission in due course and no doubt will be asked to confirm these 
aspects but for present purposes you will see at the bottom of page 144 that, well, let’s 
start above, he bullets 5 points there in relation to the constitution of the inter-ministerial 
committee. In the second paragraph and I quote he writes, “as you are aware I was not 
present at the Cabinet meeting you refer to but I have consulted the Cabinet Secretariat 
on the matter. The following emerges,” he says, and if you wouldn’t mind reading into the 
record the five points that he makes in relation to this Cabinet meeting in a letter 
addressed to Minister Zwane? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So the letter says:  
“The following emerges: 
10 
1. The Cabinet meeting was on the 13th April, 2016, not the 16th April, 2016 which 
was a Saturday. 
2. No inter-ministerial committee was established. 
3. Three Ministers were nominated: Finance, Labour and Mineral Resources. 
4. No one Minister was designated as convenor.  
5. The Financial Services Sector is not in “already distressed” as your letter 
indicates and care must be taken not to compromise financial stability.” 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And then if we could just take a look at the last paragraph on 
that page. As I read it, Minister Gordhan concludes the letter with the statement, “in the 
circumstances it will be advisable for the three Ministers to first consult on the framework 
20 
for any discussion with financial institutions.” What do you make of that request from the 
Minister of Finance in relation to co-ordination with his office for the purposes of engaging 
with financial institutions? 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 27 of 90 
 
MR MIKE BROWN: So I would understand that to be the Minister in his capacity as 
having oversight for the financial services system to prior to having any engagement 
wanting to ensure that this would be a well thought through pre-planned engagement in 
the context of the legislation around anti money laundering, etc. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you, if we can return to page 203 which is back in your 
statement. 
MR MIKE BROWN: Sorry, just to be clear also. Clearly at the time that I attended the 
IMC, I was unaware of this letter notwithstanding it pre-dating the IMC. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Indeed, thank you for that clarification. Mr Brown, you 
referenced at the top of page 203 your engagements with Ms Kellerman and her 
10 
response that she couldn’t give you more details about who would be in attendance 
because she said, quote: “It was an ad hoc sitting”. When you did convene on the 6th 
May, was the meeting introduced as merely an ad hoc sitting of the committee? 
MR MIKE BROWN: I can’t specifically recall whether it was introduced as a sitting or an 
ad hoc sitting. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you, and if you then go down to paragraph 5 on page 
203, I am going to jump ahead slightly in the chronology because what your statement 
does at this paragraph is it actually jumps ahead to what you did after the meeting but I 
would like to follow its order and then return to what was discussed because we are 
currently dealing with the theme of who was present at the meeting and so it’s 
20 
appropriate to deal with what you say in paragraph 5. As I have it, you record the steps 
you took after the meeting to confirm those who were in attendance. Please can you 
explain that to the Chair?  
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 28 of 90 
 
MR MIKE BROWN: So Chair, as I said earlier in my evidence there were a number of 
people in the meeting who I was familiar with. There were also two people who were not 
introduced at the meeting so I felt it appropriate to get a full listing of who was in 
attendance so I would know who those people were. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And if we go to page 207. That is Annexure A to your 
statement. As I have it that is both your request in the second half of the page will you 
please read into the record what you requested? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So this was requested by my personal assistant and she requested 
to Zarina Kellerman: “Please can you email me the full names and titles of Governments 
that attended todays’ meeting. Thank you.” 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And then if you look above that, there is the responses I have it 
from Ms Kellerman on the 9th May and who does she record there as the attendees of the 
meeting? 
MR MIKE BROWN: So Chair, the response says: “Apologies for the delay, the team 
consisted of the following: Mrs Faith Muthambi as well as her advisors, Mr Zwanele 
Manyi and Zandile Nene, Minister Mildred Oliphant as well as her advisors, Mr Herbert 
Mkhize and DDG Mr Virgil Seafield, Minister Zwane and his advisor, Advocate Zerina 
Kellerman who was the Secretariat.” 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Was that an accurate record of who attended the meeting on 
the 6th of May with yourself? 
20 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: No, it was not.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And could you identify the respects in which it was inaccurate?
 
  
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 29 of 90 
 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: I can to the extent that I am aware of that. So, firstly, Minister 
Muthambi did not attend. Her advisor, Mr Manyi did not attend. I am certain of whether Mr 
Sandile Nene was or wasn’t one of the unidentified attendees that I said earlier. Minister 
Oliphant did not attend her advisor Mr Mkhize did attend. I am also uncertain whether 
DDG Seifield was or wasn’t the 2nd person from the prior discussion. And then it was 
correct in the fact that Both Minister Zwane and Advocate Kellerman were there. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you, I would like now to move to what was discussed in 
the meeting. And that is page 203 of your statement, and it commences at the bottom of 
the page at paragraph 6. Can you take us through in your own words, but table with 
reference to what is contained in paragraph 6.1 to 6.7 over on page 205? What precisely 
10 
was discussed at the meetings? 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: So, the meeting opened with Minister Zwane advising that the 
IMC was required to submit a report to cabinet by the 11th of May and therefore, these 
meetings needed to be held expeditiously. And at the back of that, I read into the reasons 
for the ad hoc meeting that we spoke about earlier. He also upfront expressed 
dissatisfaction for some banks that has refused to attend. I did not know at that stage if 
any banks had or hadn’t refused to attend. And stated that it was concerning that banks 
could undermine government by refusing to attend such meetings and I certainly felt that, 
that was a veiled threat in terms of the power of the IMC. He said that the meeting was a 
confidential meeting, and I had the impression that it was being recorded, given that both 
20 
the Secretariat was taking notes and there was equipment. I don’t know whether the 
equipment was switched on or not from recording point of view. Minister Zwane started 
by saying that the IMC was constituted by cabinet and it was not there to represent any 
particular family or company; but rather to resolve the apparent issues of investor 
confidence and reported potential job losses that had emerged as a result of banks 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 30 of 90 
 
closing bank accounts, and that those job losses were in thousands. I recall the number 
he mentioned in the meeting was 16 000. And I certainly upfront in the meeting confirmed 
that while we were happy to engage on matters broadly around closure of bank accounts 
and legislation, we will not be engaging at all around any specific matters on the Gupta 
accounts given banking confidentiality. I then spent a large portion of the meeting going 
through the regulatory environment, in particular guidance note 3, and I listed a number 
of issues that existed in guidance note 3, around what banks are required to do in terms 
of knowing their customers, risk rating their customers into high, medium and low, what 
are indicators of higher risk customers, and banks reporting obligations under either cash 
threshold reporting or suspicious transaction reporting. I also specifically spent time going 
10 
through the J P Morgan report, where J P Morgan disclosed publicly that they had closed 
18 000 accounts in the prior period as a consequence of reputational risk, and also, the 
legal risk they run if they make a mistake. 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Mr Brown, if I may just take you then to Exhibit H6 which we 
handed in previously, we handed it in at the point that you referred to having made 
reference to it at the meeting at Luthuli House but here in your statement, you also record 
that you made reference to it in the meeting in the IMC. We have marked it Exhibit H6. 
And if you would please indicate to us the aspect of that report that you shared with the 
IMC?  
MR MICHAEL BROWN: So Chair, I would have court started on the 2nd page of H6, and 
20 
if you go about, just about half way down on the page, on the left-hand column, I would 
have quoted J P Morgan as having said that they during the course of the financial under 
review, because this is an extract from their public integrated report that they deployed 
new anti-money laundering systems, which is a monitoring platform across all of their 
global payment transactions. It’s now functioning across the company and utilizes 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 31 of 90 
 
sophisticated algorithms that are regularly enhanced based on transactional experience. 
J P Morgan reviews electronically 105 trillion dollars of gross payments each month. And 
then on average, 55 000 transactions are reviewed by humans after algorithms have 
identified any single transactions as being suspicious. Following this effort, we stopped 
doing business with 18 000 customers in 2015. We are also required to file suspicious 
activity reports. I presume that is the US equivalent of our STR reporting and for J P 
Morgan last year, they filed 180 000 suspicious activity reports, and they estimate the 
industry as a whole, files millions each year. We understand how important this activity is, 
not just to protect our company, but to help to protect our country from criminals and 
terrorists. I then would have continued in particular to say, J P Morgan exited or restricted 
10 
approximately 500 foreign correspondent banking relationships, and tens of thousands of 
client relationship to simplify our business and reduce our risk to anti-money laundering 
or AML. The cost of doing proper AML or KYC, know your customer diligence on a client 
has increased dramatically, making many of these relationships immediately unprofitable. 
But we did not exit simply due to profitability we could have maintained unprofitable client 
relationship to be supportive of countries around the world that are allies of the United 
States. The real reason we exited was often because of the extraordinary legal risk if we 
make a mistake in many places, and he is talking about around the world, it’s simply 
impossible to meet the new requirements. And if you make just one mistake, the 
regulatory and legal consequences can be severe and disproportionate.  
20 
I think what’s also relevant is, you know, probably one paragraph further down to say, in 
all cases we tried, we carefully tried to get the balance right while treating customers 
fairly. And I certainly felt that, that was a very well set out framework in what takes place 
in banks globally and here in South Africa. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And is it reflective of what happens in Nedbank? 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 32 of 90 
 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: Certainly, the number of transactions and amounts are 
significant smaller given the relative scale. But it is reflective of what happens in industry 
and in Nedbank.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON: With regard to those transactions, are you able to give some picture of 
how small that scale is in regard to Nedbank transactions or accounts which you closed 
generally speaking in order to deal with reputational risk? 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: So, the – I don’t have the specific numbers with me, but my 
recollection is that in the year to June 2016, which was the last date – 2017 – which is the 
last date at point I can recall, Nedbank would have closed approximately 100 accounts as 
10 
a consequence of reputational reasons. There would be a significantly larger number of 
accounts that would have been closed for other reasons like dormancy, etcetera.  
CHAIRPERSON: Okay. And I don’t know to what extent you may or may not have an 
idea. Is that close to what you would think some of the major banks also might have, or is 
quite difficult to say in terms of, how much in South Africa, how much of that happens in 
South Africa in terms of banks? I see that maybe in the US it is quite large, but are you 
able to say, you are not able to say?  
MR MICHAEL BROWN: Mr Chair, unfortunately I wouldn’t have that data from our 
competitors.  
CHAIRPERSON: Okay, thank you, 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you Chair. If we then go to paragraph 6.4. on page 204, 
and just to locate us, you told us previously in your testimony that when the meeting 
began, Mr Zwane gave you an assurance that the purpose of the meeting was not to 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 33 of 90 
 
represent any particular family or company, but to talk broadly about issues of investor 
confidence. Mr Brown, did he hold true to that assurance? 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: No, as you see here, there are several questions not only from 
Minister Zwane, but also from other members of the panel were also posed into the 
specific circumstances, there were questions around consistency, there were questions 
around what had been the triggers for closing these accounts -  
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Sorry, when you say these accounts, is this now a focus on the 
Gupta associated accounts? 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: That is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you. 
10 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: And a conversation that is recorded here about a Nedbank staff 
member talking to a client of Nedbank about the Gupta accounts, it’s a conversation that I 
wasn’t aware of prior to this meeting but that clearly wasn’t in the spirit or in the framing 
on how this was constituted. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And did you learn how they had come to learn about this 
particular conversation? 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: I do not know how. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And how did you respond to the allegation that there was a 
staff member of Nedbank who had spoken to another financial institution about the 
closure of the Gupta accounts? 
20 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: So, I responded by saying that I was unaware of these 
allegations, that they were new to me. I then said that the only context that I could think 
they could have taken place in is a context of Nedbank talking to other financial 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 34 of 90 
 
institutions with which we have a correspondent banking relationship, and as a result of 
our normal conversations in us doing our due diligence, and anti-money laundering 
reviews on those clients of Nedbank, it would be normal to have that conversation. And I 
said that I would however try and understand from when I went back to Nedbank as to 
exactly what the underlying conversation was, which I was able to do and I subsequently 
addressed a letter to the IMC that confirmed that the IMC’s allegations to us that the 
Nedbank employee was inappropriately talking to Nedbank clients about Gupta related 
matters was in fact, not true. 
 
 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you, and were the accounts of any other families 
discussed at the meeting? 
 
 
10 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: No.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: If we then go over the page to 205, you then reference a 
paragraph 6.5 what Minister Zwane then said in relation to the Nedbank-Gupta entity 
relationship. Can you please explain to the Chair what he conveyed to you? 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: So, what happened in the meeting is that Minister Zwane 
referenced that Nedbank were not the main transactional bankers to the various Gupta 
entities. I do not know where he got that information. But he then went on to suggest that 
would Nedbank consider stepping in to save jobs and provide an amicable solution given 
that the relevant family had in the period where we gave notice and held this meeting 
resigned from those companies. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: What did you make of that request to you? 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: I found it particularly strange. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And what was your response to it? 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 35 of 90 
 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: I reminded Mr Zwane that we were not here to discuss specific 
client matters. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And if we just go back to his suggestion that Nedbank step in 
to save jobs and provide an amicable solution because family members had resigned 
from the companies. Would that provide an adequate basis for Nedbank to reinstate the 
accounts that you had closed? 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: Absolutely not. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Why not? 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: Because our decision for closing the accounts was based on the 
reputational and business risk associated with those accounts and you know, that 
10 
reputational and business risk would not have changed or materially not have changed at 
all as a consequence of resignation of directors. The underlying companies were still in 
existence and operating. 
 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: At the end of paragraph 6.5. you deal with question of collusion 
amongst banks. Please tell us what was discussed in that regard? 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: So, my recollection is that there was a conversation around the 
seeming timing of all of the banks closing accounts at the same time, and as a 
consequence of that, was there collusion in the closure of accounts, and I refuted that 
saying we had not had any conversations with any of the banks around closure of 
accounts. 
 
 
 
 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And then at paragraph 6.6 you talk about how the meeting 
concluded. Can you tell us about what happened at the conclusion of the meeting? 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 36 of 90 
 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: So, at the conclusion of the meeting, we were thanked for our 
attendance, and Minister Zwane commented that he found it surprising that other banks 
had refused to attend the IMC meeting with government considering that banks received 
their licences from government. 
 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: What did you take that to mean? 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: I also found it to be a very strange statement. I think it felt like a 
form of a threat, it is also a technically inaccurate statement because banks do not 
receive their licences from government they receive their licences from the Reserve Bank 
which is constitutionally an independent body. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: At paragraph 6.7 you reference that it was agreed that 
10 
Nedbank would be provided with a draft set of minutes for the meeting. Did that occur? 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: No, we were not provided with a draft or final set of minutes 
notwithstanding our request for one after the meeting. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And at paragraph 7 and Chair, this will conclude my question 
for the witness, unless there is why further for you? You talk about your overall 
impression of this meeting with the Ministers at Minister Zwane’s offices. What was that 
impression? 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: So, I think I left the meeting with the impression that the IMC 
was focused on 2 key issues. Firstly, to try and determine if there was collusion amongst 
the banks in the closure of bank accounts and secondly, to determine whether Nedbank 
20 
would have appetite to step in and become the primary transactional banker for the 
Gupta group of companies. 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 37 of 90 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And just for clarification purposes, at paragraph 6.5 the 
discussion around the relevant family, can you just clarify for us which family that was? 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: The Gupta family. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you, those are our questions. 
CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Mr Brown, in that meeting with the IMC you said that there 
was mention of job losses which were said to be in thousands. As at that time, did you 
understand those job losses to refer to any specific entity or not? And if your 
understanding was that they were talking about job losses relating to a particular entity, 
what entity was that?  
 
 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: So, my understanding at the time would be that it was job losses 
10 
associated with a particular group of entities being the Gupta-related accounts, and that 
that was an estimate of, if the Gupta’s were unable to have banking facilities and 
therefore as a consequence, these companies closed down, that was an estimate of job 
losses.  
CHAIRPERSON: Now, when you spoke about the meeting that you had with the ANC 
you made it clear that when you came out of that meeting, you had no feeling that you 
had been pressured to try and reverse the decision of the bank. The discussion had been 
in general as I understand it. Excuse me. In regard to the IMC meeting, did you have the 
same impression? 
 
 
 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: No, I did not. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON: And do you want to just articulate again what your impression was as 
you left the meeting?  
 
 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 38 of 90 
 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: So, I certainly left the meeting with the impression that a good 
outcome for the IMC would have been for Nedbank to agree to take over the 
transactional facilities of the Gupta family. Something that we were clearly not prepared 
to do. 
CHAIRPERSON: And the impression you had, was it one that made you feel that there 
was pressure being placed upon you, or simply that maybe there was an attempt to 
persuade and no more than that? 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: So, again I think this is relatively difficult on a continuum of 
pressure to persuasion - 
CHAIRPERSON: I appreciate that. 
10 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: But I certainly felt that the numerous references in the meeting 
to the licencing regime was pressure that was being placed on the bank. 
CHAIRPERSON: You see because it is conceivable that somebody may come before 
this Commission and say that the discussion was intended for nothing more than just a 
general discussion. That’s why I am asking you these questions. So, maybe it might be 
good if you say, if you just mention all the things, officials of the meeting that together 
may have given you this impression? 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: So, I think primarily the conversation was being led by the Chair 
of the meeting which was Minister Zwane. 
CHAIRPERSON: Okay, maybe my question was not as clear as it should have been. 
20 
What I would like you to say and you have said part of it is just to say what you would say 
if somebody said, you are wrong to think some pressure was being placed on you to 
change the decision. I just want you to say, I would stand by that statement if that would 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 39 of 90 
 
be the position because of A, B, C, D. or if you say, look, it is nothing more than my 
impression. That’s fine. I just want to be able to – I just want you to deal with what I think 
may well come up later on so that we know whether you feel strongly that, that was the 
position or it is just an impression. I just want you to be able to deal with that adequately. 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: Thank you Chair. So, I would say that what caused me to 
believe that there was being pressure placed on the bank would have been a 
combination to the references to the licencing regime. And beneath that, the sub-text 
around, you know, be careful, things could happen to your licence if you don’t behave in a 
particular way. And secondly, the closure of the meeting which effectively was a request 
for Nedbank to become the primary transactional bankers for the Gupta companies given 
10 
that other banks had terminated. 
 
CHAIRPERSON: Did you say you didn’t attend the meeting with Mr. Howa? 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: That’s correct, I didn’t attend, but officials from the bank did. 
CHAIRPERSON: Yes, and I assume they would have given reports to you. Would those 
reports have revealed that basically and that meeting, the bank was – the bank did give 
information to Mr Howa that it could not give to third parties to say, this is why we have 
made this decision, and therefore, they had the opportunity to say that’s true, that’s not 
true or whatever? 
 
 
 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: So, Mr Chair, my information is that the – first, the meeting with 
Mr Howa was a very short meeting. The meeting was concluded probably in a matter of 
20 
minutes. The intention of that meeting was to deliver the notices of termination which 
contained within them the reasoning for termination being in our opinion, the level of 
business and reputational risk. And as a consequence therefore, the termination in terms 
of contractual clauses and that initially Mr Howa didn’t want to receive those notices. We 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 40 of 90 
 
actually had to subsequently deliver them via registered post, and his only request was 
for the bank not to make any public statements which we hadn’t done. So, I don’t believe 
we had the opportunity in that meeting to explain more than that given the very short 
nature driven by him, not by us. 
CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Mr Brown, if I may just clarify there and I fully appreciate that it 
is difficult for you not having been an attendee at those meetings. But the description that 
you have just given about the wanting to hand over the termination letter and the 
resistance to that, as I have it from your affidavit was the meeting that was held Mr Nath 
originally. Your evidence previously was that, that occurred on the 7th of April, and that it 
10 
was short in the terms that you have described because he was not willing to take over 
those letters of termination. As I have it, the Chair’s question relates to the subsequent 
request from Mr Nazeem Howa to meet with the bank. As I have it, that was in the letter 
of the 14th of April which you received as the bank on the 19th of April. And then the 
subsequent meeting with Mr Howa took place, let me just get my note here – on the 3rd of 
May 2016. Can you just assist us there with the nature of the meeting with Mr Howa and 
what was discussed?  
 
 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: Thank you, your sequencing is absolutely correct. Apologies, I 
was answering in respect of the meeting with Mr Nath on the 7th of April. In respect of the 
meeting with Mr Howa again, it is difficult for me because I didn’t attend the meeting, but 
20 
it is my understanding that that was the meeting were there was a much broader 
discussion around Nedbank’s termination, a conversation around the reasons and an 
attempt to persuade Nedbank to reverse that prior decision. 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 41 of 90 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: And as I have it, the outcome is that Nedbank did not retract its 
prior decision.  
 
 
 
 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: That is correct. 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you Chair, and the final follow-up just in relation to your 
questions previously to the witness in relation of the possibility of further evidence before 
the Commission, my learned leader at the commencement on Monday indicated that 
notices to implicated persons had been sent out flowing from the statements, those were 
the statements of Standard Bank and of Nedbank which the legal team viewed as raising 
implications for persons. So, specifically in relation to Mr Brown’s testimony, due notices 
were sent to Minister Zwane. And at present, there has been no application for cross-
10 
examination or any other application from Minister Zwane.  
CHAIRPERSON: Okay, thank you very much. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYER: Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: Mr Brown, thank you very much for coming to give your evidence. I will 
excuse you for now. Should there be a reason for you to be asked to come back, the 
Commission’s legal team will be in touch with you and request you to come back. thank 
you very much, and you are excused. 
MR MICHAEL BROWN: Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON: It looks like this might be the opportune time, Mr. Pretorius, you want to 
say something? 
20 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS: No, we understand that your preference to use all available 
time Chair, but in this case we have to set up overhead projection facilities and the 
witness is not here at present. He was due to arrive in time for 11:30 hearing. 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 42 of 90 
 
CHAIRPERSON: Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS: So, may we adjourn until – may we adjourn for 15 minutes 
then? Just to allow the setup to take place. 
CHAIRPERSON: 15 minutes is normally for tea time. Are you sure you – that’s enough 
for setting up? 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS: I am told so, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: Okay, all right, all right. We are at five past eleven now, so let us 
resume at twenty past eleven. 
ADV PRETORIUS: Okay, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: We adjourn 
10 
COURT CLERK: All rise. 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 43 of 90 
 
Session 2 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Miss Norman? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC: Thank you Mr Chairman.  This witness is Dr Daniel 
Kaufmann and I would like the Chairman to have regard to exhibit “G1” which is his joint 
statement together with Dr Hellman, but I would like, ask the Chairman to swear the 
witness in? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry, you want this bundle to be marked “G1”? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC: It was marked already exhibit “G1”. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is just that the one in front of me is not marked or it doesn’t appear 
to be marked. 
10 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC: It doesn’t appear to be marked yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you the Registrar can swear the witness in please? 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:   Daniel Kaufmann. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection with taking the prescribed oath? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on your conscience? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:   Yes. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give today will be the truth, the 
whole truth and nothing but the truth?  If so, please raise your right hand and say so help 
20 
me God. 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 44 of 90 
 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:   So help me God, yes. 
REGISTRAR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN:   Thank you very much.    
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC: Thank you Mr Chairman.  Dr Kaufmann is it correct that you 
together on, with Dr Hellman testified via skype on the 31st of August 2018, to this 
Commission? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  Yes it is correct. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC: Is it also correct that you are in possession of the transcript 
of the proceedings of that day? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  Yes. 
10 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC: And have you gone through that transcript?  Do you recall 
that the evidence that is contained in that transcript is evidence that you gave? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  Yes. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC: Thank you. On the last occasion you did indicate to the 
Chairperson that in response to some of the questions that you would want to elaborate 
when you come to South Africa? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry before you proceed I thought you would follow up with 
another question in the light of the fact that at the time when they testified, they were 
thousands of kilometres away from here, that you would ask him, let me ask him.  Do you 
confirm that the evidence that you gave at the time via the video link is true and correct? 
20 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  Yes, Mr Chairman I do confirm that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 45 of 90 
 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  On the last occasion then you 
indicated in response to some of the questions that you would want to elaborate when 
you come to South Africa and testify. Just one aspect which I would like you to just 
confirm which I do not recall that you confirmed according to the transcript that you are 
actually an Economist and a Social Scientist, am I correct?  
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  And having read your statement, having looked at your 
transcript and having looked at the material that you provided, I decided on my own to 
come up with a presentation which I would like to show and then you would indicate to 
me whether you believe or you want to elaborate on some of the things that I have 
10 
recorded on that presentation?  With your leave Mr Chairman may I beg leave to present 
to you the presentation which is entitled, can we just open it, “The State Capture 
Phenomenon Where Business Becomes The State”.  Could we just move on, or maybe 
even at that point, would that coincide with your understanding of when a State is said to 
have been captured that that would be those instances where business would become 
the State itself? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  Thanks, Mr Chairman a comment on these, that is a very 
powerful title for a presentation and that is noted.  In terms of the approach and the work 
which we have done for decades with Professor Hellman who is not here before you 
today, these would be an extreme manifestation of State Capture when the business 
20 
become fully the State.  That however, should be also noted that State Capture could 
have other forms and could be coming more in subtle ways.   
The way we define it is the ability of certain very powerful influencing group usually from 
the private sector to shape the rules of the game that basically make the State function or 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 46 of 90 
 
not.  So shaping the institutions, the rules, the policies, the laws and regulations 
governing the State which could come in various forms, an extreme form is when it 
becomes the State itself. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you, and then the next... (interrupted) 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry before you proceed.  It might be helpful if the witness would 
just refresh everyone’s memory of some important features of the evidence they gave 
before.  I do not know to what extent what you have will reveal that or whether it is just a 
continuation? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  No, in fact I wanted to start with what you are suggesting 
but the witness preferred that we start this way.  We will deal with all of those very, very 
10 
critical features of his evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you.  And then the second slide would, haven taken 
from various countries, haven taken from various authorities and various publications 
where we have listed possible persons that may be or entities that may be captured.  You 
see that, second slide?  Are you there? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  Yes. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes in that certain countries it may be the President of that 
country, in certain countries the Ministers, it may be Officials, it may be Councillors, it 
may the Judiciary? 
20 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  That’s correct. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Okay, thank you and then on the third slide we deal with 
intermediaries and enablers, this is something that you did not touch upon in your 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 47 of 90 
 
evidence when you testified on the last occasion.  It was mentioned briefly that there 
would be many players in the industry, but then what I have identified, what I have 
identified from your evidence is, these intermediaries, enablers can be many and not 
easy to identify but the important facilitators of State Capture, some private Accountants, 
financial and Tax Advisors, International Traders, Lawyers etcetera.  So why is it difficult 
to identify the intermediaries and enablers?  
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  Well the challenge is one of doing the proper in depth 
diagnosis for each country.  If that, if and when that is done and a number of countries 
have embarked in this process and you are one, it should be possible to identify those 
intermediaries but by definition because of their nature of State Capture they tend to 
10 
operate in the shadow and there are many pre-conditions for basically shedding light on 
that shadow. 
I can refer to that later as we go through the transcript and you may have detailed 
questions in regarding particular cases and how long it may take until all of these is 
unearthed but with a proper political war resolve and then tactical war and investigative 
war it is possible to unearth and identify who these enablers are.  It is very important to 
recognise between the captor that those that seek to shape the laws, the regulations and 
the policies of the State and those that are captured they are very important facilitators 
and enablers, it is not done just between two parties usually, it is a complex web and 
doing the proper diagnosis it will vary from country to country but it is possible, 
20 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes, thank you.  And then you have already mentioned the 
capture which is on the next slide the entity, the person or the firm that would have 
control over the intermediaries, enablers and may seize public power, influential business 
people, particular economy conglomerates, military etcetera. 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 48 of 90 
 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  That is indeed the case and in some, certain some countries 
also the mafia’s, drug traders, very powerful illicit economic interest play a role in some 
others could be some part of the more traditional economic or financial elite so it will vary 
from certain to certain. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you, and then the next slide is these are the 
potential sectors that you have identified in your report, not all of them but some of them 
as being the sectors that can be captured being the extractive, the mining sector, the 
industrial sector, energy, financial, communication and military.  Is that correct? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  That is correct and that again I want to stress, take this 
opportunity Mr Chairman to stress the importance of acknowledging the particularities of 
10 
these challenge in every country and that is one of the reasons I commend your 
Commission and the work that it is doing but nobody can come from the outside and say, 
and have a particular template or Bible that says where it all happens.   
As the expression goes to use if you allow me a bit of lightness, why do so many robbers 
are interesting in robbing a bank?  It is because that is where the money is.  Well it is a 
useful simplistic approach to start looking at this issue when does a diagnosis within a 
country it will depend where the most, the sources of major [inaudible 0:11:32] for that 
elite would be.  In some countries it would be the oil sector which is, we focus many 
countries on that which is subject to capture of the rands, others is the financial sectors, 
others could be both so it would vary from country to country depending on the 
20 
particularity of the country. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you, and then I have just entitled matters that 
you have identified as red flags so to speak.  So you deal with sponsorships and 
donations, charities and educational foundations, Trusts mismanaged and unduly 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 49 of 90 
 
influenced State owned enterprises or through privatisation, illicit political finance, 
beneficiary ownership, financial benefit to dependants of family members, monopoly over 
fishing, mining, energy, communication rights, and financial benefits to the members of 
the Executives from foreign countries.  I will take you to some of these later on in your 
evidence, but is there any particular one that you believe that I have left out from your 
summaries?    
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  I think this is a comprehensive enough first unless some 
further details can come out through the details. Later I should stress also that since 
already it is clear that you are doing very, very important work on that, there may be 
some features that you have emphasised here which may be particular here which we 
10 
would not have emphasised and we have not seen it in our previous work, like you 
mentioned at first sponsorships and donations, you would know best how that works here 
and whether that is a particular feature. That does not come from our work and the only 
other comment for now to put it in context that could be quite unique to hear. 
On the other hand the challenge of State owned enterprises being utilised as a vehicle for 
capture and the distortion of basic policies, the use of public funds and so on, that is quite 
common in this field and it is something that is a major challenge that we are trying to 
help with in other countries in particularly in the oil sector we have studied that in the 
context of the organisation I lead but also it is clear in other sectors as well.  So that you 
have mentioned here, it is a challenge it is quite common in many other countries of how 
20 
State owned enterprises are not, do not operate in the best commercial, financial and 
economic interest of the country, of the public good but are essentially part of the 
captured environment for the benefit of the few.   
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 50 of 90 
 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes, thank you, and then the next slide we deal with the 
administrative corruption as you deal with it in your statement and regulatory corruption 
State Capture, but what, I would not want you to comment on these because the 
questions that I am going to be asking you later on they relate to the distinction between 
these concepts which we must, you will have to deal with, but you just summarised your 
report in so far as those are indicated therein. And then the next slide is the 
consequences of State Capture, the erosion of the economy, the cost to the entire 
society, that it may plunge the country into recession, it may affect poor members of 
society, destroys competition, it affects countries borrowing capacity and it may lead to 
unemployment and increase to State grant dependency.   
10 
But I am going to now with all of that summary then take you so that you can put that 
summary into context as to when you are talking about State Capture, you have already 
told us what it means, but we would like you to repeat it now because maybe other 
people didn’t hear it properly when you explained via the video link, that the whole 
concept, you had coined the terms State Capture together with Dr Hellman, am I correct? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  That’s correct. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes, and then in simple terms what do you mean when you 
say a State is Captured? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  First Mr Chairman, and thanks again for this opportunity and 
to be in person in here it is my honour and privilege to be before you in person and in 
20 
your wonderful country but to give credit where credit is due, we did not invent the terms 
capture and we did not invent or what is in this framework but as it is usually in Academic 
work, we studied in depth the previous literature as well as reality as we saw it on the 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 51 of 90 
 
ground as well as we are serious believers in evidence based analysis, evidence based 
advise and evidence based policy making.  
So we did a lot of surveys to collect data about this situation, a lot of credit goes to other 
writers in the, well in the past but particular one noble prize in the economics George 
Stigler who wrote first about regulatory capture and he did encompass a sense of very 
powerful interest being able to influence particular regulations in an economy, so that 
already had been developed. 
What we did is pick up on that but broaden it and I think that is a clarification if you allow 
me to make it  very broadly here because I know that is a legally oriented Commission 
which is commendable yet it is very important to understand our concept beyond only the 
10 
laws, the legal aspects of that.  The concept that we developed and we made it very clear 
is the shaping of the rules of the game in a particular nation by those influential few, 
usually but not always illicit means to do so and these rules of the game, by these of the 
game we mean the laws yes included, but not only I mean some countries that mostly 
express through the implementing regulations and other such regulations, it is the laws, 
the regulations, the policies, what happens is micro economics policies and so on, there 
is a lot of discretion in any country within the constitution, and within the existing laws yes 
yet they can be captured the allocation of public expenditure. 
What happens in State owned enterprises? Whether their procurement system is rigged 
or not could still be in a context where their constitutions and the laws in the constitutions 
20 
were not necessarily unduly shaped by that particular capture, capture elite.  It could 
have started very well but it is in the context of these policies and regulations and 
institutions that are captured that these could happen.  So in that sense I want to draw 
the distinction and the broadening of the term from regulate, the original notion of 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 52 of 90 
 
regulatory capture or even legal capture, we would very narrowly focus on that to make it 
broad to also encompass all policies implementing regulations as well as institutions, the 
key institutions in the State.    
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Seeing that you have already touched on regulatory 
capture, could you define for us because this is an aspect that you deal with in paragraph 
7 in your statement, you deal with administrative corruption, you deal with regulatory 
corruption. Could you just define those because there seems to be a very fine line 
between the two and also to make it easy for one when you are presented with facts at 
the end of the day to see whether this is indeed regulatory corruption or administrative 
corruption, could you just deal with those two concepts? 
10 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  So just a bit of elaborating on that Mr Chair, administrative 
corruption takes place when there is bribery or related illicit action that basically provide a 
private gain and a private benefit to one individual in the implementation of a particular 
regulation or a particular law. If I have accumulated certain sanctions for being drunk, for 
drunk driving or trying to get rid of parking ticket violations and I pay a bribe or for red 
tape, to try to get around red tape in my company and so on and facilitate for my own 
individual benefit without, which is insidious and it should not be happening but that does 
not necessarily have a major impact throughout society and for the public good to 
everybody else, that is administrative corruption and that would extinguish, so that is in 
the implementation of a particular regulation or not. 
20 
If instead we are talking about altering and shaping these laws, these regulations, these 
institutions have it influence it and distort them so that ultimately the benefit is for myself 
or a small group in the elite and it is usually at the expense of the public good to the rest 
of society, that is what we are talking about in terms of State Capture and again I want to 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 53 of 90 
 
make the distinction that is broader than the original notion of regulatory capture which 
only focus on particular regulation but here we are talking about institutions also and 
about policies. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  And then this regulatory corruption, administrative 
corruption and State Capture, you associate, when you titled some of the headings they 
referred to countries that are in transition.  Can we find these in countries that are actually 
stable, that are old that are not in transition at all? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:   That is another excellent question Mr Chairman and before 
fully embarking into that just like I gave an example in the case of administrative 
corruption as like when there is red tape and one tries to get around the red tap in paying 
10 
a bribe, a very potent example of what happens with State Capture which doesn’t 
necessarily imply that somebody shaped the constitution in a particular way, it is in 
political financing and the rules, the regulations and the system of party and political 
finance it is something that evolves over time and enormous amount of abuses take place 
in many settings in the world to affect particularly those policies and subsequent laws that 
are passed through Parliament in many countries. 
So that is an example of how a system can be influenced, the same can happen with as 
we said through State owned enterprises and through public expenditure and through 
other such things which have major impact. So now in terms of the issue of in transition it 
is essentially to recognise the notion that countries that have been in transition, their 
20 
institutions are either more influx because they are also in transition, they are evolving, 
they are being developed and or they start from a rather weak initial stand point. 
And for either of those two reasons or for both the vulnerability to being captured in the 
process, because the institutions are being shaped during those transitions and the laws 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 54 of 90 
 
and the implanting regulations and the policies, there is a higher probability of being 
available to capture. It is very important to recognise also how do we interpret transition? 
Transition is not unique to what we used to call developing countries and I am a proud 
citizen of a country that was labelled as a developing country was it Chile and now we are 
a proud emerging economy and part of OCD. 
Those transitions also take place in very industrialised and very rich countries, many of 
us are observing with much concern the transitions beginning to take place, how it has 
begun and will probably have major impact in the case of Britain and Brexit, that is going 
to be a major transition where many institutions, rules, laws, regulations would have to be 
reformulated and are going to traverse. 
10 
So that is the first clarification. Transition doesn’t mean development, developing country 
status it is common in emerging economies. We were in transition and in some sense we 
were just at the end of a very important transition, post military dictatorship in Chile which 
was in Chile until the late ‘80’s. It took a generation to, for that transition to occur I am not 
going to label now all the details but it takes a long time. The Soviet system, one is a 
transition, one is a red curtain falls and in many ways it is still in transition. 
I have come here from Ukraine, still a country very much in transition where many of the 
institutions had been subject to this challenge of capture in one form or another. So it is a 
higher vulnerability in countries in transition but it is not only. To illustrate, a country that 
has not been in full-fledged transition with very robust institutions since sometimes the 
20 
1900’s, after having experienced enormously high and corrosive corruption is the United 
States itself and it took a very long time for that transition to occur. 
After the Civil War historically things did improve, there were hiccups with the mummy 
hall experience of their political movement out of New York and so on then there was a 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 55 of 90 
 
recovery and much improvement but nowadays it is a serious concern and given their 
political changes that some forms however subtle or not subtle of State Capture have 
returned even in the case of the United States which if there is interest I can elaborate 
further later but it is to illustrate that that can also happen in countries which are typically 
not labelled in transitions. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes, then you would get a questions from someone from 
South Africa, where South Africa is, has according to South Africa now as you find it now 
has its foundational values entrenched in the Constitution which we regard as one of the 
best Constitutions in the world, now, then someone is going to say when all the laws were 
promulgated, all of the laws after 1994 at least, they had to be consistent with the values 
10 
as housed in the Constitution. So you have that situation then in South Africa where we 
know that everything has to be constitutionally compliant, how then does one associate 
regulatory corruption with a state such as South Africa as we find it now?  
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:   Thanks, an excellent and complex issue again that you are 
asking and Mr Chairman, the first thing that I would want to clarify is that the assessment 
of the situation in South Africa is yours, I am not an expert in South Africa so that’s of 
high interest and I am of course very interested in informing myself while I am here on 
that, so I speak from the experience of other countries. Countries like the United States 
and some others have very robust also and proud constitutions, there had been 
amendments because the times evolve and as times evolve there is always a need to 
20 
refresh the legal framework, reinterpret, have amendments and so on. 
Just to illustrate since we just discuss the United States and also to put it very frankly and 
clearly that this problem of State Capture is not of one type or particular country or 
economy, it is not an issue for developing countries in particular or so on. The United 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 56 of 90 
 
States which has had their very robust constitution, very robust and then with its 
amendments they have had over time, interpretations, because it is common law 
interpretations, they go to the Supreme Court and what constitutes corruption and 
bribery? Under the existing laws as of 2 years ago, as of a few years ago, what 
constitutes bribery and corruption their former Governor, the other time a certain 
Governor of Virginia was indicted, was prosecuted, indicted and then ended up serving 
time because of illicit gifts that he had received while in office from a contractor that 
subsequently got particular contracts.  That goes, is appealed, goes up to the Supreme 
Court, the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court essentially uses that case to redefine and 
narrow the definition of bribery and corruption by suggesting that was not sufficient there 
10 
was corruption there had to be a much more direct and totally proven link between the 
two events. 
The gift that was provided on the one hand and then the subsequent decision which is 
considering the Governments field of overly restrictive and draconian and therefore it 
would leave many people who are engaged in bribery and corruption with impunity. That 
as an analyst I am suggesting that but the main point here is to illustrate that the laws are 
a very important institution in a country at a particular moment but they do evolve even 
when there is a constitution. So what was illegal up to a year and a half ago in the United 
States regarding a possible bribery offence now it is legal that goes also to the notion that 
we have exploring the past that bribery can be or capture, can be done through legal 
20 
means according to the laws of the moment in that country which doesn’t mean that that 
cannot change. 
Conversely and not to be also fair to many robust institutions in the United States, after 
the Wall Street crisis, following that major debacle which had major worldwide 
consequences and the Wall Street crisis is a case on capture of the financial rotatory 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 57 of 90 
 
system by Wall Street and related elite. After that there is a reaction, there’s an 
institutional reaction suggesting the robustness and the resilience of the political and 
related institutions in the United States, as a result major regulation and legal changes 
take place in the form of the Dodd-Frank Financial Sector Bill which makes many things 
that were legal before illegal in terms of the activities in the financial sector. 
Again it is a way of suggesting that these laws do evolve over time and different groups 
may have different type of influences on those laws. Some through legitimate lobbying 
and part of the competitive political discourse but some they could be on you and could 
be going the wrong direction. Unfortunately now there is a movement to undo many of 
those tighter regulations of the financial sector again because of the interest of the 
10 
financial elite in the United States and the present political environment. Most of it has not 
yet been undone and it goes to show that the resilience of the institution are important. 
But the point here is we are in a dynamic context where the laws the regulations, the 
policies of every country evolves even in the context of a very robust initial constitution 
and set of laws. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes, thank you. In your statement you deal with the issue 
of governance witnesses as being some of the causes of State Capture and then could 
you just elaborate on that and just show briefly why governance deficiencies would cause 
that or would lead to it? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:   In simple terms Mr Chairman, thanks again for a very apt 
20 
question, in simple terms we are dealing with a complex inter play between the chicken 
and the egg. First and you showed it in your summary slide very well, when State 
Capture is present that those actions by the captor are bettered by the intermediary, the 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 58 of 90 
 
facilitators, the enablers, can have major consequences. Some of those consequences 
are on the broader governance structures of a country itself.  
In some countries expectedly [inaudible 0:34:59] in some countries in Latin America, not 
the Brazils or the Chile’s who has made much progress but in others some many 
countries, the Former Soviet Union the judicially has been totally captured. So the 
undermining of the governance, a key governance institutions where it is in rule of law in 
terms of economic management and policy making and so on takes place as a result of 
capture and that would be one of the slight additions I would have suggested in your nice 
framework that you put it, is not only the social economic and other costs you put but the 
cost in terms of the governance institutions being weakened and undermined and let’s 
10 
not under estimate and call it by its name, the undermining of democratic constitutions. In 
countries were, that happen in transition, democracies is already dynamic and vibrant but 
if a very small elite captures a system, in the eyes of the rest of the population there is a 
major loss of legitimacy of those very democratic institutions. 
I mean in Latin America we have had it from time to time, such political influencing in 
equality that arises, there are talks about military coup again and so on, after having left 
behind this military dictatorship for a long time and the appetite then of considering well 
maybe we would not be so bad under military dictatorship if instead the alternative is a 
completely capture system in the economic and social sets. So I want to stress that 
linkage. 
20 
Of course the other side of the causality direction, the direction from going of weak initial 
institutions to enabling State Capture to occur is also present and that goes to your 
previous question why do you focus on countries in transition? When the Soviet Union 
collapses, in some sense he becomes almost like a blank cheque in terms of all the 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 59 of 90 
 
institutions that have to start from scratch consistent with political competition and 
democratic institutions as well as economic competition, what to do with all the State 
assets that begin to privatise and what happens to them? 
So depending how weak those governance structures at the initial point that can also 
influence the extent to which State Capture occurs, so essentially the directions in both 
ways. The initial governance strength or weakness or the institutions of the State when 
the process start is a very important determinant about the vulnerability to State Capture 
and conversely once State Capture occurs that has very pernicious effect for the 
development of the governance institutions in the country.               
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes, from your, I know in one of the answers to one of the 
10 
questions you made it very clear you are not here to talk about South Africa because you 
have not looked, you have not researched south Africa? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  And because... [interrupted] 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes. 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  You know it much better. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you, and then can we then just deal with one 
other issue that you dealt with in your report at page 38 where you now say once a State 
finds that or once there is what is State Capture in any state, what are the solutions? I 
had taken you through this in your previous testimony but I would like you to give 
examples to the Commission because you had undertaken to come back and give 
20 
examples of some of the countries that were found to be in a situation where there was 
State Capture and what steps did they take to try and redress that situation?  
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 60 of 90 
 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  Sure, I can do that. Now it is very important to recognise how 
incredibly complex this issue is and that is why it is commendable what you are doing and 
there are pitfalls in just picking a country and suggesting the whole country is a success. 
We are in an imperfect world with great leaders, great institutions and lighten countries in 
many cases but also there are other forces, other institutions so there will be progress in 
some areas and not in others. There will be two steps forward and one step back even 
when there is progress. 
But of course I cannot help if you allow me to say a few things about the case of my own 
country in Chile where first it is very important to study and recognise the historical 
antecedence in every country, the Soviet Union for instance the Soviet system in many 
10 
ways we studied very, with data and very clearly, there was very significant corruption 
throughout their system and how their elite in fact basically benefit in a very particular 
way at the expense of the rest of the population. 
So it is very easy sometimes to only focus on what happened a few years ago. In Brazil 
everyone is focused on what has happened very recently in the case of the car wash 
scandal and so on but we have this, the understanding and the view of already this has 
been going on for 20 years and one has to understand the military dictatorship and to see 
them and how that had a major impact. 
In the case of Chile it is a case that historically, there was already, there were already in 
lighted leaders who in parked the absolute paramount importance of serving, of being 
20 
public servants and serving with full integrity and doing away from lack of  interpreted 
practises. There was already historical structure, in fact from the first founder of the 
country Bernardo O’Higgins and who becomes the first leader in the country we are 
talking about 1812 if you allow me, and one of his first decrees was to order at that time 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 61 of 90 
 
the presidential house, it is a presidential palace but it is not so much of a palace, the 
outside walls had to be plastered with all the names of the top officials and the high 
officials and what were their income and assets. 
This is 1812, we are now in almost 2020 how many, in how many countries they still 
reticence to do some, such basic wall, but that is to illustrate that it is very important to go 
back to history and then there are many other [inaudible 0:42:27] there are problems, but 
governance improves and then there are set backs and these are set backs under the 
dictatorship of Pinochet in the mid ‘70’s to late ‘80’s and eventually was discovered there 
was a lot of corruption including by the leader [inaudible 0:42:45] and the association with 
the particulars by the private elite was already a form of capture then and then major 
10 
reform start to take place. 
Two major findings that we have, already with Joel Hellman from our initial war on State 
Capture from the Soviet Union, which post-Soviet countries we are talking about 27, did 
better and which ones went the capture way, which ones went the competitive way?  And 
it is a clear distinction and I discussed it briefly last time between the two types, the 
countries in the Baltics, the Slovenians and others have gone market, have gone 
completely, so there is nothing predetermined versus countries like Ukraine and Russia 
[inaudible 0:43:35] and others. 
So there are two distinct types.  Two major issues has come out very clearly as 
associated with [inaudible 0:43:46] of capture of lack thereof.  One, political contestability, 
20 
the extent that there is a vibrant competition politically and associated with that civil 
liberties, the voice of civil society, engagement of civil society, are they there or are they 
supressed like in Central Asia unfortunately that is the case there now, the voice of that, 
so that is one, the political contestability and competition. 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 62 of 90 
 
The other is economic contestability and competition, to what extent a vibrant medium 
small scale sector is allowed to operate, enter and operate. Even if there are large 
enterprises either is there enough competition rather than, in the Former Soviet Union we 
call them Holy Guard, is there one or two Holy Guards or maybe there are twenty, twenty 
five and then already competition and suits as well as the next stage medium and small 
scale.   
So the extent of that economic contestability, economic competitions is very important. 
For that obviously opening te doors to the rest of the world having investors and the 
presence of global, more global industries also can be very important. Also misbehaving 
in terms of Governments and corruption but overall the openness and the competition 
10 
that context is very, very important. 
Then one gets into the details those are very large buckets but obviously to the extent to 
which anti-monopoly regulation in the country effective works is extremely important for 
such a competition in the economic field. In the political field it is extremely important to 
which, not only to which this political competition among parties, you know very open 
legitimate way and total open and voice of civil society but the extent to which there is 
democracy within party. 
In Chile, one of the things that we have to do following some scandals including, 
regarding public financing and so on, one of the major reforms that were undertaken is 
opening up the system of electing the leaders within each political parties. So the whole 
20 
notion of how political parties function and how can they be made more open and 
democratic which is a significant challenge in my region Latin America is it’s a key issue 
on that. 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 63 of 90 
 
And then there are obviously major advances that are made including in my country in 
Chile regarding the whole procurement process that is another institution that tends to be 
captured. First transparencies is absolutely crucial and putting everything on line and 
making it contestable and subject to appeal, but also the system how competitive the 
bidding takes place, it is absolutely key. 
And for now, last and lastly and least because it is also a great experience in the case of 
Chile, meritocracy, the importance of instituting and having us part of the DNA of the 
institutions in the country that is meritocratic, be it the civil service, their judiciary but very 
importantly also State owned enterprises, how the board are constituted and the top 
executive on State owned enterprises and on regulatory agencies. 
10 
There is a commission, there is a commission which is totally independent including 
outsiders from the public sector and Government and other experts that essentially 
provide three top candidate to the decision making body be it Parliament or the President 
regarding the top agencies and that politicians, those politicians can only chose after 
meritocracy. 
So now some allowance for the political should be there and the politicians should have 
been elected to powers shall we say but they have to choose from that trio, that is chosen 
wat meritocratic suggest.  There were so many thousand, tens and tens of thousands of 
political appointees, whenever Government change hands, political appointees were very 
low in terms of the totem pole or the secret services. Nowadays that has been capped 
20 
and it is a very clear and limited amount which are political appointees the rest is all on 
democratic grounds. So these are types just to suggest that the type of reforms in that 
direction which are very important.     
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 64 of 90 
 
Last but not least on political campaign finance, there is a major role that the public sector 
plays in providing public finance which is equal across parties in terms of also access to 
TV and so to make the system more equal and less amenable to private influence and 
very, very strict gaps and bands regarding private contributions to political finance.  It is 
just a whole field different areas where one would have to cover but of course it depends 
on the particular vulnerability and nature of the capture in each country where their 
homework needs to be done, which institutions are the most amenable to capture? 
The wholly show of State owned enterprises and the reform of Sate owned enterprises 
the state of the art has advanced significantly in terms of what to do it to improve. The 
issue is mostly at the stage now it is not so much technical it is political will, it is political 
10 
will to do it to make them truly independent commercialise. I rejects and as an analyst we 
have done a lot of homework, I reject the notion that the only solution is privatisation. 
Privatisation if well done in a particular form makes sense in some cases but not in 
others. State owned enterprises, if the reforms do take place and then they can perform 
the role that they should be performing can be efficient. We, recently an assessment was 
done of over 80 State owned enterprises in all gas and mining around the world and I am 
very proud to suggest and I didn’t have any role in the methodology that Codelco the 
Chilean mining company came out ahead of even Statoil the Norwegian oil company and 
others from industrial countries and the State owned enterprises from India from other 
emerging economies came out, rated and assessed very, very highly so yes it can be 
20 
done. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you. And then maybe you could just as well now 
that you are dealing with the examples of these countries and then just give us an 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 65 of 90 
 
example of parent because you asked, you had indicated at page 106 of the transcript 
that you would elaborate on that, on the position of the Peruvian State? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:   Well, Peru it is another context that is very dynamic and they 
made some strides unfortunately less in the potential it could have been. A number one 
again it is really important in Peru to recognise now the following, yes the President up to 
about 8 months ago or so, up to recently, President Kuczynski had to leave power, was 
basically sacked because he was associated with the major corruption and capture 
scandal that started in Brazil under the car wash scandal, which I can refer the case of 
Brazil because it is quite interesting in that and I had promised that if there is time an 
interest but it goes to show first that some of these corruption and State Capture 
10 
nowadays is transnational in nature and one, it is very important to always look at the role 
of outsiders in that, both enables in our field which is all gas and mining which is one of 
the areas I focus on. 
There is some commodity traders in the oil business who do not necessarily behave and 
act in the best interest of the nation where the oil, gas and mining is being purchased as 
oppose to some now more enlightened transnational and multinational mining companies 
that are operating at a much higher standard of governance realising that ultimately it 
pays, it pays for the country, it pays in the long run for them. 
So the first is to recognise the international dimension that has become very clear 
recently in the case of Peru, the President loses his job but this is not a recent 
20 
phenomenon and again it is really important to go back to history. Many people are 
focussed on the military regime of President Fujimori who also ended up in prison. 
So one can say some institutions do work because there is no impunity and it happen in 
prison and the system that he had with the Chief of Intelligence Montesinos which was a 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 66 of 90 
 
different type of capture because is started from that political intelligence elite but then 
they were in cahoots with the top business elite, some in the top business elite. They also 
captured the media which is a very important issue here the freedom of the press which 
is something we can relate to. 
Later, but in that context even what happened under the military regime of Fujimori and 
we are talking about the ‘80’s into the ‘90’s, already had [inaudible 0:53:56] of corruption 
under the previous administration which was more democratic but with fragile institutions, 
the President of, President Garcia where the particular relationship with the elite had 
already begin to take place.   
So already there was a history since then. In recent times, in recent months because of 
10 
what has recently happened in terms of this scandal or corruption which was a bit more 
transnational in nature and because of the nowadays the press is no longer captured like 
it was before because of the civic space that is provided and the citizens demanding 
change, there is increasing attention to that by the top political leadership who had begun 
to enact certain laws and policies to try to move forward and address these issues of 
corruption and capture but this incipient and there one has to recognise there is a deep 
historical background that has to be brought into play in understanding these issues of 
capture. They do not happen overnight and they do not usually just happen under one 
regime.    
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC: Thank you, and then from that answer one gets the sense 
20 
that from what you have told us, there is different forms of State Capture, they come in 
different forms and shapes and one has to look at a particular form that present itself 
before that particular country at that time. 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  That is right. 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 67 of 90 
 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC: Yes, and then once then a country has found that is has 
been captured, what is the best way of dealing with it? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN: I would want to encourage a broader debate and discussion 
because you know the case of South Africa better what the notion of discovery also 
means. I assume it is not an overnight epiphany but it is already a process of observing 
and basically also feeling the consequences of a particular types of mis-governance, 
corruption that may be taking place already for some time and then it takes the work of a 
Commission like yours and I know that many Academics here working on it and so on to 
fully unearth what are the major manifestation, what is really happening and I know there 
were major reports issued late, or not so late last year by the Prosecutor and so on and 
10 
that is part of the process one goes on what you, I know in legal terms you have the 
notion of discovery but it is a process, it is a dynamic process. 
Similarly the response to it which is absolutely crucial and I commend you because it, for 
what you are trying to do and this is such a historical opportunity here in that case, that 
has to be home grown and it has to draw and we, I am very pleased to have been invited 
here with also Joel Hellman having testified and we can provide suggestion from the rest 
of the world but it is more in terms of what they did and they did in response to A, B, C, 
and D, and you would know best what is applicable or not. 
I would start this as a way of thinking about the issue in terms of asking the questions 
regarding of what are the most vulnerable institutions that had been subject to capture 
20 
and why and what are the forces behind it. In terms of the forces behind it one has to look 
and I speak as an Economist in terms, the incentives, what were these incentives for 
those that were trying successfully or not to capture, why were they there rather than say 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 68 of 90 
 
no that is not in our interest as was told by Professor Hellman in our joint discussion from 
a far a few weeks ago.   
It is in our human nature that is part of researchers, we know that and we try to influence, 
influence others and influence decisions that is true everywhere.  The questions is how to 
organise and regulate that influencing so that it is competitive, it is legitimate.  The many 
civil society groups, legitimate groups that want influencing in one form or another to take 
place and thus inform the Parliament and that is part of the vibrant democratic process.   
The problem is when it becomes monopolised by the few that influences and that gets 
into the very important issues of conflict of interest and Labour Law Regulations.  There is 
a whole bucket there that the country would want to look at, any country in terms of 
10 
whether it is appropriate to ensure vibrant, competitive influencing.  Nobody would, one 
cannot illuminate influencing it is part and parcel, the same about the regulations and 
system of political campaign financing because it plays such a key role. That is another 
issue of public service reform related to meritocracy we just mentioned that, it is another 
area of focus and something that was much focussing in the case of Chile that has been 
dealt with. 
Then there are the issues around state owned enterprises which you did mention recently 
and then of course the issues of judiciary. At the end of the day, these progress 
[indistinct] including absolutely crucial, the freedom of the media as opposed to capture 
the media which has been a problem in many countries.  The freedom of the media 
20 
coupled with the accountability that civil society leaders in the outside can demand from 
the public service and government has proven crucial and that is proven why in Chile, 
parliament, parliament didn’t have incentives, the congress and the parliament, the law 
makers, many of these laws that will be passed on political finance, it is against their 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 69 of 90 
 
interest, but why they were eventually adopted, they had no choice.  There was such a 
groundswell of support and pressure from civil society mobilising groups that look after 
what happened and these are the recommendations of the commission.  The 
recommendations of the commission, was either we do it or we are out in the next 
election and many of these leaders put them on notice.  This affects the voting, so that 
those different type of aspects need to be looked at, but which ones are crucial in the 
country, but to end, it was absolutely crucial all this can be happening including 
transparency reforms which are crucial.  We have not discussed enough, but if at the end 
of the day, all this happens, but it is full impunity, then it has very little traction or impact, 
so how rule of law functions and the absence or existence of impunity is crucial and that 
10 
is what has made the difference and that’s why even with a lot of problems, Brazil is 
making progress, so they had a major scandal, a major discovery of a system of state 
capture.  It was discovered because the judiciary had been strengthened and they were 
very courageous investigators and judges went out there and they unearthed a whole 
web of capture and corruption that involved the whole political elite that the whole 
personal human risk in much context, but it was because the judiciary had been 
strengthened.   
Associated with that strengthening, was the use, the adoption and use of plea bargaining, 
plea bargaining as a tool for discovery and unearthing the whole problem in the system 
and not just with one particular individual captor.  Captors is not one individual, it is 
20 
usually a whole web, it is many, it could be a group of industrialists working together or a 
group in the financial sector having met in the shadows for a very long time, so it takes 
one of them to tell the whole story.  
There is plea bargaining that is happening.  We are witnessing this in another context in 
the United States right now in the case of [indistinct] but in the case of Brazil, it was 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 70 of 90 
 
absolutely crucial, so there are all these types of innovations and reforms that different 
countries are undertaking.  I am reticent to say this is one country with a great success.  
Of course I am very proud of Chile, we still have challenges there, and unfished business, 
but it is very important to focus on particular areas where some countries have made 
enormous progress and the same country may not be making the same progress. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  So in those countries where it has been found that there 
were these transgressions, people were brought to book so to speak and you believe that 
if that happens at the end of the day, after all the evidence has been led, all the findings 
are made, that would be a necessary process to be undertaken? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  If I can just have one comment about that.  Obviously where 
10 
in settings where there is complete impunity, there can be enormous progress on the 
rest, but the country will have a significant challenge. Speaking very frankly, I have been 
a student on this issue for decades and I like to [indistinct] countries to study that share 
the same historical and cultural history and so on.  Chile and Argentina, Argentina was 
much richer and much better off than Chile.  We have now crossed paths because of 
governance in the other direction.  Chile and Mexico also it’s very interesting, because in 
Chile, rule of law has been very, very important and there have been improvements.  
There was more reticence of having transparency reforms for a variety of reasons.  There 
was much more anxiety regarding that.  The converse in Mexico, will make many 
transparency reforms while the judicial rule of law is to put it mildly, a huge challenge and 
20 
that is why Mexico is not making the progress it should in spite of those other reforms.  
Well Chile have eventually adopted transparency and so on. 
At the end of the day, it’s not one that will work, so you put it very rightly rule of law 
versus impunity is very important, it is necessary, but at the same time, it will not be 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 71 of 90 
 
sufficient on its own. It has to be complemented by the systemic reforms that we are 
discussing.  This is our observation in other countries. Maybe you come to a different 
conclusion in South Africa, but it has to be what happens with state owned enterprises in 
any country and what happens with the meritocracy in appointments in the public service, 
what happens to political campaign finance.  All these other areas, if they are far, far 
behind, then they are going to be a major pull back in not allowing these reforms to 
progress even if there is no impunity, so it is just not impunity or persecutions alone. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC: Yes and then you have linked the whole issue of 
transparency, conflict of interest with beneficiary ownership.  Could you just elaborate on 
that? 
10 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  I am glad you asked about that.  It is one example, a potent 
illustration of the notion that even if the country is not in transition, the whole legal 
regulatory institutional system in any country because the world evolves so significantly, 
has to be in transition, has to be very dynamic and evolve with the times. In the old days, 
there was very little ability for the corrupt to engage in, through technology now and other 
means in placing the monies abroad.  The whole issue of illicit financial flows and so on, 
has taken particular prominence in our modern era.  It was not such an issue 30 years 
ago and given the magnitude of the [indistinct] related to state capture and the ability of 
many to appropriate that and put them elsewhere, that has been very important. 
All of a sudden, speaking about discovery, we get this major worldwide scandal which I 
20 
am confident you are aware of, which is called the Panama Papers.  That provides a 
major [indistinct} for many who are pushing for a long time to have much more disclosure 
and much more transparency in who are the real owners of the major corporations, 
entities activities and also those that are bidding for licences for the [indistinct] of the 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 72 of 90 
 
country, whether it is mining or in oil and so on, so we have been asking for a long time 
for disclosure.  One of my roles, is also to sit as a member of an international board in the 
extractive industry, transparency initiative which has more than 50 countries in the hope 
that maybe someday South Africa would wish to join, but it’s helping with the norms 
regarding full transparency, accountability and governance in the oil, mining and gas 
sector across the board, so there was the push to try to have much more disclosure 
regarding who are the real owners that benefit from all these deals which is very 
important for anti-corruption and for mitigating state capture, there was a lot of resistance. 
The Panama Paper scandal happens and the resistance had to be much more muted 
and there was a big push and therefore, new regulations and requirements.  In this case, 
10 
it’s a requirement probably but every country decides whether to adopt it in the law or not 
as to have full disclosure of who the actual owners are and through that, one ought to be 
able to see well are they very high officials, higher level politicians that are involved in 
these commercial oil licences and are they related to the ministry of oil.  This is just an 
example of what is called in international lingo, the PEPT political exposure.  This is to 
illustrate that there are certain innovations regarding laws and regulations that happen 
over time even in a country irrespective of how robust the original constitution and set of 
laws are.  The same applies to anything related to technology.  Obviously with the laws 
and regulations regarding that, it will have to be adapted to a completely new [indistinct] 
compared with 50 years ago.  So there are all kinds of innovations, but regarding the 
20 
public disclosure registries in terms of every country having it viz-a-viz the beneficiary 
owners, both of the company, but also for the licencing’s which is where their [indistinct] 
licencing or natural resources which belonged to the people, so if you are going to issue a 
licence, one wants to know who is bidding and of course transparency about the 
contracts and transparency about the payments that are given to government.  That is 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 73 of 90 
 
one of the major progresses that have taken place over the past 10 years.  Transparency 
and beneficiary ownership is evolving still and many countries have not implemented it, 
but it is one of those. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC: Yes and you had referred us to the emoluments clause that 
exists in the United States.  Could you just mention that to the Chairperson, which deals 
with receipt of gifts? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN: Well there is a particular legal case that is taking place right 
now in the United States.  The emoluments clause it’s a clause that comes in the 
constitution, but the original writers of the constitution of the United States, were talking 
essentially 250 + years ago, they were [indistinct] have to say that no holder of high 
10 
office, including the president, shall be allowed to receive any gifts from any foreign 
entity, particularly for a government, or even officials of the different states of the United 
States, the government and so on, so there can be no undue influencing from abroad or 
even from the other states, for both national security but also in terms of property and 
integrity.  There have been many question marks and issues that have arisen under the 
current leadership and the administration in the United States and one of them, is the 
undue influencing of commercial business interests that may be tainting the decision 
making by the top leader for the public good, so as a result, the leadership of one state, 
the State of Maryland and some former officials of US administration, who happened to 
be the ethic [indistinct] in charge of ethics of both – in one case a republican 
20 
administration President Bush and the other case of Obama administration, they are both 
jointly in this case basically trying to bring to trial, for the president for violating the 
emoluments clause because a person that supposedly had gone to the allegations had 
been benefiting from his own investments that he does have in the United States and a 
particular example is the Trump Hotel in Washington DC which is close to the White 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 74 of 90 
 
House, is supposedly or allegedly may have received basically foreign guests as well as 
leaders of particular states and as a result, benefiting from those, so that is a case that is 
moving through the courts and of course, the last thing is for me to comment on how it 
may end up.  For one, the constitution can be very robust and it can be used also by the 
legal system of the court to respond when there is an alleged case of miss-governance or 
corruption or state capture however it is labelled by the law of the particular response.  So 
this is just one illustration that sometimes a constitution can be helpful in this context. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes and then maybe just on that issue of transparency, 
just the example that you gave us the other day of you having invited someone over to 
your house and the restrictions on what to offer that person and the extent to which you 
10 
can go as a host to make your guests comfortable? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN: Well it’s a quick anecdote but also I am glad you’re asking me 
this now because it is too easy right now to be totally critical about one country or totally 
[indistinct] for another, that is why I was also being cautious in my own country Chile, 
where we still have our challenges.  In the case of the United States, there are enormous 
institutional strengths that should be commended and that is part and parcel of 
governance in the country. No country in the definitions that I give about governance, the 
good governance, absence of state capture or corruption, that doesn’t exist and therefore 
that’s not the definition absence of corruption, that it should be equated with stellar 
governance.  Good governance is when challenges happen, that they do happen 
20 
everywhere, is the ability of the system, the institution, it’s the rule of law to respond to it 
and that is what we have done in Chile. 
In the United States, for better or for worse, that is happening and there are going to be 
mid-term elections and so on and where it is very serious in the United States, it’s the 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 75 of 90 
 
rules and regulations and laws around governmental ethics governing public service and 
just as an illustration, they cannot receive gifts from an outsider.  When I was heading the 
World Bank office in the Ukraine in the early days of transition, there I invited a high level 
official of one of the agencies of agriculture, who used to be in the World Bank before so I 
knew him, I invited him for dinner and he said I can accept dinner as long as you promise 
that it’s not going to be a very luxurious dinner because I cannot accept even in kind 
anything that would exceed the cost of 50 dollars, but it’s just to illustrate that in those 
systems, that is part of the DNA.  Even if at a higher level, there may be attempts at 
capture as we have discussed. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC: Yes and then maybe if you could just deal briefly with the 
10 
cost of state capture to a country.  You have dealt with this in your report and you have a 
section in the slide, if we may just go back to the slide, you have just put up two 
examples, could you just go back to that?   
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN: Okay so you have already summarised it very well at the 
beginning.  In fact, you had shown everybody a slide after that- 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  That’s the slide. 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN: That slide does come from us the rest was your excellent work 
Ms Norman.  That is from our original work, one of the summaries of the data which we 
did summarise in the earlier hearing that we had with Professor Hellman present. It is 
also fully explained in the statements. All that I am going to suggest here, is the 
20 
enormous difference in the height of the two sets of coloured reflect what happens with a 
dynamism or lack thereof or the whole private sector and also more generally of the 
economy in countries that manage to avoid state capture versus countries that exhibited 
state capture.  These are among the post-socialist countries in transition, so out of 27 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 76 of 90 
 
countries it’s a ratio of 2 to 1 in terms of the growth of the private sector who are not the 
captors.  The captors that small elite, manages to benefit particularly in a captured 
setting.  That is because they buy essentially that influence, but it is at the expense as we 
see in the graph, of everybody else and there is much less growth, there is much less 
investment and there is much less revenue for the company and importantly, which is not 
in this graph, there is much less protection of property rights for the regular company, the 
regular firm which is not the captors.  The private captors buy their own protection of their 
property rights and they do well and they do in fact five times better in terms of the extent 
of protection of property rights than a non-captor firm in countries that have been subject 
to capture. 
10 
The other countries that have managed to avoid capture, they do very well in terms of 
property rights, so that’s one aspect of obviously the cost.  If you can go to the next slide, 
to broaden the discussion, that comes from separate work which takes the whole world 
data that we have had and we have monitored and we have a set of indicators that we 
started developing already in the 1990’s for 20 years which I call the worldwide 
governance indicator with my partner in these things, so we can use the data throughout 
the world about governance, including one of the dimensions is control of corruption 
which also includes capture, so this is more general. 
What happens in countries that over time, have exhibited high corruption versus medium 
level corruptions versus low corruptions.  There is an extreme difference in terms of the 
20 
levels of wellbeing of the population between those and that gives a sense not only about 
the cost of corruption, but also about the promise and the potential payoff, we call it 
dividend of improving governance, controlling state capture, controlling corruption.  Just 
to give one point of data which is part of that research, a country that decides to embark 
on serious governance institutional reforms to tackle corruption and state capture, in a 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 77 of 90 
 
realistic manner which doesn’t mean no country can go from being the worst in the world 
even in 5 years to being at the top.  The realistic manner is basically traversing about one 
fifth of what the distance between the worst and the best of the worst which is totally 
realistic in statistical terms. 
So a country that improves realistically, significant reforms but realistic improvement that 
is associated with an improvement in per capita income for every citizen, if it is distributed 
by three times, it is a tripling of income per capita.  If the country has income per capita of 
$10 000 per year today, you can expect in the long term, it takes time to have $30 000, 
so that applies to income per capita.  That also applies to- we have seen it in the data 
and it goes from improving control of corruption to this. It is lessening of inequality, 
10 
lessening of illiteracy, better education gains and also, very importantly, much better 
investments.  As I said earlier, that is associated with research of others. I am not in that 
field.  It also strengthens national security of the country, the whole issues around 
migration, national security around corruption and security services and so on is very 
important and lastly but not least, it’s mentioned it also improves the prospects of 
democratic institutions, so it has a major also very healthy political dimension. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC: Yes and then you had mentioned in your statement, 
recession in the case of Brazil, am I correct? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  Thank you for the question.  That is the flip side of – I just 
tried to put it in prospective and very positive terms, what if a country does not, but a 
20 
country that has been enmeshed with this corruption and indeed, what we show in our 
research, is that the medium and longer term impact, but nowadays, particularly when a 
country goes downhill in terms of corruption and state capture, they impact it’s not in the 
long term.  The income can be very, very large and it can be of a short term and it’s not 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 78 of 90 
 
only about general wellbeing objectives, it’s also about the basic macro-economic 
financial indicators, but your deficits go up, financial crisis ensues and the rate of growth 
of GDP, comes to a halt very quickly.  Brazil in fact for the first time in an extremely long 
time after a very robust period of growth entered a recession of which they are now trying 
to get out.  They are just barely back to zero growth after being in the negative territory 
for a couple of years as a result of what happened. 
In Peru and some other countries, because of the trans-national nature of these major 
state capture events, there has been a major impact not only on GDP, but on the 
paralysis, the sudden halt and paralysis of infrastructure and investments since much of 
their captor was associated with construction and infrastructure companies and so on and 
10 
in some cases, have come to a halt. This shows in real time and concretely on the 
ground, that this is not just abstract numbers, it is what’s happening and that’s a major 
cost for the middle class and for the poor that ultimately takes the brunt of this problem. 
At the financial level, one more comment, this has become such a serious concern and 
issue, that the International Monetary Fund, that in the past, were not very focused on 
these issues  because their limit was short-term financial issues, so corruption, state 
capture was a bit more foreign to an organisation like that.  The World Bank was dealing 
more with that, but now the IMF has taken significant leadership of that and they have 
coined a new term for the impact, potential impact of state capture and corruption in a 
number of countries, they call it macro critical.  I mentioned that before given the concern 
20 
of that and this is an example of that.  Brazil was [indistinct] case for these type of 
organisations and looking at it more internationally, that this can have a major impact for 
the whole macro economy of a country, which implies major impact for the poor and the 
middle class. 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 79 of 90 
 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC: Yes, so in summary, is the last slide indicating that the 
sooner that you act on any suspicion or allegations of corruption and state capture the 
better for a country? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN: Obviously it is incredibly important as mentioned before, the 
role of the judiciary and not only that the proper persecutions take place and there is no 
impunity as a result, but it’s very important that it sends such a clear signal to the 
population also to investors abroad and so on which plays not only an enforcement role 
but a deterrent role, because the more that there is no impunity and there is a real 
sanction involved with [indistinct] in this form, the less you are going to have those type of 
cases in the future.  At the end of the day, we are all human, we all make cost benefit 
10 
calculations, is it worth it or not. Of course, we have our ethics too, but incentives play a 
key role. 
Now there is in the United States again talking about the strengths of the United States, 
you are not supposed to and by law, you cannot evade taxes. Only about 1% of the tax 
payers are audited because it’s millions and millions of extremely expensive and so on.  
However, if you are audited and you are found to have evaded, you will go to jail and you 
do and the politicians and others right now in the Muller case, these are some cases of 
how they are doing it, so as a result, the extent of tax evasion is not very large in a 
country like that, so it’s not that you need to be auditing everything, but rule of law does 
work and people know here there is a sanction, one doesn’t mess around with that. So 
20 
just to exemplify that it is very important that a judiciary’s function in any place and there 
is no impunity because it also plays a deterring role.  At the same time, as a lead-up from 
your question, it is absolutely crucial in any country, to also embark and make progress 
on the complimentary issues and reforms that are absolutely essential, because no signal 
progress on just one dimension, is going to make the difference alone and that’s only for 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 80 of 90 
 
you to know regarding South Africa in the systemic sense, how much whether issues 
regarding safeguarding the budget from being looted what needs to be done with state 
owned enterprises, what needs to be done with political finance campaigns, what needs 
to be done in other political realms.  What I was telling about Chile, you would know best.  
It would be my hope, this is such an impressive initiative that you have all undertaken that 
this also creates a space to discuss not only the issues of prosecutions, but now legal 
issues that you are discussing, but to have the space of discussing more broadly what is 
absolutely essential as well in other realms regarding addressing state capture. 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Thank you, thank you Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much for your evidence.  Would it be correct to say in 
10 
the end, the whole idea behind anyone who might be wishing to capture a state, is to 
have influence on certain decision making institutions and functionaries within a state so 
that ultimately, they may have financial or business benefit, or are there other motives or 
goals? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  A very important question Mr Chairman, Mr Deputy Chief 
Justice, obviously from our experience in other places, the traditional and boring answer, 
is going to be both.  The whole issue of financial motivation it’s obviously a very important 
driver of human nature for reasons that you know better than I do, but that’s not the only 
motivator.  We collectively and in different degrees, driven by power, there are many 
people who accept to serve in public service in positions of leadership with not full 
20 
integrity and I have met so many in so many countries and that it’s not for financial gain, 
but to have a major influence in policymaker and the power to do so, but for the public 
good.  It’s also a very important driver.  Many of us, in think tanks, academics, I had an 
organisation which is an international institution that we also advocate with evidence for 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 81 of 90 
 
improved governance transparency in natural resources for the benefit of the citizens of 
the country. 
I come from Chile and my colleagues come from all over the world, we want ultimately all 
the benefits.  That drives us and that drives many of you in public service, so the financial 
motive is not the only thing that obviously drives them.  That’s the first point, but even if 
the main driver, particularly by those that want to capture for their own financial benefit, is 
purely financial and economic, it makes a very big difference if that is in the context of 
enormous competition in terms of lobbying and political influencing or it’s in the context of 
the political influencing. The extent of that political economic influencing by the few has 
become monopolised. The moment that it becomes monopolised and the relationship 
10 
between the few and the elite, in the economic financial elite, with the top political 
leadership or with the law makers in parliament, it can be extremely damaging and 
distorted, but as I mentioned at the beginning, the intention to influence, it is part of 
human nature.  Many organisations and groups do and we do it in the voting booth every 
time that we vote also, which I don’t know if that is legitimate, but that’s why it’s so 
important to look at the extent to which the whole system of political influencing has been 
distorted or not via political campaign finance, via the way that the political parties elect 
and monitor their own leaders and by the issues of conflict interest, lobby laws, all that 
was discussed, it’s what’s important.  In short, one cannot ban by feared influencing, that 
is in the human nature, but one can regulate it and ensure that there is a system put in 
20 
place which is not just through laws, but through institutions and so on, provides more of 
a level playing field regarding such influencing. 
In [indistinct] cases, this exists, a case is obviously the Scandinavian countries, where 
they do have a social compact among the different, with the whole population of what is 
legitimate and how to move forward and certain [indistinct] of equality both political, 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 82 of 90 
 
economic and so on. Canada is a very interesting case that has made significant 
progress in those, so these models and these systems, it’s not at an academic level.  
They do exist and they have achieved consensus in how to move forward and at a more 
practical and micro institutional level, if you will allow me to mention exciting initiatives are 
taking place and innovations in this day and age in many countries.  In Chile there was a 
lot of mutual interest because we had our own after [indistinct] and so on, there is 
increasing effects and an interest in multi stakeholder type of institutional arrangements 
to reach consensus about key issues in society, so about improved governance and anti-
corruption in natural resources, we have these global initiatives which is extractive 
industry transparent initiative. 
10 
This is where we have to agree among the key representatives of government, of 
industry, of investors, as well as civil society think tanks and so on and something 
happens when this is done in such a consensus form.  It is my measured sense that in 
the context of improved governance and corruption, it’s really important when these 
initiatives do embrace and involve also this multi stakeholder nature engaging civil 
society, the leaders in think tanks as well as the leadership in industry, the enlightened 
leadership.  Every country does have that.  We have been witnessing some from the 
banking system and others. In no country, it’s just that this whole group, they are all 
tainted and so on. There are leaders with integrity and reformists among all stakeholders, 
just like there are others who have other interests, but it’s very interesting and important 
20 
how this multi stakeholder initiatives can also make progress through the commendable 
work of your Commission if that could be also perhaps a venue to engage in that 
discussion and which in some other countries, that has allowed for a broader type of 
consensus regarding the need to move ahead for this reason. 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 83 of 90 
 
I am not mentioning or referring at all to the legal aspects of that which you have a very 
particular mandate and you know best, but from my experience in many other countries, 
the whole notion of moving forward, whether through one commission or separately, with 
a multi stakeholder dynamic discussion and debate in trying to arrive at consensus in 
society with that, it’s something that could in the case of Chile we have done it, in the 
case of anti-corruption recently and so on and there are other such examples. 
CHAIRPERSON: Now you mentioned that in your research, you found that in some 
cases of state capture, what happens is that certain groups want to change the laws and 
the policies of government, so as to suit their ends.  I would imagine that in a case where 
it’s difficult to change laws, in terms of the constitutional and legal system of a particular 
10 
country, they might want to look at people who have power, people who serve in certain 
institutions of government, people who occupy certain positions in government and 
therefore, seek to ensure that it is people that can do what they want them to do.  Does 
that sound consistent with your experience in terms of research? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN: Yes indeed Mr Chairman, one of the vehicles of capture, in 
fact rather than the indirect influencing from still saying supposedly on the outside of 
government through political campaign finance or through other illicit means, bribes 
themselves and so on.  That is one way, but the influencing on who would be in a high 
position of power and who being in the cabinet is obviously such a form.  In some 
countries, it’s no secret. In the post-Soviet era, there was even an informal price tag 
20 
associated with how much a particular ministry capturing it and putting one’s own person 
would cost and it was interesting to see the differences across ministries which was again 
related to the question of what are the most vulnerable sectors, where rents can be 
accrued, whether the country was oil rich, obviously the ministry of oil versus the minister 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 84 of 90 
 
of agriculture and so on, so the answer is yes unfortunately, that is one of the vehicles, 
one of the mechanisms by which it can be accomplished. 
But let’s keep in mind also that yes, some countries go through increasing sophistication, 
development and so on like many countries here and so on, so over time, the form of 
corruption and the form of state capture, morphs, changes, so at a particular vulnerable 
time, in terms of the institutions, they may be placing directly the cabinet ministers.  In 
some cases, some of the oligarch’s quote unquote oligarch’s become the leader or the 
state themselves.  It has happened too and then over time, governance institutions they 
evolve, they strengthen, but that doesn’t mean that state capture necessarily disappears.  
It takes a while, but then there other forms which are more subtle through the political 
10 
finance context and so on, take more prominence. 
The ability to adapt and see opportunities, obviously should not only be a major priority 
for reformists, but unfortunately it’s also what the other side is always looking how to 
adapt to the new policies and so, they are trying to counter those forces of capture. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You spoke also about state owned enterprises and that they can be a 
target for state capture and from what you have said, it seems you would be saying to us 
that talking generally, to the extent that state owned enterprises could be easy targets for 
state capture, that it would be important to ensure that the legal framework for example 
for the appointment of boards of those state enterprises, should be strong and 
transparent maybe, the appointments should be very transparent so that in that way, one 
20 
minimises the prospects that somebody, one person may just put in all the people that he 
or she wants to put in if all the power depends on one person to constitute boards of such 
entities.  What would be your comment on that? Is my reading of what you say correct? 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 85 of 90 
 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN:  Absolutely correct and one of the main concerns in a number 
of state owned enterprises and we have looked around the world, I would extend it not 
only about the board is crucial, how the board is appointed, but then I would added to 
strong and transparent even if it’s embedded in the notion you just said of strong, the 
explicit notion of meritocratic, so that’s extremely important, I would expand it also to the 
chief executives, to the top executives obviously of the state owned enterprises and then 
the regulations and laws that govern the independence by which they can operate, the 
clarity of their remit is crucial.  Deliberately many of the state owned enterprises, they 
remit it either unclear even in the box or even if it is in the box, it’s not followed and they 
take over the production and regulatory remit at the same time, when there should be 
10 
total [indistinct] and should differ in institutions, that is just to illustrate that that is 
happening in the oil sector or a major state owned enterprise and take both remits on the 
data that creates all kinds of miss-governance and potential conflict of interest and that 
there are many such issues that need to be clarified. Transparency also applies to the 
financial accounts, so that everybody can monitor that, so you are absolutely right, it is 
like what we were discussing before as to how to tackle state capture more generally.  
These what you have just mentioned, are referred to in my testimony regarding the 
appointment of the board is crucial, but not ought to be seen as the silver bullet on its 
alone.  It’s necessary, but not sufficient and the rest or the homework will of course 
depend on the diagnostic of each country and state owned enterprise, but the rest of the 
20 
homework on this other dimension is very important as well to compliment that initiative 
regarding the board appointment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I guess you may or may not say the same thing with regard to the 
appointment for example of directors general in different government departments.  Now 
in South Africa, directors general I think generally would be appointed I think one of the 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 86 of 90 
 
witnesses told us by I think the President, I think at a certain stage, it was the President, I 
don’t know if at another stage, it was the Minister or there was consultation between the 
two, but the director general is like the chief executive officer of the government 
department and it would seem based on what you have told us, that it may well be that if 
the appointment of directors general happens in a certain way, that might encourage 
state capture, but if it is done in a certain way, maybe very transparently and so on, 
maybe it might not, so I just want you to comment on that or whether you would limit what 
you said to state owned enterprises in terms of board and their chief executive officers? 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN: That’s an excellent question because we have to 
acknowledge that it becomes more nuanced regarding senior level appointments in 
10 
government because there is a legitimate political process, there is a reason why a 
particular leader with a political backing, is elected into power and that is part of the 
political process.  Then, every country differs, there is a legitimate question, the extent to 
which those appointments and how far down should be of a political nature and from 
where it’s absolutely crucial to safeguard the integrity meritocratic technical integrity of 
the civil service and that should not be.  That is [indistinct] in terms of best practice 
around the world that should not be touched by the political process.  There was a time I 
studied this issue in particular depth many, many years ago, so this doesn’t reflect the 
current era, but it was a time 20 years ago, when I looked at this issue to say in countries 
like Bolivia, a small country, government change, 60 000 civil servants and public officials 
20 
were changed as a result of change. In Japan, at the time, the mandated changes were 
18 just the ministers for political reasons and of course, the reality around the world, it is 
somewhere in between.  That is very different than state owned enterprises, that basically 
has to play a certain role in terms of maintaining and safeguarding the independence and 
functioning in an efficient and commercial way otherwise it can be an enormous drag to 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 87 of 90 
 
economy, a social drag on society.  If it happens at the end of the day, that’s the 
difference, the last work, its state owned, but it’s an enterprise.  If it’s going to be an 
enterprise, in this day and age and not be a major drain ultimately on the tax payers that 
pay for that that is absolutely crucial.  But having said that, in terms of director generals 
and even those decisions that are decided to be political decisions, certain systems allow 
for that having an integrated degree of meritocracy in it, so at the end, the minister or the 
leader, basically they want to make a decision which has a political dimension, but okay, I 
want to see the top five candidates that will come from a meritocratic system and then on 
the top, I may have a political dimension with that, but at least I am choosing within a 
[indistinct] of the most very highly qualified people with different dimensions and so on, so 
10 
there are ways of integrating this with the political reality of any country and the political 
imperatives, but saying but I still want to get the best possible person, so I will look at that 
list rather than just having my person [indistinct]. 
The other question and you raised it with state owned enterprises the more transparent 
the system, the more that it will encourage – even if the ultimate decision has a political 
dimension, but it will encourage more credibility and more meritocracies in that ultimate 
decision made. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you have anything you can say about what you think could be done 
to protect for example, a director general who is opposed to doing wrong when for 
example, his or her political master, wants them to do something wrong?  Now if the 
20 
director general concerned, his or her continued employment as director general really 
depends just on that one person, then there may be a risk of losing the job and therefore, 
that director general doesn’t get protected, but at the same time, one may have to look at 
what you have said, to say well, maybe directors general fall within a certain category of 
persons where somebody in political office should be given room to put in whoever they 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 88 of 90 
 
want in order for them to achieve their goals in government, but I am just wondering how 
one would balance the two to try and make sure that there is a framework or an 
environment that encourages directors general to say no to any attempt to get them to do 
wrong or to say no to state capture without being vulnerable to losing their jobs or being 
changed from one department to another maybe for no good reason?   
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN: Again, Mr Chairman to again backstop the point that I am not 
an expert in South Africa and I know you are asking in general, but just showing my own 
ignorance, when you speak about Director General, you are referring within the 
ministries, not a particular outside agency or something like that. 
CHAIRPERSON: Within the ministry, in our system, a director general is within a ministry, 
10 
so it would be the president, the deputy president, the minister and then the director 
general and the Director General is basically the head of the administration of the 
department, whereas the minister is a political head of the department. 
DR DANIEL KAUFMANN: That’s clear, in other regions I have worked on, there have 
been permanent secretaries and there are secretaries in the United States, or vice 
ministers and so on, I am clear and that makes the answer even more difficult, that in 
general, obviously a traditional response in this, but it has been full of challenges in the 
implementation. The visible protection is one of those examples where it is not that 
difficult to get consensus to adopt it and to put it in the laws and regulations, yet at the 
end of the day, through loopholes and the waiting implemented, it doesn’t necessarily end 
20 
up fully protecting the whistle blower, even if in paper or in principle, that may be the 
intention, that person or that functionary who is under pressure, may have serious doubts 
whether he or she will be indeed fully protected, so the first question is that any country 
would want to undertake – okay, how is our system a whistle blower protection and not 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 89 of 90 
 
just what’s written in the law?  How is it being implemented and do we know for a fact, 
that it has really truly protected and that would have to imply that there could be no 
retribution and no sanction and that would be – if there was retribution and sanction, that 
would be subject to a high penalty for those doings, because again, we get back, that’s 
the second comment to the issue of rule of law and judicial working.  
Ultimately and I know where you seem to be going with the question, you would not want 
that undue pressure from the higher up to the director general to do the wrong thing and 
that is what we tried to do in Chile many times, to get to the situation where the director 
general is capable of saying do you know that if I do that, we both may end up in jail?  So 
that’s where the issue of penalty and sanction being really there, this is by the way they 
10 
respond at an international level and I know I am taking the [indistinct] from the director 
general, but I think the parallel applies.  
The response that many in the early days of again United States some kudos in this 
case, the Foreign Corruption Practices Act, when it begins to be instituted and basically 
barring foreign bribery from the US at first and then it gets expanded by all SED 
countries, then when international executives will go to a country, a high official would say 
we can do this deal, but you have to give me this or that under the table.  Their response 
was that you know that if I do that, I will end up in jail, so that to make sure that there is 
serious sanction for even that type of pressure and action, would be an important 
deterrent so that the director general not only has to think do I whistle blow or not, but be 
20 
able to say look, you know what will happen if we do this? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much, Ms Norman you are done? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Yes thank you Chair. 
 
 
 
DAY 14, 19 September 2018 
 
 
Page 90 of 90 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes is it you or is it Mr Pretorius who will tell me what is envisaged 
from now on? 
ADV THANDI NORMAN SC:  Mr Pretorius. 
CHAIRPERSON: Okay thank you. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair, the application in respect of at least one 
of the applicants will be heard tomorrow by arrangement at 10:00.  We will shortly receive 
documentation in that respect and thereafter, we will announce the programme for the 
following week. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you, thank you very much Dr Kaufmann, you have given us very 
useful insight and to the issues of state capture and I have no doubt that we will be 
10 
enriched by the evidence you have given and there may well be further communication 
between the legal team and yourself, thank you very much, you are excused.  We will 
then adjourn until tomorrow at 10:00.  I will then deal with Ms Lynn Brown’s application, 
that should not take long and then we will announce tomorrow after that application, what 
is going to happen for the rest of the week and next week.  The proceedings are 
adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
20 
