 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
20 JULY 2020 
 
 
DAY 235 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757 
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 214 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
20 JULY 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 3 of 214 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 20 JULY 2020 
CHAIRPERSON: Good morning Mr Pretorius, good morning 
everybody. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Good morning, morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Morning.  We - 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you – you have a matter to deal with 
first. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes you will recall last week Chair it 
was agreed that Mr Sikhakhane would address you briefly. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In regard to the evidence of the 
Ambassador. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.   
ADV SIKHAKHANE SC:  Thank you Chair with your leave 
may I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SIKHAKHANE SC:  Pull this down? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes thank you. 
ADV SIKHAKHANE SC:  Chair we are very grateful for the 
20 
opportunity you gave us.  We know your schedule is tight.  I 
represent Mr Arthur Fraser but in order not to waste time I 
am also going to – what I am going to say for him applies to 
Mr Manzini so that there is – there is no difference. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay so you – you represent both? 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 4 of 214 
 
ADV SIKHAKHANE SC:  I represent both. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SIKHAKHANE SC:  At this point for these points I am 
going to make today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. Okay. 
ADV SIKHAKHANE SC:  Chair the job is slightly easier now 
that me and my colleague Mr Pretorius have sort of resolved 
what set us apart.  But the points that we wanted to put on 
record are the following: 
 
Mr Fraser is probably the only witness – the only 
10 
implicated person who has been accused of treason in these 
proceedings.  As the Chair knows he is the former DG of 
State Security Agency and he never received on the 24 or – 
to 26 November last year 2019 when Mr Njenje came here 
implicated him, he never received any notice – 3.3 Notice. 
 
As it applies now with Mr Maqetuka as well.  And we 
make this point to record because a great deal of evidence 
was given which relates to serious, very serious matters. 
 
Ordinarily Mr Fraser would have liked to die with the 
secrets he is going to have to disclose to this – to these 
20 
proceedings but it is only because he has been accused of 
treason that he reluctantly comes here.  And he comes here 
Chair to complete your picture of this thing called state 
capture.  To complete it because what the Chair was told 
that at least from the Intelligence point of view which is not 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 5 of 214 
 
something that ordinarily should be done at a place like this 
is this.   
 
His evidence is going to be important because 
basically he is going to complete the picture for Chair about 
secrets of the states – of this state about who exactly is 
subverting our state.  And he is going to complete the picture 
because unlike many other witnesses he is going to have to 
share the secrets with the Chair relating not just to those 
who were in the administrative arm of government he will 
have to complete this by doing something he reluctantly does 
10 
to tell the Chair about things that relate to the President or 
the Presidents of this country past and present, that relates 
to the Judges, that relate to the Parliamentarians so those 
three arms because the Chair will have completed that when 
he knows what has been happening there. 
 
As I said I have advised him not to because he 
signed an oath never to but he has been accused of treason 
now. 
 
Chair we have agreed with Mr Pretorius that it is 
clear it is not denied that he was not served with Notice.  
20 
The affidavit here tells you that what happened to him is that 
a certain number – in fact the affidavit says this from Patrick 
Mlambo.  He says: 
“I was never asked to obtain Mr Fraser’s contact details in 
relation to the 3.3.” 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 6 of 214 
 
 
So it is admitted by the commission at least the 
secretariat that he was never served with all of these serious 
accusations against him.  The same applies to Mr Manzini. 
 
And so they have curtailed the dispute because then 
what they did was to send the Rule 3.3 Notice not just to Mr 
Fraser’s son’s cell number but to Mr Fraser’s son’s wife cell 
number which Mr Fraser wants to talk about at some point 
because it tells you about what is happening behind the 
scenes that people would have his son’s cell number and 
that is where they served him. 
10 
 
And when they say it was not intentional well recently 
this is another one sent to him where he works now.  So the 
commission knows where he is but when it comes to these 
very serious accusations against him, they did not know.  But 
they have just sent him things that relate to BOSASA where 
he is National Commissioner now. 
 
And so what we would ask the Chair to rule on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  When I was about to say I am surprised 
why – why anything to be served on him would be sent to his 
son or whoever because is he not known to be at 
20 
Correctional Services? 
ADV SIKHAKHANE SC:  Absolutely I think – I think that is 
why they said the worst thing than a spy is an inefficient spy.  
Whoever has the numbers whatever they do with the family 
numbers of the Frasers did not know which – which number 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 7 of 214 
 
relates to Mr Fraser. 
 
But I think that has been sorted out.  What we would 
like the Chair to rule and I have raised this with my learned 
friend, I do not think he denies it and we thank him because 
he has curtailed the job a bit. 
 
Is that we would like the time for Mr Fraser and Mr 
Manzini to file their statements in relation to Mr Njenje and 
in relation to Mr Maqetuka. 
 
And as I have said because Mr Maqetuka’s evidence 
is not complete we are told he was correcting it as he was 
10 
going we would ask that for both of them there are days for 
reasonable matters run at the point when we receive the 
finalised affidavit of Mr Maqetuka from which point we will 
then file a statement with the items that I related to the Chair 
and then it is a separate process see whether we apply to 
cross-examine or call any witness.  But we are not there yet.  
 
We just think that is what we would like the Chair to 
rule.  And most of the other disputes we would have raised 
are unnecessary because Mr Pretorius and I have tried to 
resolve them so that at least today we just get your ruling 
20 
which makes it easier for both my clients to be able to file 
and assist this commission and probably their evidence will 
complete what this commission has to do. 
 
Those are our submissions Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is fine.  It is always a pity if 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 8 of 214 
 
Rule 3.3 Notices are not served at all or on time.  I do not 
now pay attention as much as I used to when the commission 
started to whether Rule 3.3 Notices have been served 
because those who might have – who may remember when 
we were starting the first thing Counsel would deal with 
when before leading a witness would be to deal with 3.3 
Notices so over time I thought that people would – the 
commission’s people make sure that 3.3 Notices are served 
on time and when they are not served on time condonation 
application is made and so on. 
10 
 
I guess that in all probability most are served but still 
there are some that are not served timeously and so on.  And 
whatever the commission has – has found out that it has not 
done well it should be big enough to apologise and try to do 
better in the future. 
 
With regard to the filing of any affidavits by Mr Fraser 
and Mr Manzini I am aware that Mr Manzini sent an email 
towards the end of last week and requested an opportunity 
and I am under the impression that a letter – a response was 
sent to him on Friday to say that he must just calculate 
20 
fourteen days from when he received the affidavit of Mr 
Maqetuka 
and 
then 
file 
his 
affidavit 
and 
apply 
for 
condonation is he files it outside fourteen days. 
 
But the idea is simply to say where there may have 
been problems with 3.3 Notices there will be accommodation 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 9 of 214 
 
– you know. 
ADV SIKHAKHANE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Probably.  What I do not know Mr 
Sikhakhane is whether whatever is left off Mr Maqetuka’s 
evidence whether it is likely to relate to your clients.  Mr 
Pretorius might know better but from what I saw I was not 
sure that it would be so.  But we – we can make an 
arrangement in terms of which the – the fourteen days runs 
from a date that one can determine now if there needs to be 
certainty about whether he might still include matters that 
10 
relate to your clients. 
ADV SIKHAKHANE SC:  Well Chair two points which are my 
last points.  So let me start with the last one.  And one is 
that well if the Chair looks at the affidavit – I mean the 
evidence of Mr Maqetuka of Mr Njenje and Mr Mo Shaik the 
Chair will see that they tried to analyse different intelligence 
paradigms in the world and the country.  And most of it I 
think will be complete when the other intelligence officers 
give you that.  It may not relate to them but I think the 
version you are told about paradigms of intelligence on its 
20 
own – I know many intelligence agencies are laughing at us 
that our intelligence officers are telling the world how weak 
and how strong we are but we are here now.  So that is the 
first point   
 
So it may help this commission to listen to the other 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 10 of 214 
 
people who lee that environment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SIKHAKHANE SC:  Give you that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I certainly want to hear ja. 
ADV SIKHAKHANE SC:  The last point is this Chair.  As I 
said Mr Fraser and Mr Manzini come here reluctantly to 
breach an oath they took that they would die with secrets of 
the state is that we are assume Chair that simply because 
the other three former leaders of intelligence have testified 
and laid bare things that relates to security my clients are 
10 
also indemnified from breaching that oath because as I said 
when they talk about the PAN project the Chair will realise 
that the man who truly led that is Mr Fraser and because of 
the nature of what it is the legitimacy of it and what it does 
to the intelligence service is that he then has access to 
secrets that he otherwise should not share but he will and 
we assume Chair that because the other three have been 
allowed to deal with those secrets he is equally indemnified 
for doing so before the Chair because it is an important 
commission.  But otherwise it is something ordinarily I have 
20 
advised him not to do and he has felt no intelligence officer 
should do but there is no choice and we assume he will not 
be arrested for sharing those secrets with the Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No thank you very much. 
ADV SIKHAKHANE SC:  Thank you Chair. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 11 of 214 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me hear what Mr Pretorius has to say.  
I just say that nobody has asked me to indemnify him from 
anything and I doubt that I have power to indemnify anybody.  
Thank you.   
ADV SIKHAKHANE SC:  Thank you Chair we thank you so 
much for the opportunity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  Just very briefly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The final affidavit of the witness, the 
10 
Ambassador Maqetuka will also contain some corrections as 
emerged in evidence so it is probably fairer to the implicated 
persons that the fourteen days run from the time the 
evidence is complete. 
 
Second point is that in defence of the secretariat and 
the investigators they go to extensive efforts under great 
pressure to obtain relevant addresses and correct addresses 
for implicated persons.   
 
In this case as will appear in the affidavit which we 
should hand up to you because it is in the possession of the 
20 
other party to which my learned friend referred the – the 
device to which the Rule 3.3 was sent was actually 
registered in the implicated person’s name over quite a 
substantial period of time.  What happened to it thereafter 
we will no doubt hear but that is the route of the confusion? 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 12 of 214 
 
 
The third point great emphasis has been laid by my 
learned friend on the nature of the evidence given.  It is – 
may be clear to us but it should be clear to the public as well 
Chair that however serious an allegation it does not 
constitute a finding or an approach of the commission unless 
and until you have heard all the evidence and made a 
finding. 
 
And 
then 
lastly 
Chair 
the 
commission 
as 
we 
understand it is not in a position to give indemnities. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.  So I – I do not think I 
10 
need to make a ruling as such but I think that we will all 
accept that Mr Manzini and Mr Fraser’s fourteen days will 
run from after they have received the supplementary affidavit 
or affidavits that relating to Mr Maqetuka that will be served 
on them. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair.  Despite the adversarial 
nature 
of 
our 
relationship 
before 
you 
Chair 
we 
are 
colleagues and we are sorted out. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is fine.  No thank you very 
much.  Okay.  Thank you.  Those who wish to be excused are 
20 
excused.  Mr Notshe are you ready? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair we are ready to proceed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair today is the hearing of the 
evidence of Ms Nomvula Paula Mokonyane and the witness 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 13 of 214 
 
is here to testify and Chair I will then after she has been 
sworn in and just take her through the file that we have and 
so that she can find her way when she is testifying through 
the file.  And Chair before we even get there, I have spoken 
to the people who help us with the files and pagination we 
have agreed that this file which contains the evidence and 
he statements relating to Ms Mokonyane that it will be 
Exhibit B. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Bundle? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  We will – bundle – I am sorry I am 
10 
referring to the bundle B. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I am sure there have been – there has 
been Bundle B before. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I am told Chair that the – the bundle 
numbering started with the evidence of – of Charl Le Roux 
and that was then labelled Lea Bundle A and then they say 
this will be then Bundle B. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
I 
hope 
that 
information 
is 
accurate 
because we do not want to end up with two bundles B. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No I am – I was assured that the bundle 
20 
system. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Started with Charl Le Roux’s evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So we will – this will be Bundle B 
then. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 14 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Then you look Bundle B. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But before you proceed, I think there are 
lawyers representing the witness who need to get a chance 
to place themselves on record and I think they can place 
themselves on record.  I do not know if the – I hope the 
microphones where they are working then they can – they do 
not need to go to the podium for now.  Yes. 
May it please you Mr Chairperson I appear for the 
witness in this matter if I may remove my mask? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
10 
UNKNKOWN COUNSEL:  We were instructed by Madlanga 
Attorneys and we are here in the spirit of cooperation to 
cooperate with the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
UNKNKOWN COUNSEL:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Yes Mr Notshe.  So this will be 
Bundle B. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it – it has – well they included notices 
here.  I think notices should be perhaps separate from this 
20 
because we do not really need the notices.  They can be in 
separate file but there is nothing we can do about it now.  
We 
will 
keep them there 
but for future 
notices and 
correspondence that have got no evidential value should not 
be included.  So that what we should have in the lever arch 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 15 of 214 
 
file should only be statements and documents that have got 
evidential value. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I understand Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright yes proceed. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair the – the genesis of the evidence 
of – just presented before you is the evidence Mr Agrizzi and 
there is a statement he gave to the commission.  He gave 
evidence thereafter there was a supplementary statement 
and then Ms Mokonyane filed a response and then Mr Agrizzi 
filed a reply thereto.  I will take before Ms Mokonyane 
10 
testified, I will take you through just to files so that she 
knows what document – where the document is.  And what I 
also intend doing Chair is Ms Mokonyane will testify and 
then I will then take her to the point that she is responding to 
and then – so that it then makes sense what she is testifying 
about.  Because what she has done in her – in her affidavit 
is to respond directly to the statement of Mr Agrizzi both the 
main statement and the – the main statement and the 
supplementary statement.  So Chair with your leave can she 
be sworn in and then I will take her through the statements 
20 
before she testifies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  She will be sworn in and then we talk 
about what you propose to do after that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please administer the oath or affirmation. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 16 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Oh sorry.  Sorry Chair I did not realise 
the microphone is – this Chair was meant for tall people.  I 
never realised that a short person like me will come.  So it 
was high up but it is now to my height. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
MS MOKONYANE:  My name is Nomvula Paula Mokonyane. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry, I am sorry.  You can take off 
your mask for when you are just taking the oath so that 
10 
everything can be heard properly.  Well you can move it a 
little bit you do not have to take it off completely. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Thank you very much Chairperson.  I saw 
yesterday that they said it is also unhygienic to put it on the 
cheek. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
MS MOKONYANE:  And I do have serious ailments hence I 
am very sensitive of my health. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no – oh no – look if that is so maybe 
put it back and then we will just try to speak louder.  Ja 
20 
okay. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
MS MOKONYANE:  My name is Nomvula Paula Mokonyane. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 17 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:  No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so help me 
God. 
MS MOKONYANE:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  You may be seated.  Before Mr 
10 
Notshe proceeds Ms – Ms Mokonyane I just want to thank 
you for coming to the commission to testify and I want to 
also indicate that the reports that I have received recently 
are to the effect that you and your lawyers have given the 
commission cooperation in everything that they have been 
doing and there has been a lot of cooperation from your side 
and from the side of your lawyers and I just want to record 
the commission’s appreciation for that cooperation.   
MS MOKONYANE:  Thank you.  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Thank you.  And maybe before he 
20 
goes further I must also say you will be asked questions by 
him.  I will also ask some questions.  Listen to the questions 
carefully.  If you do not understand the question say so it will 
be repeated.  Answer the questions to the best of your ability 
and as far as you – you remember.  He has a duty to ask 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 18 of 214 
 
questions to try and get to the truth of the matters that we 
are looking at and he would be doing that to the best of his 
ability.  I have to satisfy myself that I have got all the 
information and clarification that I may need because in the 
end I must decide matters and it is important that I should 
understand your version, I should understand what you say, I 
should understand what everyone else says.  So I thought I 
must just explain that but this is the – your opportunity to put 
your side of the story and to do deal with whatever matters.  
So use this opportunity to make sure that your side of the 
10 
story is heard. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Ms – Mr Notshe. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Thank you.  Ms Mokonyane I am sure 
you have a black file in front of you – arch lever file. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now the – the statement to which you 
responded it will be appearing on page – when I refer Ms 
Mokonyane to pages, they will be – if you look the 
documents in front of you there is a – the number in red.  So 
20 
page number 1 refers to a page number.  It will be a number 
which is in red. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright just one second Mr Notshe.  It is 
quite dark inside.  The technicians or whoever must just do 
something so that we have better lighting in the room.  I 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 19 of 214 
 
have previously asked that there should be a lamp next to 
where the witness stands because sometimes it is so dark, I 
do not know whether everybody can read documents when 
the lighting is like that.  Does it look like you will be able to 
read Ms Mokonyane? 
MS MOKONYANE:  I will try to Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You will be able. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Thank you for your considerations yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  Thank you.  We will proceed 
in the meantime. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Ms Mokonyane check they will be at the 
top page 7 is 007.   
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  That is the evidence of Mr Agrizzi.  I am 
just – just showing you where the statements are and then 
we will come back to deal with them.  And then that goes to 
page 11.  And then if you look at the dividers, they are in… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe you must just mention that when 
you refer to page number you will not be calling the MPM 
and 00 you will just say 7, 8. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And so that she will understand.  You 
understand that? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You understand that? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes I do.  The red? 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 20 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Ja the red one ja.  And then I will just – I 
will not call T20MPM00 I will just refer to page. 
MS MOKONYANE:  To page. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  To page number but it is the red number 
that I am referring to.  Then what will also help us you will 
see there are dividers. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Ys. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  That colour – multi-coloured.  So 
document it is – I will refer to the section where it is.  I will 
firstly refer you to the divider and then to the number, to the 
10 
page number alright.  Now your statement will be under 
divider 4.  That is your answering statement on page 19. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And then – then we jump from there – so 
if you go – can you go to divider 10 and then on page 3881. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  That is the supplementary affidavit of Mr 
Agrizzi and you have referred to it also in your statement. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Page 381. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No 3881 – 3881. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, is it 388.1? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  388.1.  I beg your pardon, Chair. 
MS MOKONYANE:  38 ...[indistinct]  Is it 381 or...? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  388.1. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
I 
do 
not 
have 
point 
...[indistinct] 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 21 of 214 
 
...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You see, the... I think what could be, the 
red indicators in the middle... 
MS MOKONYANE:  Oh, yes.  I see there the supplementary. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes, supplementary. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, but why ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Is the Chair ...[intervenes]  
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why is the page number ...[intervenes]  
MS MOKONYANE:  It is numbered in the middle. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  The page is in the middle, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, why did they write the page number in 
the middle on that page when... or every other page it is at 
the corner? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It should have been there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is what is confusing. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Ja, I apologise Chair and... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, you may continue. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  Then, Ms Mokonyane, then go 
back... then go back to Divider 6. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Should there not have been another divider 
just 
before 
his 
supplementary... 
before 
Mr 
Agrizzi’s 
supplementary affidavit? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  There are nine dividers... there are ten.  
Agrizzi is under ten Chair. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 22 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:  [Indistinct]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But I have taken the witness to Divider 6. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, there should have been another divider 
for the supplementary but I think we will find our way. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And then Divider 6, it is on page 064.  Is 
the Mr Agrizzi’s reply to your affidavit. 
MS MOKONYANE:  H’m. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now, Ms Mokonyane, let us go back then 
10 
to your affidavit and start there.  Can you just before you 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Wait just.  Tell us again where it is? 
MS MOKONYANE:  [Indistinct]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Sorry, Ms Mokonyane.  It seems as if you 
suffer from the same illness as me. 
MS MOKONYANE:  H’m. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  The height.  Chair, I apologise for the 
both of us. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Ja. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Our height. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  [Indistinct]  
MS MOKONYANE:  [laughs] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  [Indistinct]  
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 23 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  In this one.  That one is fine. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Okay. 
MS MOKONYANE:  It is on which divider? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  In the... the affidavit is on Divider 4. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Thank you.  Yes, yes.  Okay.  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
One 
second. 
 
Is 
somebody 
doing 
something about the lighting?   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Apparently... they say it is on the side 
10 
somewhere. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, I am talking more about in the room.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Apparently, the connection is there in 
order to get lights.  They must...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  They must do something. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...must I adjourn so that somebody can do 
that? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Maybe, ja.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me adjourn so that they can connect 
20 
that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No, that is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It should have been connected before I 
came in. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  That is fine. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 24 of 214 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  We will adjourn for five minutes.  We 
adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS:   
INQUIRY RESUMES:   
CHAIRPERSON:  I think that looks better.  Yes, okay.  Let us 
continue. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
MS MOKONYANE:  May I beg your indulgence? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MS MOKONYANE:  Before I get lead on the affidavit, I would 
also wish to address yourself with due respect. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You would like to...? 
MS MOKONYANE:  I would wish to make a statement before 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:  ...if you permit? 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine.  You may do so.  The last time 
I allowed somebody to make a statement before starting the 
evidence, what happened is that they implicated certain 
20 
people, other people in their statement and we did not know 
in advance.  So I am hoping that you will not be implicating 
anybody. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Not at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  Ja.  Your statement, you would 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 25 of 214 
 
like about what, five minutes? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes, if you give me five minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
MS MOKONYANE:  I will do my best. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  You may go ahead. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Thank you very much Chairperson.  And 
thanks for your consideration also for affording me the 
period to mourn.  And finally, I have presented myself before 
the Commission and I promise to continue cooperating with 
your good selves. 
10 
 
Chairperson, just as a precursor to affidavit I have 
submitted.  I just want to put it on record that for the better 
part of my life since the age of fifteen, I have been part of 
many South Africans who have availed themselves to be 
directly active in fighting in suffering and sacrificing for a 
non-racial, a non-sexist and a united democratic South 
Africa. 
 
Throughout, 
until 
today, 
here 
in 
this 
particular 
Commission, I have come knowing very well Chair that it is 
still part of that journey I have made a commitment towards, 
20 
of paying the price for my commitment and determination to 
fight any injustice against me, my comrades, family and all 
other South Africans. 
 
The submissions that has led to me being here today, I 
find them extremely defamatory.  I find them full of 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 26 of 214 
 
contradictions by someone who has had ample time and 
opportunity afforded to him exclusively. 
 
I find that the smack of hatred.  I find that they are very 
insensitive.  I find that they seem to be an act of excessive 
desperation for the reasons that are better known by Mr 
Agrizzi to discredit me, to destroy the little of what remains 
of my character, my family and myself in particular. 
 
There are cessions that have been made of my political 
influence of the presidents as it is stated in his affidavits.  It 
also shows the naivety and ignorance that he himself, Mr 
10 
Agrizzi has on how the ANC functions, together with his 
witnesses. 
 
And it goes as far as to say in page 467 paragraph 10 
that I have even gone to an extent to having a serious 
influence on President Comrade Thabo Mbeki. 
 
They are falling short Chairperson of even saying I had 
influence on Comrade President Nelson Mandela.  The above 
accessions indicate that both him, Mr Agrizzi and his alias 
do not understand nor know the ANC nor even know me as a 
person. 
20 
 
I belong Chair and I am member of the African National 
Congress.  I have and I enjoy full democratic rights within 
the ANC, including the choice of a leader I prefer. 
 
At no point Chair have I never been loyal or supportive 
of any leader democratically elected, even in instances 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 27 of 214 
 
where I have directly contested a position and lost, I would 
embrace 
the 
outcomes 
and 
rally 
behind 
the 
elected 
leadership executive and even execute the mandate of that 
particular outcome. 
 
But I have also been, notwithstanding that, being a 
victim of those who had come with the notion of the 1996-
Class Project in the scheme of politics.  I have received 
dismissal letters, dismissing me from the Central Committee 
of the South African Communist Party because of my loyalty 
to the movement and the leadership of the African National 
10 
Congress. 
 
I have contested the current Treasurer, the General of 
the ANC for the position of a Gauteng chairperson.  Yet even 
then, our families, our personal relationships have remained 
so close to each other, such that he remains a family friend, 
a brother and more in particular, an uncle to our kids and the 
same with me and his family. 
 
Who went to Nasrec Chairperson in 2017.  It is a known 
fact that my preference was on Comrade Nkosazana Dlamini 
Zuma, the current Minister of CoGTA.   
20 
 
I was even then part of a collective, on behalf of the 
National Executive Committee of the ANC, that ran this 
conference properly.   
 
Yet I was accused by some in the media for intending to 
collapse the conference by having called for a recount and 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 28 of 214 
 
many other accusations. 
 
Even 
then 
Chairperson, 
the 
conference 
ran 
and 
concluded its agenda and immediately thereafter, we all had 
to rally behind the leadership collective, and all the 
outcomes of the conference. 
 
When we moved it to East London post Nasrec - 
because the conference was in December.  In January when 
we went to celebrate the anniversary of the ANC in 2018, I 
was amongst those and there are those social media clips 
that showed Nomvula Mokonyane publicly announcing in 
10 
front of the media that delegative spoken, the slates were 
broken in Nasrec and we have to move on with the agenda 
as mandated by Conference under the leadership of the 
current President of the ANC, Comrade Cyril Ramaphosa. 
 
As for President Zuma.  It is a known fact that I 
supported 
Comrade 
President 
Zuma 
against 
Comrade 
President Thabo Mbeki, firmly on my believe that he could 
not have more than two terms, as well as, on my policy 
preferences and the choice I have made. 
 
I have served Chair and led under Comrade President 
20 
Zuma including being part of his cabinet.  I have never acted 
in the Criminal Justice System Cluster.  I have never been 
appointed in any of those positions.   
 
I have only served as the Minister of Water.  And then 
post-Nasrec, 
I 
was 
moved 
from 
Water 
taken 
to 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 29 of 214 
 
Communication.  Then moved from Communication taken to 
Environmental Affairs.  And then post the elections, I opted 
not to go back to parliament. 
 
I was part of the collective going to Mangaung, Chair 
that supported Comrade President Zuma for second term.  
And for that, I also supported Comrade President Motlanthe 
who, amongst others, he preferred, he himself, to be a 
contestant against President Zuma, when I preferred him 
with many other members and structures within the ANC as 
the deputy president to Comrade President Zuma. 
10 
 
Upon Comrade Motlanthe declining the Deputy President 
position, I was personally, amongst many ANC members, 
who then opted to bring the current President, Comrade Cyril 
Ramaphosa to be the Deputy President against former 
Treasurer General of the African National Congress, who by 
the way, left us at that conference. 
 
And we had to be saved by many other people who are 
accused of being corrupt and have captured the state and 
those are the people who saved us from the Mangaung 
Conference and the conference ran smoothly and President 
20 
Zuma and Deputy President then, Ramaphosa were elected. 
 
I 
did 
this 
all 
as 
a 
loyal 
member 
of 
the 
ANC, 
understanding 
the 
duties 
of 
a 
member 
including 
the 
Constitution. 
 
On my personal attack and vilification Chair, I take 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 30 of 214 
 
serious exception, find it insensitive for Mr Agrizzi to claim 
that they paid the costs for the burial of my son and my 
family. 
 
He even confuses the names, even my own sons, as to 
who has passed on who has had a drug problem.  Precisely 
because he has other ulterior motives of which I do not 
know. 
 
My family, like many others, including yourselves and 
many others, both black and white, do receive condolences 
during bereavements. 
10 
 
But we all know Chair that to claim that BOSASA buried 
my son and family is so hurting, derogatory and insensitive 
of Mr Agrizzi. 
 
In any of my bereavements, we uphold our pride and 
cultural practices and one of those is that we bury our own.  
We take the responsibility of what are the burial cost.  We 
take 
full 
responsibility 
in 
line 
with 
our 
customs 
and 
traditions. 
 
I am married to Basotho, proudly.  Proudly Basotho. 
[Speaking vernacular], who have their own cultural.  I am 
20 
born a ...[indistinct]  We have our own culture at home and 
we have our own rituals that we prefer. 
 
And therefore, we cannot go and have a stranger burying 
our own because we do not want to be followed up by other 
things that we have to sort out post the burier.  I think the 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 31 of 214 
 
Chair understands better what I am saying.   
 
And we know that where people come Chairperson and 
make contributions, it will be, as it is done in other families 
including in other religions. 
 
Now people offer condolences in different forms.  Some 
not even known by the immediate family.  And in the 
instances that Mr Agrizzi is referring to, I have been the 
chief mourner. 
 
And in our own tradition and our culture, I am confined 
to the bedroom with a mattress put down and myself just 
10 
interacting with... the only people that I can tell you Chair, 
who I have never been their supporter but they have become 
my own family, is Orlando Pirates.   
 
The 
Orlando 
Pirates 
would 
forever, 
during 
my 
bereavements come, and yet they know I am an avid 
supporter of Kaizer Chiefs.   
 
Even when ...[indistinct 00:14:29] said this is their family 
business, I am still a fan of Kaizer Chiefs but my home is 
with Orlando Pirates because sis Mantwa,  bra Irvin Khoza, I 
see them as my own brothers.  I call him “Grootman”.  I 
20 
called sis Mantwa ...[indistinct 00:14:44] Mantwa, precisely 
because of my marriage to Basotho. 
 
Out of all this, I so wish Chair that even one day when 
death has struck on Mr Agrizzi’s family, no one use his pain 
to try and discredit or seek to destroy him. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 32 of 214 
 
 
It is un-African, it is inhumane, it lacks Ubuntu.  
[Speaking 
vernacular]. 
 
People 
do 
come 
[speaking 
vernacular]. 
 
And some of the things that he is referring to, are things 
that I really think they are actually bother on undermining 
and trying to destroy the little of my character that I have 
built. 
 
With regard to the food donated by BOSASA.  As these 
things are happening now Chair, just now, under lockdown, 
there are hundreds, if not thousands, of business and 
10 
individuals who go all out to share with communities. 
 
With BOSASA was no exception and it continues to be 
no exception.  I am still involved in charity work, not even 
being in parliament, not being a public representative. 
 
As we speak now, kids in Kagiso 1, will be fed through 
the initiatives and the support that business have extended 
to make sure that those who normally depend on the food 
that they find... they get served at school, are now actually 
giving something to live and survive now that schools... now 
that they have not gone back to school. 
20 
 
And also Chair, I can also indicate that not only have 
BOSASA worked or supported the community of Kagiso.  It 
has gone as far as Orange Farm.  It has done a lot of work in 
Limpopo in the rural areas. 
 
It was worked in Port Elizabeth.  And here, they found 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 33 of 214 
 
me as one of the public representatives, one of the activist 
of Kagiso, a child of Kagiso, a child of Munsieville, that we 
should work together and make sure that when they donate 
these things we are there. 
 
And they have served and they have done those things.  
They have even been given an opportunity to people who 
would not have had a Christmas celebration, a chance to 
have a Merry Christmas. 
 
There was a moment when parents and communities 
Chair in Gauteng – and I think all of us will remember 
10 
because it was out in the media – when all of us were 
overwhelmed and desperate because of the drug abuse in 
this province. 
 
Outside of my responsibility as a public representative 
but as an affected parent Chair, together with community 
leaders, parents – and I want to state it, Orlando Pirates 
which I do not even support even today – came forward, 
worked on a programme that went out to assist kids. 
 
We picked up kids laying in Vilakazi Street.  We picked 
up kids in Diepkloof.  We picked up kids in Kagiso.  And 
20 
because of this social mobilisation... we had a crisis in 
Eldorado Park that everybody knows, where I met many of 
the anti-drug activists.  
 
We worked together.  And all these people came 
forward.  And in this partnership - it was not only BOSASA, 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 34 of 214 
 
there were other institutions that also came to partner with 
the communities. 
 
And in this instance, BOSASA again, offered to lend a 
hand in assisting to fight this scare of substance abuse.  
They offered services voluntarily.  Not to my child only.  Not 
to me but to the community that had come forward. 
 
And young people who are willing to be assisted, 
volunteered themselves and admitted themselves into the 
services of BOSASA, not... and it then went beyond 
Gauteng.  It even went to the Western Cape.  It went to 
10 
Limpopo.  It went to the North West as well.   
 
On security matters Chair.  Chairperson, my life and that 
of my family has been always under threat from as far back 
as in the 80’s.   
 
We 
have 
survived 
bombings. 
 
We 
have 
survived 
kidnappings.  We have survived torture.  We have survived 
shootings.  We have survived poisoning, not one but many a 
times. 
 
Even when I was eleven days married and two months 
pregnant.  We thought we were going into a special 
20 
honeymoon only to find that we are going to Section 29 and 
we were then kept in isolation together with my late 
husband, Serge Mokonyane. 
 
At the time when I was even the Premier, Chair, never 
mind those times in the 80’s, and unfortunately, if you know 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 35 of 214 
 
the 80’s, the Truth Commission – and I think it was amongst 
other venues, using this kind of facility – has never come out 
until today.   
 
Nobody, including a district sergeant who colluded with 
the security branch to say, “I am not pregnant”.  Trying to 
abort me forcefully, never came forward to apologise.   
 
Even today, nobody has come out to say who bombed 
our homes more than once.  Nobody has come forward to 
say who actually wanted to jump the fence and the gate in 
...[indistinct 00:20:17] Street, where I used to live in 10... 
10 
‘85. 
 
And that out of the security advise of the ANC, we had to 
move away from that area because there was illegal 
electricity connection and our house sometimes got dark 
because of illegal connection, only to find out that there was 
also a plan to keep our house dark.   
 
We had to move to Silverfields, not to Kenmare as Mr 
Agrizzi and his witnesses refer.  I have never lived in 
Kenmare.  I have lived in Kagiso. 
 
I got married.  I lived in Munsieville.  I moved to Kagiso.  
20 
I then lived with my family in Silverfields and then we are 
now in Noordheuwel.   
 
Again, a demonstration that they do not know me.  They 
seem to be barging and trying to find everything.  It just 
deals with the little of the character that I have built for 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 36 of 214 
 
myself. 
 
At the time when I was the Premier, Chair I was faced 
with a housebreaking whilst I was asleep inside the official 
residence in Bryanston.  That residence had cameras on.  
That residence had South African Police Services officers on 
duty.  And strangely on that day, the alleged that they 
knocked off at two in the morning. 
 
People got into the house.  They took all the electronic 
appliances.  Fortunately, I locked the door when I am asleep.  
And they left with no one having found them.   
10 
 
To date nobody, including members of the SAPS who 
were on duty that time or started duty, have ever faced any 
hearing.  Just a simple hearing or a disciplinary case.  
Nothing has happened.  But let us leave that Chair. 
 
Now when I was the minister, I was sent to go and work 
in the Eastern Cape in Umtata.  There was a break-in into 
my room and only to find out that that hotel only had its 
cameras at the reception and in the kitchen and people 
broke into my room. 
 
They took all the electronic gadgets, whilst I was asleep.  
20 
They took my handbag and all other valuables.  To date, 
nobody has been prosecuted.  A case was opened.  Until 
today, nobody has actually come back to me and say, “We 
have closed this case because we have no evidence 
whatsoever”. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 37 of 214 
 
 
But now recently, with the killing of George Floyd – I live 
in 
Noordheuwel, 
Chair. 
 And 
living 
in 
Noordheuwel... 
Noordheuwel – I do not live in the upper Noordheuwel.  I live 
amongst the working class in that area just as in Silverfields. 
 
I live in a standalone house.  I am subscribed to a 
security company.  And when there was this issue of George 
Floyd and about Black Lives Matter, one of the other people 
who reside in Noordheuwel, a white person, actually went 
onto the chat group and was making a mockery of George 
Floyd. 
10 
 
I responded.  My daughter who lives with me also 
responded to say but this is so wrong.  This is a security 
chat group.  You cannot do these things.  And they were all 
laughing.  They were all making a mockery.  And I was the 
first who responded. 
 
But guess what happened Chair?  This man, a white man 
who I do not know, decided to go for my daughter, Katleho, 
telling her, “I know you.  I know where you live.  I know you 
and your mother are staying alone.  I will get you.  I can 
come even now”. 
20 
 
And I am saying this now during this period of the 
lockdown.  And all these things were reported to the police.  
And precisely because of that, I can say all those who want 
to deal with Nomvula find it difficult to confront me directly 
but opt to go directly to those that they know they matter 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 38 of 214 
 
most in my life, my children. 
 
Any parent who gets attacked through his or her kids, 
actually feels the severest pain compared to being directly 
attacked.  
 
Now Chair, when I was in Silverfields, one of the things 
that happened was that one of the days we found our dog 
actually poisoned.  Even then, no work was done.  The SPCA 
took the dog and all those things.  We do not know what has 
happened. 
 
Not once Chair but many a times, even during the 
10 
apartheid days, I have never refused or failed to cooperate 
whenever there is an investigation against me. 
 
Even now, when the Commission arrived at home, I 
stayed away from them.  Also due to my own health 
conditions but also because of the respect for the rule of law 
and allowed the team to work. 
 
And in that inspection, still, they continued to look for 
whatever that they were looking for, which unfortunately, the 
very witnesses that have made me to come here today, are 
still fudging issues and confusing matters but thanks to Mr 
20 
Nixon who actually confirmed that some of the things that 
are said here do not actually stand ground.   
 
I find it very concerning Chair that having been at pains 
to cooperate, a lot of sensation has been created about my 
house, about my family and what is found in my house even 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 39 of 214 
 
with a lot of inaccuracies, including a simple inaccuracy to 
say that I have wooden stairs in my house. 
 
There 
are 
not 
wooden 
stairs. 
 
His 
assession 
of 
describing my house inside.  Before you get to the kitchen, 
you pass a private lounge which has got a door on the right-
hand side and we have a dining room that has always been 
in use. 
 
But of course, it is Mr Agrizzi’s... [throat clearing].  
Excuse me Chair.  It is Mr Agrizzi’s intention to really rub in 
a perception that has been preferred over time about the 
10 
kind of person that they want to project to society against 
the person that I am. 
 
He claims to have been there when I was giving cash 
and I am contesting him.  I am challenging him.  They also 
agree with his witnesses that there were instances that when 
they came to the house and they met there at the house in 
my absence, knowing very well Chair that I am actually a 
busy woman and hence I was also given the name Mamma 
Action. 
 
I am always on the road for church reasons or 
20 
community issues or my own family things, even travelling as 
far as Lesotho because of the love I have for the people.  
Not only that are of my ...[indistinct 00:27:21]    
 
He remained in the council but later will reflect and said 
only one of us must stay in politics and the other one must 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 40 of 214 
 
opt out.  He took care of the family, including most of the 
matters that have to do with the up keeping of the home, as 
well as, our safety and moved to National Cabinet. 
 
Throughout my term in Gauteng, security matters were 
the responsibility of the state.  Even when the Sunday Times 
paddled the news before the Commission said, my husband 
actually reported through an SMS to say this is hogwash.  
This is [speaking vernacular].   
 
Unless Mr Agrizzi does not know, my husband is a proud 
African man.  A very proud Basotho.  Very selfless who has 
10 
tried everything Chair, even under these conditions, Ever 
Green Project in Eskom. 
 
Until today, my husband was fighting that case where his 
preference, including the application of the 30% quota, was 
ignored because the Ever Green been anyway a Secret 
Intelligence operator of the African National Congress, the 
person of Mr Agrizzi. 
 
In my serving the ANC, being the member of, I have 
seen various business organisations momentarily coming 
forward to support ANC leaders and programmes, including 
20 
sharing campaigns and parties of... and parties of leaders of 
the ANC. 
 
This 
has 
not 
only 
happened 
during 
Comrade 
President Zuma’s term, but with all leaders starting with 
Comrade President Mandela up to now.  I am not sure if Mr 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 41 of 214 
 
Agrizzi is saying it was because of other ulterior motives 
that we were working and BOSASA was supporting and 
working with us in the African National Congress.  What 
would he say of the taxi industry?  To date the taxi industry 
is not subsidised by the State but the taxi industry has 
worked with us in the ANC using their cars as mobile bill 
boards, telling supporters of the ANC to rally a state owned 
entity, 
national 
– 
Chairperson, 
I 
beg 
your 
pardon, 
Chairperson, a state owned entity Telkom was one of those 
who sponsored our national conferences and many other 
10 
businesses that are included here. 
 
And this has been something that is being done not 
only for the ANC, not only for me, not only for members of 
the ANC 
but this has 
been 
part of the democratic 
operations here in this country where businesses had 
chosen to support those that they prefer would pursue their 
interests and would also help to reconstruct and rebuild 
this country.   
 
The support that was given and the relationship had 
no strings attached and that is an assertion that Mr Agrizzi 
20 
himself says that at some point he got frustrated about this 
relationship.  He himself and Mr Nixon, one of the 
investigators, also confirmed that there has never been a 
contract or a tender when I was MEC for Environment but I 
can proudly say my legacy and the legacy of the ANC when 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 42 of 214 
 
I was appointed MEC for Agriculture, Conservation and 
Environment in Gauteng was to now have Maropeng,   
being a World Heritage site.   
I moved it to Safety.   I am sorry, I will say 
something, one of the things that we did was to activate 
communities and one of the key campaigns that we 
mobilised communities, business against crime, everybody 
on, was a campaign against wanted criminals and dealing 
with those that were harassing women and children in the 
streets and reclaiming the streets.   
10 
One of those projects was Operation Wonderful(?)   
Pardon my language but it was demonstration of the extent 
of which communities were angry against crime.   
 
The second one, Chair, as we speak, here in 
Braamfontein, is Ikhaya Lethemba where together with 
Telkom they donated the building for victims of gender-
based violence.   
 
I moved to Housing.  When I came in Housing there 
were only eight companies, white, well-established, Stocks 
and Stocks that is now Stefanutti and your other big 
20 
companies, they were the only eight that were established 
contractors and the other upcoming were only male.  
Again, I went out and pursued the policy position to bring 
women into the construction industry, to empower young 
people into the construction industry and this is how I have 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 43 of 214 
 
worked.   So having BOSASA here in Gauteng, having 
BOSASA in South Africa, collaborating and supporting 
government initiatives and the African National Congress 
was not a foreign thing, showing off that he is working with 
the African National Congress here in Gauteng and that 
has never been an issue, nobody has ever frowned upon 
and we all know [African language] that our children must 
also 
find 
space 
to 
express 
themselves 
without 
the 
influence of [African language].   
I wish and pray, Chair, that Mr Agrizzi out of his 
10 
own could refrain from using this Commission in a manner 
that shows a sense of desperation and destruction of 
people’s characters for motives better known by him. 
Thirdly, Chair, that man tells no story.  Whether this 
Commission is deprived of hearing not only from the late 
Mr Gavin Watson but my late son, Retlabusa they have – 
having not been a person who is addicted to drugs and yet 
Agrizzi refers to him showing how he does not even know 
my kids and as we speak now, my child who has a drug 
problem is trying by all means to survive but they get 
20 
chastised, they get humiliated, they get mocked and they 
get 
actually 
hurt 
every 
time 
and 
again 
by 
what 
is 
happening about their own parents. 
And here I can see Mr Agrizzi now his new project 
with all those – of that are his handlers, is on my daughter 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 44 of 214 
 
Katleho.  I cannot be correct.  It cannot be allowed.  It 
hurts.  I so wish that - sad Gavin and Retlabusa would 
have been alive so that they can also come and tell their 
side of the story because he claims he knows it.   
Yes, my husband is a golfer but my husband does 
not have a relationship with Agrizzi nor is my husband a 
racist and the very fact that we have been born, lived and 
bringing our families in Krugersdorp, it is one of the 
verkrampte places.  Two kilometres away from my place 
you have got that monument where Terre’Blanche used to 
10 
go.  I live with those community.  I have high respect for 
them.  I do respect them and I appreciate that if they hate 
you, they hate you.  If they do not want any relationship 
with you, they do not have a relationship.  But if they make 
friends they are the best of buddies.  So I really think that 
he 
himself 
does 
not 
actually 
take 
also 
respect 
for 
individuals, both the dead and the living.   
I here, Chair, in conclusion, to respond to his 
continuous contradictions, the affidavits which I also think 
reflect an abuse of this Commission for motives better 
20 
known to him. 
The following are just my concerns, that my house 
has been put up for public knowledge and access, the 
address has mentioned more than once here and there has 
also been those Google Maps that he has taken and has 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 45 of 214 
 
presented here before the house.  For the record, Chair, I 
want to tell you, as we speak today, in that house I only 
live with two other women, myself my daughter and my 
little grandchild Latita.   
Rather than me investing on the future of my 
grandchildren, I have to invest on my security.  I have to 
invest on my safety.  I have to invest on paying legal 
support because I do not know what the intentions are but I 
am here, Chair, because I believe that Mr Agrizzi must be 
proven to be a character that I have characterised here 
10 
today.   
With crime being on the rise, with all the issues that 
are happening, I have said it, I have invested on – I have 
to invest on security, I have to take care of myself because 
I think this deep hatred from the man and those that have 
actually advised him to go this route. 
I 
am 
also 
concerned, 
Chair, 
about 
what 
is 
happening in the country on crimes against women and 
children, not only violent or physical abuse but also 
misogyny, I think Mr Agrizzi hates women.  He chose to 
20 
pick myself and Dudu Myeni, for what reason, I do not 
know.  I have never worked in Correctional Services, I 
have never worked in the Department of the Justice, I have 
never acted for any Minister.  He gives me the credit that I 
am [African language].  He claims that I have influence on 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 46 of 214 
 
Comrade President Zuma.  Chairperson, for the record, 
President Zuma signed a proclamation to investigate a 
department under my leadership without having even said 
anything to me but it came out and there was investigation.  
Even then you can go and ask the Law Enforcement 
agencies, I have cooperated to an extent where I had to 
frog march officials who were refusing to cooperate with 
the SIU and everybody to come and cooperate because I 
do believe that where there is transgression there must be 
accountability.  
10 
I am not sure why in all these supplementary 
affidavits Mr Agrizzi fails to confirm that through BOSASA 
his own son, Giancarlo, rendered services to the ANC in 
Gauteng Province and doing research.  He took selfies, he 
posted and even when they were doing all these things, he 
would always put the ANC there.  As to whether it was to 
protect BOSASA, I do not know, but I do want to say to 
yourself, to your good self, Chair, I am here because I 
have to put my own side of the story and all these things 
that Agrizzi is saying about me, only him and his handlers 
20 
– I do not think even his God allows him to do this. 
And hence even last night, Chair, we went to bed 
early hours of today, working on all these documents that 
are similar to this because I want to come set the record 
straight, go out and continue with the life of looking after 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 47 of 214 
 
my own children now as a widow, make attempts to ensure 
that there is food on the table, serve the people of South 
Africa still, build this very ANC,  as we are doing even 
under lockdown, and make sure that there is peace and 
friendship in our country.  Thank you very much Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, Ms Mokonyane.  I 
just want to mention you did mention that you wished, 
among others, that Mr Gavin Watson was around to be able 
to put his side of the story.  I have mentioned previously 
that before he passed on the Commission had already been 
10 
in touch with his lawyers in order to make arrangements to 
get an affidavit from him so that he could put his side of 
the story but unfortunately, he passed on before we could 
get that.  So I just thought I would mention that.  But I am 
grateful you are here and you have already made certain 
points about your side of the story.  I think we will take the 
tea adjournment so that when we come back then we can 
continue.  Okay, we will take the tea adjournment.  The 
time is twenty five past eleven.  We will resume at twenty 
to twelve.  We adjourn. 
20 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   ...of state capture there can be many 
ways of capturing the state by influence – trying to 
influence the people who have got influence in the state, 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 48 of 214 
 
you understand that? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  Now I see when you mentioned 
in your speech that there are certain gifts that are made to 
the ANC support but with no strings attached.   
You mentioned things like that and I suppose the 
strings attached, you refer to the exact issued that is 
involved in this Commission, the state capture. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Strings attached being tend to capture 
10 
the state. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, strings attached in terms of what 
Agrizzi says about my role in – on that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Mokonyane, although he will be 
asking the questions most of the time but when you answer 
please look this side. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so I can hear you and I can 
understand what you say properly. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now let us …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you comfortable, are you okay? 
MS MOKONYANE:   I am comfortable, it is just cold here 
but I am here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, ja, this venue is very cold.  Last 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 49 of 214 
 
week I had to say they must switch off even the air con 
because it seemed better without what they call the heater. 
MS MOKONYANE:   But we can proceed, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, as we continue, I do not – is it not 
better if we switch off – they indicate that it is better that it 
is on but… 
MS MOKONYANE:   Ja, let us soldier on, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, let us soldier on but just mention if it 
becomes too much or unbearable. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Thank you. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Ma’am, can we go to folder divider 4, 
your statement? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   On page 19 you give details about 
yourself, your name, where you stay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Mr Notshe, do you not want to 
have her affidavit admitted as an exhibit? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Before that, can 
you just then turn, Ms Mokonyane, on the same page on 
20 
page – turn to page 40. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now you confirm there is an affidavit 
there above the name Nomvula – sorry, there is a signature 
above the name Nomvula Paula Mokonyane, is that your 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 50 of 214 
 
signature? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, it is. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And do you confirm that this document 
we are looking at together with annexures NPM6 is your 
affidavit? 
MS MOKONYANE:   NPM? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   M6 on page 60. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe let us say this.  Ms 
Mokonyane, the document that starts at page 19. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And goes up to page 40, is that your 
affidavit? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, it is, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And do you confirm that the contents of 
that document are to the best of your knowledge and belief 
true and correct? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, it is, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it has got annexures, doe it?  I am 
just going to have a look.  Does it have annexures?  Ja, it 
has annexures. 
20 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, it is, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, those are annexures to your 
affidavit. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 51 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, then this document is – can it 
be admitted then as EXHIBIT T20 starting on – as Chair, 
has indicated, page 19 and ending at page 62, that is the 
content and the annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you propose that it be EXHIBIT T20 
only or T20A or T20.1 or...? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, with your leave, can we – 
because they have got the dividers 1, 2, 3, but if you use 
the alphabet then it should be D, it should be 20D  T20D. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What will be 20A? 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   20A will be the letter, the letter that 
said the 3(3) on Ms Mokonyane and the B, the notice 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but that is just a letter that is not 
going to have any evidential value, is it not? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, there is no need for it to be 
admitted at an exhibit. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   As you then please, Chair.  Then we 
can move – Chair, the only issue where I need your 
20 
guidance then is 20 on divider 1, the letter contains the 
notice 
in 
terms 
of 
Rule 
3(3) 
and 
in 
the 
notice 
is 
accompanied by the affidavit of Agrizzi which will be part 
of the evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but the notice should not have been 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 52 of 214 
 
there. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I suppose they had put the notice 
there because it contained the affidavit.  What was 
intended to be there is the affidavit of Mr Agrizzi, the main 
affidavit. 
 
Chair, 
what 
we 
can 
do, 
what 
we 
can 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You will not be referring to the notices, 
is it not? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   No, I will not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Well, the first affidavit you have 
10 
got in the bundle is that of Mr Agrizzi. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which would have been admitted and 
has a certain exhibit when he gave evidence. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Oh yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Preferably we should keep that exhibit 
number. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   In the that – in the evidence that you 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   In regard to his one, the first one, 
20 
because that one would have been – the supplementary 
affidavit, his supplementary affidavit would also have been 
given an exhibit at the time he gave evidence. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I understand. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
It 
is 
only 
his 
response 
to 
Ms 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 53 of 214 
 
Mokonyane’s affidavit that would not have been given an 
exhibit number as yet because he did not testify after 
giving deposing to that affidavit and Ms Mokonyane’s 
affidavit certainly needs to be admitted but now you might 
not have – you might not be ready to say what the exhibit 
number was of Mr Agrizzi’s affidavit. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it may be that for the sake of 
convenience the extracts from his affidavit, because it is 
not the whole affidavit. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The extracts that are here could be 
given a new exhibit number and then that would make 
things easier.  So we could start with Mr Agrizzi’s one and 
make it EXHIBIT T20A or .1 and then when we reach Ms 
Mokonyane’s one that might be T20.2 or B and so on and 
so on.  Do you prefer it that way? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I prefer it that way, Chair, so Chair, 
we can leave then... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so Mr Agrizzi’s affidavit appearing 
20 
at page 7 will be admitted – the extracts from his affidavit 
will be admitted and marked as EXHIBIT T20A.  Okay?  
EXTRACTS FROM MR AGRIZZI’S AFFIDAVIT HANDED IN 
AS EXHIBIT T20A. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And we must give the notices and then 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 54 of 214 
 
we go to Ms Mokonyane’s affidavit or statement – oh, it is 
a statement, it is not an affidavit, hey?  At least that is how 
it looks like at the beginning of the statement, I am not 
sure at the end.  At the end it says an affidavit. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Basically an affidavit, yes.  Her 
affidavit is admitted and marked as EXHIBIT T20B, that is 
together with its annexures. 
MS NOMVULA MOKONYANE’S AFFIDAVIT TOGETHER 
WITH ANNEXURES HANDED IN AS EXHIBIT T20B. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then as you refer to others then we 
will add.  Okay.  So, Ms Mokonyane, when he refers to 
EXHIBIT T20B, that is your affidavit but he will probably – 
will also say your affidavit. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And when we refer to EXHIBIT T20A, 
that will be the extracts from Mr Agrizzi’s affidavit at the 
beginning and then others will be marked as we go along.  
Okay, Mr Notshe. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   But, Ms Mokonyane, if you get lost 
20 
please indicate and then we will also use the numbers to 
guide you.   
MS MOKONYANE:   Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now we were at page 19, the 
introduction in your affidavit, where you described your 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 55 of 214 
 
name and your address and also you – also there, Ms 
Mokonyane, what you have done, through the directions of 
the 
Chairperson, 
is 
to 
withhold 
from 
evidence 
from 
mentioning 
your 
address 
also 
for 
security 
purposes.  
Throughout you have tried to steer away from mentioning 
your address so we will not read it into the record. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Thank you. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And then at paragraph 2 you deal with 
the various public offices, positions you have held. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And on page 20, paragraph 3, you deal 
with the positions you have had in the ANC and paragraph 
4 you have dealt with – Chair, it is – I am merely going 
through this because it is just merely a background. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I think you should go straight to 
the issues unless Ms Mokonyane has anything on these 
pages that she particularly wants to mention.  Nothing? 
MS MOKONYANE:   No, nothing, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Yes, okay.  So I think you should 
go straight to the real issues. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Ms Mokonyane, where I would really 
want to start is on page 23, paragraph 14, where you refer 
on paragraph 14, there where you said the narrative you 
are dealing with is the publication in the Sunday Times.  I 
am reading in the middle of the second sentence of that 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 56 of 214 
 
paragraph. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Why do you want to deal with that? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, I just want to discuss - Ms 
Mokonyane to explain to the Commission the issue of the 
Integrity Commission of the ANC. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but …[intervenes] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   The point …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But why is that particularly part of the 
issues? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   The point I wanted to find out and 
10 
hope Ms Mokonyane would assist the Commission that the 
Integrity Commission also is guarding against members of 
the ANC, members who are in government to be unduly 
influenced 
who 
gather 
[inaudible 
– 
speaking 
simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think start with the issues that Mr 
Agrizzi raised.  Let us start with that.  If we end up dealing 
with Integrity Commission, we can see how important it is 
but I think let us go to the real issues for the day. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, fine, Chair.  Then …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And if at any stage there is something 
that you have not covered that Ms Mokonyane or her 
lawyers feel is important they will mention. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 57 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Then, Ms Mokonyane, turn to page 27 
of the bundle which is your affidavit, paragraph 24, where 
you are dealing with – you start to deal with the allegations 
made by Mr Agrizzi.  Paragraph 24 is – and if you can put 
your hand on page 27 and then turn to Mr Agrizzi’s affidavit 
which starts …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Notshe, there are two 
ways of dealing with this.  One way is for you to tell Ms 
Mokonyane which allegation by Mr Agrizzi you are dealing 
with and she can deal with it because some of these 
10 
matters she might be able to deal without having to go and 
look at a particular page but obviously if she wishes to 
have a look, she can have a look.  So one way is for you to 
say Mr Agrizzi says the following and then let her deal with 
that.  Another way is the way you want to deal with it but I 
leave it to you, which one you want to adopt. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, I think then the easier and 
quicker way is for me to let Ms Mokonyane keep – stick to 
her affidavit and then I will read and if necessary, we can 
go and refer back to Agrizzi. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   So, go back to your affidavit on page 
27. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, I am, Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And then what I will do then, Ms 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 58 of 214 
 
Mokonyane, I will read what Mr Agrizzi is saying and then 
you can respond on what you are responding to.  Turn to 
page 28 where you deal with paragraph 22.2 of Mr Agrizzi.  
At 22.2 Mr Agrizzi says this:  He says: 
“During 2002/2003 she was the MEC for Safety and 
Security Gauteng, as far as I can remember.  I met 
her at the BOSASA office while she was there on a 
social visit.” 
Now you deal with that on page 28 of your affidavit.  You 
say: 
10 
“The contents of this affidavit are admitted insofar 
as these relate to my status.  At the time that I 
denied in relation to me having met Agrizzi at that 
stage at the BOSASA office on a social visit.” 
Now Mr Agrizzi replies, he replies to this – on your 
paragraph 26.  He replies to it and this is on page 70.  Of – 
ja, page 70 of the red number. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now Mr Agrizzi says this, says – I am 
reading his affidavit, he says: 
20 
“I deny the contents of this paragraph..” 
That is your paragraph. 
“…and Mrs Nomvula Paul Mokonyane has denied 
that she had met me on a social visit at BOSASA 
office park.  I met Ms Nomvula Paula Mokonyane on 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 59 of 214 
 
both 
social 
and 
business 
meeting. 
 
I 
even 
coordinated 
Nomvula 
Paula 
Mokonyane’s 
50 t h 
birthday party celebrations which was funded by 
BOSASA.  The theme of the birthday party was 
“Break a Leg” or words to that effect.  It was held at 
Victorian Guesthouse situated at A1 Tom Muller 
Street, West Village, Krugersdorp.  I was personally 
present 
as 
a 
guest 
at 
the 
birthday 
party 
to 
coordinate the parking.” 
MS MOKONYANE:   Chairperson, if I may respond on that.  
10 
This is again an assertion on what I have said about Mr 
Agrizzi.  My 50 t h birthday was held at the casino, Silver 
Star in Krugersdorp and not where Mr Agrizzi is referring 
to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:   I turned 50 in 2013. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Once again, Ms Mokonyane, I do not 
know whether it is the air con but you are not as audible as 
you were earlier on. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Is it better now? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is better, ja.  Yes, okay, just start 
again. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Chairperson, once more, this is a false 
assertion.  I turned 50 I 2013, my 50 t h birthday was hosted 
at Silver Star Casino in Krugersdorp.  
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 60 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Is there a party …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, what did Agrizzi – what 
venue did Mr Agrizzi give? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   He says Victoria Guesthouse situated 
at A1 Tom Muller Street, West Village, Krugersdorp.  Now, 
Ms 
Mokonyane, 
just 
explain 
to 
the 
– 
just 
tell 
the 
Chairperson …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   One second before you – that is not the 
venue where your birthday party was held? 
MS MOKONYANE:   No. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:   The venue was at Silver Star and it is 
a known place, it is on the road on N14. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, thank you. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   But is there a party that was ever held 
at Victorian Guesthouse? 
MS MOKONYANE:   There has been many parties at that 
place. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I mean your party? 
MS MOKONYANE:   No. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   You have never had a party there? 
MS MOKONYANE:   No. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And you have never had a party called 
Break a Leg?   
MS MOKONYANE:   I have had a birthday party at Silver 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 61 of 214 
 
Star. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:    A Break a Leg? 
MS MOKONYANE:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, he says the theme of your 50 t h 
birthday party was Break a Leg, you say that is not true? 
MS MOKONYANE:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Well, did your 50 t h birthday party 
have a theme even if it is not …[intervenes] 
MS MOKONYANE:   The call was to people to come and 
celebrate. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:   The journey of my life. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Ms Mokonyane, just in fairness to you, 
I mean, you did not respond to this in an affidavit but what 
you would do – what the Commission, as they are entitled 
to do, is it can follow up the response you give. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   So I just want you to confirm that you 
say there was no 50 t h birthday at Victoria Guesthouse and 
you 
say 
there 
was 
never 
your 
birthday 
at 
Victoria 
Guesthouse. 
MS MOKONYANE:   No. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 62 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Is that your evidence? 
MS MOKONYANE:   There has been other parties but not 
my birthday.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   At that place? 
MS MOKONYANE:   No. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And you also want to confirm that at 
that place at Victoria Guesthouse there was never your 
birthday paid for by BOSASA. 
MS MOKONYANE:   No, there was never that they paid 
[indistinct – dropping voice] 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And also, there was no birthday called 
“Break a Leg”? 
MS MOKONYANE:   No, not to my knowledge.  Not my 
birthday – not Nomvula’s birthday, not Nomvula’s 50 t h 
birthday. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now then I am continuing with Mr 
Agrizzi’s statement, paragraph 23.2, he says …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe let us expand on this. Mr Agrizzi 
says that he had had both – he had attended meetings 
where he was present and you were present, that you had 
20 
business meetings as well as social visits.  So do you say 
that is not true at all or do you say some meetings, yes, 
but not others or do you say you never attended a meeting 
which was attended by Mr Agrizzi whether it was a 
business meeting or a social meeting? 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 63 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:   I have never been in a meeting with 
Agrizzi. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:   And he is also not a personal friend or 
anybody who I can have a social interaction with him.  He 
says I will come across him in BOSASA and I did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  He says that there were meetings 
where he was accompanying Mr Gavin Watson and you 
were there.  You say there were no such …[intervenes] 
MS MOKONYANE:   A few companies of Mr Gavin Watson 
10 
but I have never sat with Agrizzi in a meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You have never been in a meeting with 
the two of them at the same time? 
MS MOKONYANE:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Ms Mokonyane, the Chair has just 
touched on the paragraph I was about to read where Mr 
Agrizzi says he met you a number of occasions at the 
BOSASA office park where you normally used to visit, to 
arrive after 17h00 where you attended on meetings with 
20 
the late Gavin Watson and he was personally present.  
Now in this are you say you never or are you saying you 
did attend meetings at the BOSASA office park but Agrizzi 
was not there? 
MS MOKONYANE:   I have never in the day meeting with 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 64 of 214 
 
Agrizzi in BOSASA office park.  I have met other people 
who work at BOSASA because of the ANC’s operations in 
BOSASA. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And – but you confirm that you did 
attend meetings at BOSASA office park? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, I have. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now if you look at paragraph 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, would one of the people that you 
would meet at BOSASA office park be Mr Gavin Watson? 
10 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, it will be Gavin and then he would 
hand over the people who will be running a call centre and 
those that will be assisting the ANC in its programme. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now paragraph 23.3 he says: 
“Some of the meetings held where I was present 
related specifically to criminal prosecution that was 
being considered against BOSASA and its directors 
and the SIU report.” 
MS MOKONYANE:   I deny that, I have nothing to do with 
20 
the SIU and authority. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And then he says on paragraph 23.4: 
“Nomvula Paula Mokonyane did further attend at the 
office park on social occasions as well where I was 
present.   This includes the official headquarters 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 65 of 214 
 
and ANC events.  BOSASA funded all celebrations, 
food, refreshments including hiring and ancillary 
costs.” 
MS MOKONYANE:   This was for the ANC and it was not a 
social thing, it was a political programme of the ANC which 
I am a member of. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And is it correct ANC – BOSASA 
funded the celebrations, the food, refreshments including 
hiring and ancillary cost? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, BOSASA did fund some of the 
10 
programmes, was a sponsor.  Like I have indicated that 
there have been many other sponsors such as BOSASA, 
Telkom and many others would come in and sponsor ANC 
there. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now you go back to page 28 of your 
affidavit.  Now this is a – on paragraph 27 you are 
responding to paragraph 22.3 of Mr Agrizzi.  I will then – 
let me read Mr Agrizzi’s affidavit, paragraph 22.3, that is 
the main affidavit.  Now he says: 
“Subsequent thereto, towards the end of every year 
20 
I was tasked by Gavin Watson to see to her family’s 
Christmas needs.  It would include approximately: 
22.3.1 
120 cases of cold drinks. 
22.3.2      
4 cases of high quality whiskey. 
22.3.3 
40 cases mixed beer. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 66 of 214 
 
22.3.4 
8 Lambs 
22.3.5 
12 cases of frozen chicken pieces. 
22.3.6 
200 kg Beef (as well as various braai  
  
packs. 
22.3.7 
Numerous cases of Premier brandy 
and speciality alcohol.” 
Now you respond to this in paragraph 27 on page 28. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe you just let her respond without 
going to her affidavit because some of these things I think 
she knows the answer but if she wants to be referred to the 
10 
relevant part of her affidavit she can be referred.  Ms 
Mokonyane, if you feel free to just respond, just do that.  
But if you need to have a look at your affidavit that would 
be fine. 
MS MOKONYANE:   No, thank you, Chair.  Just to respond 
on this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:   I do not have the capacity to store 
these volumes that Mr Agrizzi is referring to.  I have never 
benefited or received any goods to the benefit of my family.  
20 
I have been employed and those who know me post 
December ’16, my family closes off, we go on holiday, we 
take a break, we only come back on the 30 December to be 
with my family and all my in-laws and every in Kagiso in my 
own parents’ home, so this is not true. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 67 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now is there – sorry, Mr Agrizzi 
responds to your affidavit, his response is on page 72.  He 
responds to a number of these and paragraph 24 of his 
affidavit he says: 
“I admit I was gainfully employed as a Public Office 
bearer and that her late husband was a business 
man.  Then 4.2, save for the above, I deny the 
contents of this paragraph, that is your paragraph, I 
repeat that late Gavin Watson always a point of 
looking after Nomvula Paula Mokonyane and her 
10 
family’s Christmas needs and that inter alia the 
items I mentioned were, in fact, not only delivered 
but received by Nomvula Paula Mokonyane and her 
family.  On most occasions the items were delivered 
to her address at Blouberg Street at Noordheuwel, 
the house is situated in a cul-de-sac”, 
Now just here, Ms Mokonyane, firstly he says you received 
these personally, were received by you and your family. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Chairperson I’ve never received 
anything, as Mr Agrizzi is stating and as it is reflected on 
20 
my affidavit this has not happened, we all know that a 
house like this one cannot have a storage to keep all these 
items even those that came on site, I’m sure they didn’t 
find any strong room or a fridge or whatever, freezer that 
cold keep this, nor did I have a place where I could keep 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 68 of 214 
 
many of these kind of items. I know what BOSASA has 
done for the communities of the West Rand and for the 
events over the festive season prior to them closing down 
supporting and going an extra mile to do their CSI in 
support of these communities, not for my personal benefit. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   He says that these items were 
delivered at an address, at Blouberg Street and he says, 
most importantly he says the house is at a cul-de-sac, is 
that correct? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, it’s common knowledge that the 
10 
house is in a cul-de-sac, I’ve had bereavements there 
people have come, Agrizzi had googled the map of the 
house and it is at the cul-de-sac it’s never moved away 
from there. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now further in his affidavit, on the 
same page, 72, he admits that BOSASA is involved in the 
CSI projects but he persists that you did receive the items 
you have mentioned and then over the page on page 73 
paragraph 27, he then importantly mentions this, he says – 
it deals with your paragraph 30 – but if you go back to 
20 
paragraph 30 of your affidavit you say, paragraph 30 you 
say, 
“I’m not privy where this gossip is resourced from, if 
any, but no documentary proof has been provided 
as 
to 
the 
nature 
and 
type 
of 
products 
were 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 69 of 214 
 
purchased and delivered by Agrizzi”, 
In his response he says, 
“Meat 
was 
purchased 
from 
Zimane’s 
Food, 
Greenfields butchery, Randfontein and the liquor 
and cold drinks are purchased from Swanes in 
Krugersdorp, the other items were sourced from 
BOSASA kitchens”. 
 
Do 
you 
know 
this 
Zimanes, 
the 
Greenfields 
Butchery? 
MS MOKONYANE:   I’ve never come across all of them, I 
10 
know the places where I purchase my own meat, where I 
purchase my own liquor and where I do my groceries. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And Swanes…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Well 
Mr 
Notshe 
you 
asked 
Mr 
Mokonyane whether she knows these places, I don’t think 
that Mr Agrizzi was suggesting that she knows those 
places where the – those things – where he says they were 
purchased. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   No, I understand Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I also wanted to confirm whether these 
– to her knowledge whether these places do exist but she 
says she doesn’t know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I think the point is he gives certain 
particulars to his – to what he says and he says where 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 70 of 214 
 
these items were purchased you might have nothing to say 
other than you never received any such items. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Thank you Chair, I’ve never received 
nor do I know these companies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, is there a possibility that some of 
these items may have been purchased by BOSASA not for 
you personally or for your family but to be given to the 
community through you? 
MS MOKONYANE:   What I’m refuting is that they did all 
this purchase for me personally and for my family where 
10 
they bought them, I don’t know.  What I know, they 
provided for those that were deserving and that was 
actually distributed – people were even hosted with meals 
they would have three meals a day and they will go home 
with their Christmas hampers out of those activities. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it possible that you may have asked 
BOSASA or they may have approached you to respond to 
community needs and purchased these for purposes of you 
or whoever you work with in the community to pass on to 
communities and not for you and your family personally, is 
20 
there a possibility that, that might have happened? 
MS MOKONYANE:   BOSASA always invited us in their 
activities amongst others because one is in the community, 
it’s a child of that community not just as a public 
representative they’ve also not only did this kind of thing 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 71 of 214 
 
for the community of Kagiso or in the West Rand but 
across.  They’ve also gone to an extent of even supporting 
schools with the school nutrition programme so it may be 
possible that he may be referring to where BOSASA used 
to purchase, where they came from I don’t know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And in that – just a follow-up to what 
the Chair ’s raising is it – were there any occasions where 
the food that was meant or the items that were meant for 
the CSI projects were delivered at your house?  
10 
MS MOKONYANE:   Chairperson there was one instance 
where 
they 
brought 
things 
because 
the 
Kagiso 
Old 
Community Hall was under reconstruction and then the 
food was collected, everything and the women in Kagiso, 
as they normally did including veterans, older women, they 
had their own big pots and own stoves they come, they go 
and cook and then the following day everybody actually 
has a shift, that is the only time and that is the time when 
the Kagiso Community Hall – the Kagiso Hall, next to the 
old police station and that’s when we moved towards, what 
20 
is known as, Kagiso Community Hall in Lewsham and also 
we’ve had many other activities in Mogale Community Hall 
and now at the Heritage Centre. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   But you’re saying these were not at 
your house, this cooking and delivery of the goods? 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 72 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:   No the cooking and everything – 
Kagiso, the old Kagiso Hall used to have a kitchen, used to 
have facilities, used to have everything that would be 
utilized there and these other ones they would then come 
in and do the cooking do the preparations and other 
sponsors would bring blankets, others would actually bring 
other goodies, food hampers and health products right at 
the site of the activities that were taking place. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I see, now then you go on and 
paragraph – on page 29 you respond to Mr Agrizzi’s 
10 
paragraph 22.5, let me read paragraph 22.5, it reads as 
follows: 
“Soon after 2002 I was asked by Gavin Watson to 
supply 
her 
and 
her 
family 
and 
friends 
with 
provisions during the course of the year.  I was 
instructed to contact her personal assistant, Sandy 
Thomas”, 
 
Now your response is on page 29, what is your 
response, actually to this? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Sandy is my personal assistant which 
20 
she is still even now and she assisted me in arranging 
meetings to some extent but she would also be requested 
by my own late husband to some of the things in the 
absence where they could not actually get hold of me.  I 
know, 
Chairperson, 
that 
BOSASA 
also 
assisted 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 73 of 214 
 
communities, 
veterans, 
military 
combatants, 
destitute 
families with the burial so that people do not have proper 
funerals but in so far as I’ve stated in my opening 
statement, I’ve buried my family we are a family that might 
not be wealthy but we take pride of burying our own but we 
also appreciate whatever contributions that are made and 
many of them are not even known to me, personally and to 
some of my own family members. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now just – and the Mr Agrizzi then 
responds to your answer on page 73, he says this, 
10 
“I deny the allegations in relation to Nomvula Paula 
Mokonyane and/or her family not being unduly 
benefited by BOSASA and I state further that, she 
did, in fact receive gratifications.  I further deny the 
allegation that BOSASA never paid for the funerals 
for any of her family relatives – her family members 
then over the page on page 74, I state more 
specifically that I signed off documentation and 
expenses – funeral expenses of Nomvula Paula 
Mokonyane’s late son.  The funeral and the expense 
20 
related thereto was committed by myself together 
with the employees of BOSASA, this entailed the 
hiring of a marquee, tents, air-condition, flooring 
together with the printing of memorial pamphlets 
together 
with 
the 
provision 
of 
foods 
and 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 74 of 214 
 
refreshments.  I signed off documents for payment 
by BOSASA in respect of the relative of Nomvula 
Paula Mokonyane”, 
 
You say, you deny all of this? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Chairperson as I have indicated, he 
says he has signed off the funeral expenses, that is not 
correct. We are the ones that procured the services of the 
funeral undertaker, we paid for the burial of my son and as 
to what BOSASA had contributed, like I do not know what 
other people have contributed, I further deny that.  I was 
10 
never even approached by BOSASA and I really take 
offence of Agrizzi continuously making us to be such an 
irresponsible family that cannot even afford to bury their 
own child nor even my family.  I know in my own 
circumstances that there are many people who are coming 
of our condolences and in many instances you don’t even 
know who has done what and not even having approached 
me and I really take exception, I take offence because he 
has repeatedly dragged [speaking in African language] into 
this game when even my son, is no more, he has even 
20 
gone to an extent of referring to him as a drug addict.  I 
take exception and I refuse to accept, whatever that was a 
contribution I can tell you that it is a contribution that 
might have been done, not on the basis of what Agrizzi is 
stating, that’s like any other person.  Hence at the end of 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 75 of 214 
 
every burial in our own culture, surely Chairperson, you’ll 
know there’ll be an elder who’ll come and thank everybody 
who has made contributions who has helped to take the 
burden off your own shoulders when you are grieving but 
for people to come now and want to sensationalise what 
has happened to my son, and wants to make use of this 
situation, it is not correct, the marquees and all those 
kinds of things I have people that I know who have been 
always supporting us we pay for those because others are 
young people in Gauteng and in South Africa who are doing 
10 
all this – who are involved in the entertainment industry 
including my own nephew who is involved and used to work 
with those individuals. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now, Mrs Mokonyane, when you 
drafted your answering affidavit, you must have noticed, 
you must have read, that in paragraph 22.5 Mr Agrizzi says 
that he was instructed to contact your personal assistant, 
Sandy Thomas.  Now when you prepared your affidavit did 
you ask Sandy Thomas about this, whether he was ever 
contacted by Agrizzi? 
20 
MS MOKONYANE:   Chairperson, yes, I have checked with 
Sandy. There was an instance, just once, where there was 
a storm and our alarm was continuously going on and 
because of that – and I was not even home nor was my 
services – service provider available because they were 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 76 of 214 
 
out in the field dealing with challenges that had effected, 
even the flooding of some of the airports and so on and so 
forth, that’s when then, Sandy got a call from my own 
husband to say, no there’s a problem in the house because 
he wasn’t even at home, saying, can you check exactly 
what is happening and can you assist and there was no-
one who could be of help and that’s when – because these 
people were known to be also involved in dealing with 
issues of security, they came and what they found was that 
there was a tree that fell on the fence and that was it, any 
10 
other thing, never except if there are things that have to do 
with my availability for the programmes that have to do 
with the CSI. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Sorry, I just want to clarify something, 
are you saying that Sandy confirmed that he contacted 
Agrizzi about the problem with your electric fence. 
MS MOKONYANE:   He contacted BOSASA yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   She contacted BOSASA? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes she contacted Gavin – sorry she 
contacted BOSASA and in BOSASA she was referred to a 
20 
person that she would have to talk to on that particular 
time and then because of the weather conditions she sent 
a text message. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   But you’re saying she never contacted 
or she had never had any interaction with Agrizzi? 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 77 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:   No not to my knowledge. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now, sorry, just to help me Chair, why 
did she contact BOSASA who told her to contact BOSASA? 
MS MOKONYANE:   She was asked by my own husband, 
because he was trying to get hold of the security company, 
the electrician who were out 24/7, who were out in the field 
because of the storm and everything and the only people 
that are in the neighbourhood that she knew, could actually 
come and assist, just come and check what is happening 
with the alarm that is going on and off and that’s why she 
10 
sent the message, the simple thing is, can you please 
come and check I’m told in Ms Mokonyane’s house the 
alarm is going on and off and there’s nobody around. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And is it your evidence that you didn’t 
authorise her to call BOSASA? 
MS 
MOKONYANE: 
 
 
No 
and 
I 
can 
even 
confirm, 
Chairperson, that on the weekend where the Sunday Times 
actually issued a statement about actually flouted the rules 
the rules of this Commission and publicised Agrizzi’s 
statement, my husband immediately responded to say, this 
20 
is hog wash, he is responsible for the security he’s got 
service providers he knows what has happened around this 
matter and that sms is still there. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now you then, on page 29 you deal 
with paragraph 22.5.1 where he says the assistance given 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 78 of 214 
 
by BOSASA include, I’m reading his affidavit – main 
affidavit, include paying and organising funerals in respect 
of deceased members…[intervenes]. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Sorry, Chair, on paragraph? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   No I’m dealing with your paragraph on 
page 29. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   On page 29 you are dealing with his 
paragraph 22.1 where he says, 
 
“Paying of and organising funerals”, 
10 
 
You deny that and his response is merely, also, he’s 
also denying that you are denying it, you won’t deny that? 
MS MOKONYANE:   No 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And then on the same page you deal 
with paragraph 22.2 or his affidavit, now in his affidavit 
paragraph 22.2 he says, 
 
“Something that was done…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry I think, just wait for Ms 
Mokonyane to find…[intervenes]. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Paragraph 22.2 it’s on page 28 – no, 
20 
no, no you are – we’re at page 29 of your affidavit. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   But you are dealing with paragraph 
22.2 but don’t worry about going to paragraph 22.2, I’ll 
read it to you. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 79 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:   Okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Ja, it’s going to confuse if you are 
going to run back and forth then in paragraph 22.5.2 he 
says, 
“BOSASA arranged for the rental of a vehicle for a 
period of three months at a time through Blakes 
Travel a premium vehicle such as Audi A3 for her 
daughter when she visited from China where she 
was studying”, 
 
Now you deal with it on page 29 of the record, 
10 
paragraph 33. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And you are saying here this is - it was 
for your daughter? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, Chairperson, my daughter is 
South African and because of our own experiences of what 
has happened to our two kids we opted to take her away 
from this messy environment where our children were 
immediate targets. She studied at Roedean she flew all by 
herself to China after we have opted and agreed with her 
20 
to go and further her studies in China.  She studied in 
China, she can read, write she can even explain issues 
that are related to trade and commerce in both Mandarin 
and in English she can even try and explain it in Zulu or in 
Sesotho.  My daughter, even before she went to China, she 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 80 of 214 
 
used to do part-time jobs here at Silverstar in one of the 
restaurants of a family friend that we know who offered to 
train her about the work culture.  She would come back 
from Roedean, from her boarding school and go and work 
over the weekends twice a month and that has been the 
culture that my daughter had.  She came back from China, 
she’s been in China for almost 12 years, my daughter came 
back when she now, could actually speak, read and write 
and was also involved in the issues of translation and 
interpretation, she was invited by Gavin, who has known 
10 
her as a little girl long before the positions of Government 
and Gavin had an interest in understanding some of the 
issues that he would have to deal with when it comes to 
businesses in China and that has been the arrangement.  
He actually, like any other child [speaking in African 
language] and how you used to do the part-time jobs 
during school holidays, plenty of us have done that.  He 
was – she was offered that because, Chair, before even 
this 
whole 
notion 
of 
politically 
exposed 
people, 
my 
children, my immediate family remain unemployed do not 
20 
get opportunities because of their identity and association 
with me.  She was offered this opportunity and they made 
the arrangement therefore, for Katleho to move around 
from point A to point B doing that particular part-time job 
whilst she was at home and this was an arrangement of two 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 81 of 214 
 
adults. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now he responds to that, because 
what you are saying is also what you put in your affidavit. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now he responds to that on page 74, 
he says on paragraph 30, he says, 
“Save for noting the contents of this paragraph I 
have no knowledge of the contents of the same but 
I confirm that, on occasions when Nomvula Paula 
Mokonyane’s daughter was in South Africa we 
10 
received instructions from the late Gavin Watson for 
higher model vehicles for her daughter on at least 
two occasions, of which two I personally dealt with. 
I’m over the page on page 75, on a further 
occasion, Frans Foster, acting on the instructions of 
late Gavin Watson hired and personally took the car 
to the house of Nomvula Paula Mokonyane, this was 
an Audi A3 model vehicle.  I state further that 
relationship between the late Gavin Watson and 
Nomvula Paula Mokonyane together with looking 
20 
after all her and her family’s needs was mutually 
beneficial to both the late Gavin Watson and 
BOSASA and Nomvula Paula Mokonyane.  The late 
Gavin Watson made clear to myself and other 
Directorate, on various occasions that because of 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 82 of 214 
 
Nomvula Paula Mokonyane’s relationship with late 
Gavin Watson and the Watson family and BOSASA, 
which extended over decades of time, the late 
Gavin Watson repeatedly made it clear to myself 
and others the important positions she held in 
Government and at a Provincial level.  It was 
evident that Nomvula Paula Mokonyane had the 
respect and eminence in top Government settings 
and 
because 
of 
her 
relationship 
with 
the…[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think, Mr Notshe that’s too long by the 
time you finish Ms Mokonyane might not remember all of 
that, do you want to break it up to put to her what you want 
her to deal with? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   All I want is your comment on the 
issues he raises here. 
MS MOKONYANE:   My facts still remains the same around 
my daughter and secondly my issues that I have raised 
about how he is trying to give me the authority and 
influence 
that 
I 
have, 
again 
smacks 
of 
an 
act 
of 
20 
desperation because for the record even Mr Nickson and 
others do concede that they’ve checked through, there’s 
never been where I’ve been responsible having to be able 
to grant BOSASA any business opportunity or out of our 
relationship they’ve been able to work in the space that I 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 83 of 214 
 
have been assigned to lead. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Basically your response insofar as Mr 
Agrizzi’s evidence relates to your daughter is, my daughter 
is an adult she has had a relationship with the Watson 
family for a long time and you don’t deny what she – what 
is written about her or cars being hired for her, all you are 
saying is she and Mr Gavin Watson had their own 
relationship and they made their own arrangements, you 
have nothing to do with that.  
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s the gist of your answer? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:   And as for the elaborations on 30.4 
and so forth, I think, I would further challenge him to 
substantiate this influence that he is referring to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now on page 30 on paragraph 34 you 
respond to Mr Agrizzi’s affidavit, wherein he says, 
“BOSASA also catered for several ANC rallies and 
20 
on your instructions”. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Chairperson, again I actually realised I 
forgot the constitution of the ANC.  The fund-raising 
committee of the ANC is headed by the Treasurer General 
of the ANC.  There is a fund-raising committee and there 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 84 of 214 
 
are fund raising initiatives it is not the individual, no 
individual has the capacity and the ability to go all out and 
go and look for resources, you have to actually work and 
even be led by a Treasurer General of the African National 
Congress.  I’ve never been a treasurer of the ANC, I’ve 
been the treasurer of the South African Communist Party 
here in Gauteng – in the Southern Transvaal and I have 
been part of those who work and organise ANC events and 
for the record I can’t deny that BOSASA had actually come 
out to support the ANC in its initiatives. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, you accept that BOSASA supported 
the ANC and may have funded some of its rallies as well 
but what you are saying is, it was not at your request. 
MS MOKONYANE:   No, it would never be even at my 
request, there are different, even ways of raising funds, 
people make endorsements.  The ANC has never hidden 
it’s fund raising initiatives, people have come to the gala 
dinners of the ANC, people have been acknowledged, as I 
have shown here, we even have a book with different 
companies including Telkom that have come out publicly to 
20 
support a conference of the ANC.  So I have never, I don’t 
have that authority and prior to every programme being 
implemented you put what the resources are and what will 
be required and together with the leadership of the ANC in 
its 
entirety, 
you 
all 
adopt 
that 
programme 
and 
its 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 85 of 214 
 
implementation and that’s why, even, for the record now, 
I’m saying I can’t deny the fact that BOSASA supported the 
ANC, I can’t deny the fact that BOSASA Office Park has 
been on, more than one occasion, an elections operation 
centre of the ANC, I can’t deny the fact that BOSASA has 
also, not only worked with the African National Congress at 
the National level but also the ANC, even here in the West 
Rand Chair and our conferences hosting the Provincial 
meetings of the ANC here in Gauteng providing foods, lunch 
packs because of their kitchen capacity for our volunteers 
10 
and even providing for people who are coming to our rallies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MOKONYANE:  And lastly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But maybe we should switch off the air 
conditioner. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
MS MOKONYANE:  There was a time when I was referred to 
a TG Minister when I was supposed to move to an office 
that has carpets. 
20 
MS MOKONYANE:  Hm. 
MS MOKONYANE:  This is me Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, Ja no then switch it off. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They will switch it off.  Let me understand 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 86 of 214 
 
your evidence correctly.  If a member of the ANC… 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chairperson I think she is – wants to do 
something. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Can I? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Thank you. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chairperson she had asked me during 
some breaks 
whether she can bring a humidifier or 
something like that?  I was not sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes of course.  Yes, yes.  Is it – is it 
something you would like to have immediately? 
10 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes we can proceed but I will bring it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No that is fine.  I just want to 
understand your evidence correct – properly with regard to 
fund 
raising 
and 
individual 
members 
of 
the ANC 
or 
individual leaders of the ANC.  If I am a member of the ANC 
or if I am one of the leaders of the ANC can I not approach 
a company and say, you know the ANC is going to have a 
function or a rally or whatever or meeting can you please 
contribute or sponsor that function or contribute to whatever 
expenses the party is going to be – party is going to incur in 
20 
regard to that function to make it a success?  Can I not go 
to a company as an individual get them to agree and maybe 
once they have agreed I then tell the formal structure that I 
have spoken to BOSASA or who – Telkom will you then take 
it from there when they will – they will expect your letter Mr 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 87 of 214 
 
Treasurer General or something like that? 
MS MOKONYANE:  In fact, Chair what happens is the 
opposite.  The fund raising committee sits, the fund-raising 
committee and the GG together with those that are 
responsible for organising will also come together and other 
officials.  We will identify the need and we will identify what 
needs to be done and the Chair who is the Treasurer of the 
ANC is the one then who will go out and identify those that 
have to be approached.  Others voluntarily come forward.  
They come to the ANC and say, what can we help you with?  
10 
We want to endorse your manifesto how can we lend a 
hand?  We subscribe to your mission, how can we do that?  
Then the Treasurer General will then make all of you to 
make a follow up depending on what you are responsible 
for.  If I have a responsibility of filling two stadiums back to 
back 
at 
the 
same 
time 
I 
would 
be 
assigned 
the 
responsibility of chairing the mobilisation committee of the 
ANC and knowing everything about who is going to be a 
Marshall, who is going – when are we going to get the 
stadium, when are people going to come?  People have to 
20 
be fed, where are we getting the resources and there will be 
different work streams and finally the authority gets signed 
off by an organisation through an organisational process.  
You cannot just – you do not do things on your own because 
at the end of the day the party must actually account.  And 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 88 of 214 
 
hence post the event there will be a token of appreciation 
that goes to the sponsors to say, [African language].  You 
know I do not know how to say it in English but that is how 
we do it. [African language] and they will do that and they 
would – they would even say proudly sponsored by so and 
so like you see with the Telkom book, it is not a secret and 
the different telecommunication businesses that is what 
would happen Chairperson.  And finally, you then when you 
run a command centre for an event like Nomvula being the 
Head of Organising in the ANC you then have to know when 
10 
is the food coming?  When are the Marshalls going to eat?  
Have the food been delivered at the pick-up points of the – 
of the thing – of the – the pick-up points of the glasses and 
all those things are not necessarily you but because this 
person acts like you know in this particular way he thinks I 
am the alpha and omega of the ANC.  Never, there are 
structures and systems to deal with these matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But are you saying it is not allowed by the 
ANC or an individual member or leader unless they are… 
MS MOKONYANE:  Assigned. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Treasury 
General 
or 
specifically 
assigned? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
They 
are 
not 
allowed 
to 
approach 
potential funders or sponsors and ask to sponsor and then 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 89 of 214 
 
get the organisation or the relevant structure to formalise 
the arrangement later? 
MS MOKONYANE:  No.  You – when you have a contact you 
must present it before the Treasurer General. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:  And to the committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS 
MOKONYANE: 
 
And 
then 
it 
must 
then 
be 
institutionalised and made to be part of the thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now Chair just in this – in this case I 
understand you knew the Watsons before even ANC brought 
him to government? 
MS MOKONYANE:  I have known the Watsons from as far 
back as pre-Democracy yes.  I have known them.  I have 
known actually Ronnie Watson before I came to know Gavin 
Watson.  I have worked with Ronnie Watson.  I have met the 
Watson family when I was part of the National Civic 
Organisation and when we were under the UDF organising 
the consumer boycott and one of the areas that had the 
20 
longest consumer boycott was in Port Elizabeth and here 
citizen in Kagiso in Mogale.  One of the longest boycotts 
that even took out Greyhounds that that entity today has no 
– 
that 
company 
that 
operates 
because 
we 
took 
out 
Greyhound which was colluding with the apartheid system 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 90 of 214 
 
and the [indistinct 00:07:07] who were actually killing our 
people.  When there was the Rowntree strike by the unions, 
I was a trade journalist.  I know that period.  I also met 
them when there was that – those long strikes and with 
various other acts and I also know them for having assisted 
the ANC in our ready to govern programme where they took 
people like Popo Molefe and many other people including 
myself to the Watson School of Business.  And we all went 
there.  We were joined by I think it Valance Watson who 
went with us or Ronnie I cannot recall but that is how far 
10 
back I know the Watson family.  I have also known their 
generosity when there was no tender.  When they used to 
support the detainees.  When they used to support the 
underground operations.  And when the issue of BOSASA 
and the relationship with the ANC came it was a natural – 
natural relationship of Teno fighters coming together, Teno 
freedom fighters coming together and their commitment and 
option to support the ANC was not something that I would 
actually frown upon compared to maybe getting Fidelity 
Guards I do not know Fidelity Guards except them being 
20 
SGS I know it.  So that is how I relate with that – with that 
situation of knowing the Watson family. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now are you saying then that the 
BOSASA volunteered on their own?  We have heard 
someone introducing them to the ANC to support the ANC? 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 91 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:  BOSASA – the Watson family are 
members of the ANC.  And I think they – it was out of their 
own conviction and the love for this country that they have 
always been generous even before BOSASA was there. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now when the Watson family was 
involved then in BOSASA and they had government tenders, 
rendering services to government it is not a problem to the 
ANC that they would continue supporting the ANC? 
MS MOKONYANE:  I do not want to speak for the African 
National Congress here.  I have come to present myself but 
10 
still I do not believe that there was anything untoward.  As I 
have said we have seen even an SOE coming out publicly to 
support the African National Congress.  Golf courses, 
Premier ’s golf courses, [indistinct 00:09:40] golf courses, 
Presidents golf courses all these activities are funded and 
supported by the private sector who many of them have got 
things to do.  Not only the black business was [indistinct 
00:09:55] 
those 
that 
are 
in 
the 
wine 
industries 
and 
everybody endorsing our events.  Not only during Jacob 
Zuma’s time.  Even during Madiba’s time.  Even during 
20 
Comrade Thabo Mbeki’s time, Comrade Kgalema’s times.  
Business has been quite good for the African National 
Congress those who believe in what the ANC stands for. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now Agrizzi’s response to your answer 
on page 75 paragraph 31 she says – and she denies that 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 92 of 214 
 
you – you never approached the himself or the BOSASA to 
cater for ANC rallies.  He says I am reading on page 76: 
“The true and correct position is and is that on numerous 
occasions for election galas and on occasion and for ANC 
Leghotla BOSASA set up funded and catered for various 
municipal, provincial and general elections.  On numerous 
occasions this was at Nomvula Paula Mokonyane request to 
late Gavin Watson.” 
Because you say you deny this. 
MS MOKONYANE:  No it will not be at my personal request.  
10 
I have never done that.  But he is also just showing how he 
is so naïve on understanding the ANC.  The Head of 
organising he is responsible for organising the ANC must 
provide the resources.  They Head of organising is not the 
convenor of the Leghotla.  Leghotla is convened by the SG 
of the African National Congress. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now on page – whilst we are still on 
page 76 he says: 
“I am attaching hereto as annexure AG1 a copy of an email 
dated 
15 
April 
2011 
addressed 
to 
Nomvula 
Paula 
20 
Mokonyane in her official email reporting to her on the ANC 
call centre.” 
And that AG1 is on page 99. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes it is about the call centre. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  Do you know about this? 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 93 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:  I know the call – about the call centre 
and it was the call centre for the ANC operations it does not 
form [indistinct 00:12:24]. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But he says here and I am looking at 
AG1 you excuse me at times this tricks me this – when the 
emails are printed. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Where is it? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Here it seems as if there is… 
MS MOKONYANE:  It is on? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Page 99 sorry.  Page 99.  There at the 
10 
top there is an email seemed to be from Agrizzi and it is – it 
is to Nomvula.Mokonyane@gautenggov – is that A and 
Sandy then in brackets Nomvulapa call on Gavin Watson 
then decided to support.  So it seems as if here if I 
understand it Agrizzi sent an email to you on the 11 April 
2011.  
MS MOKONYANE:  It was about the Ops centre for 
elections of the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry before you – you respond Ms 
Mokonyane.  Mr Notshe read this – the email if – is the one 
20 
at the bottom supposed to be an attachment to the one at 
the top or what?  I see it says sent via mobile e-phone and 
then it says begin forwarded message.  Is the message at 
the bottom what was being sent by… 
MS MOKONYANE:  Agrizzi. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 94 of 214 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  From Mr Agrizzi? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It seems as if the message at the 
bottom is – Agrizzi sends the message that followed below. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  So if that is the message that 
he sent or – then you – I think you must just read it so that 
we know what it says before she responds. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Well the message is – is from Agrizzi 
Chief Operations Officer, BOSASA Group of Companies 
Mogale Business Centre in Gauteng.  And it is from Agrizzi. 
– angeloagrizzi@bosasa.com and jenapieters@bosasa.com 
10 
and then the phone numbers.  Then being forwarded.  And 
what is forwarded it seems as if it is from Johan Fourie, 
fourie@ - johan.fourie@bosasa.com and that email was to 
send to thomas@gauteng.gov.za and then the reports and 
then the contents reads: 
“Dear Sandy attached for your perusal and comment are the 
following reports on the election contact centre activities.   
1. Call statistics on the 13 and 14 April. 
2. Canvassing information reports to date. 
And then he say please let me know if there is anything else 
20 
you would like reporting on or the formatting of the reports.  
If you find these reports useful, I can mail them to you on a 
daily basis.” 
And then over the page and then it is Johan Fourie BOSASA 
IT Pty Ltd and then – and then it warns people think before 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 95 of 214 
 
you print.  And then there is an email from – attachments of 
an email from Agrizzi to send to Thomas. 
“As discussed, we will send reports through.” 
And it is from Agrizzi.  And then from 102 Chair it is a whole 
host of – reports.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you saying those are reports from 102 
– page 102? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  102 to 115.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  So Ms Mokonyane it seems as if Agrizzi 
10 
who sent you an email on the 15 April giving this report. 
MS MOKONYANE:  My take through you Chair is that the 
message was forwarded from Johan Fourie to Sandy and in 
this very email it is all about the operations of an election.  
There is no conviction that is said that on condition you 
deal with this for us or on condition you stand to benefit on 
this matter. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I think Ms Mokonyane what is Agrizzi is 
trying to say here – remember he says no, I know Ms 
Mokonyane and he says I even sent an email, received an 
20 
email, sent an email to her.  And that is why he says: 
“I am attaching hereto.” 
I am reading his affidavit. 
“I am attaching hereto AG1 a copy of an email dated 15 
April 2011 addressed to Nomvula Paula Mokonyane in her 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 96 of 214 
 
official email reporting to her on the ANC call centre.” 
And then she says this – he say this is important. 
“This was done at her request.” 
MS MOKONYANE:  It could not have been done at my 
request because it was not for my personal consumption.  
All that we needed is the Head of organising and elections 
was to be continuously be giving the update and have a 
program an operation centre that will help the African 
National Congress to know the developments in terms of 
canvassing and in terms of the voter turnout.  And of 
10 
importance you can see when Johan Fourie responded they 
actually communicated directly with Sandy who is my 
personal assistant and they even indicated there that if they 
find these reports useful they will then come back.  And that 
was what actually happened. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Do 
you 
recall 
specifically 
this 
communication or you do not recall it necessarily but you 
are saying this is what would happened?  This would have 
been the context? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Chairperson when we set programs for 
20 
elections we go on site where we will be operating from.  
Whether it is in Luthuli House, whether it was in Shell 
House, whether it is at the BOSASA Conference you sit with 
all your teams, you work on the program.  And most of the 
people who were on the IT side were the ones who were 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 97 of 214 
 
communicating directly with us.  They are the ones who set 
the programs that the African National Conference required.  
And for them to then report to the ANC it was an obvious 
case.  I may not remember this record but it is an obvious 
case.  They will not just go and look for an administrator in 
the ANC they will look for the Head of elections.  Thus, 
does the taxis owners from Thatha would also be looking for 
me when we have to sort out the pick-up points and when 
we have to work out how we are going to fill up two 
stadiums at the same time back to back. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think part of the point that Mr Agrizzi 
seeks to make through providing this email as I understand 
it maybe this that on his version, he says in effect he had a 
lot of interactions with you.  You remember when we started 
his affidavit – in his affidavit he said business meetings or 
social visits.  He even said he attended your 50 t h birthday 
party.  But he also says that in a number of meetings he 
was with Mr Gavin Watson and yourself.  He says in other 
meetings you would have met Mr Gavin Watson without him.  
But he says some of the meetings he was there.  He seems 
20 
to say, I have had a lot of interactions with Ms Nomvula 
Mokonyane but when one reads your response it seems to 
suggest that you have not had any interaction with Mr Gavin 
Watson. 
MS MOKONYANE:  With Agrizzi. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 98 of 214 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe minimal but you might say not 
even minimal.  You did not have any interactions with him 
and maybe through this email he is saying, here is just one 
instance where I have interactions with her office. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Agrizzi – Mr Agrizzi will not know what 
was discussed in meetings and everything that I was in 
contact with Mr Gavin Watson on.  He would – he will only 
feature 
when 
now 
we 
operation 
alive 
these 
kind 
of 
activities.  And that is when you will come across him at the 
site when he would come across and meet us and tell us 
10 
that we will work with Johan Fourie and all those things.  
But all the arrangements would have been an arrangement 
that BOSASA had done directly with the ANC and not with 
me personally. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now Ms Mokonyane just to – before we 
leave off this point.  Tell me how would Mr Agrizzi… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry we – we are at three minutes 
past one already. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair can I just one question then I 
20 
leave AG1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  When would Mr Agrizzi have obtained 
your email address? 
MS MOKONYANE:  They would have obtained my email 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 99 of 214 
 
address from the contacts and the – they would have 
obtained my contacts from the interactions that we have had 
with BOSASA and us in terms of preparing for the ANC’s 
activities.  Obviously, you will need to give contacts to one 
another to say, this is how we will communicate and so on 
and so forth. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Let us take the lunch 
adjournment.  We will resume at two o’clock.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise.   
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
10 
INQUIRY RESUMES:   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I wish the proceedings were under a tree 
outside.  It is so nice and warm outside than inside here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs]  Yes, but I hear some aircon noise 
and I think the witness had a problem earlier on.  And I think 
let us switch it off.  I certainly did not feel before lunch that 
switching it off made it colder.  Ms Mokonyane, I think before 
lunch we had switched it off because it was causing 
problems for you. 
MS 
MOKONYANE: 
 
Yes, 
it 
does 
affect 
the 
20 
hearing...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.   
MS MOKONYANE:  ...with this thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright.  Thank you.  You may proceed Mr 
Notshe. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 100 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now Ms Mokonyane, we deal with on 
page 31, where we deal with where Mr Agrizzi said BOSASA 
also provided catering.  He says it provided catering for 
supporters at President Zuma’s birthday parties, at amongst 
others, the pool house and for his private birthday parties.   
 
And in essence, by way of example Annexure G a 
photograph of a cake that he arranged for President Zuma’s 
72n d birthday.  Now you responded to that.  What is your 
response to that?  Your response is on page 31. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes.  As I have stated before and as 
reflected in this paragraph Chairperson.  I wish to again, 
indicate that the provision of all these things had to do with 
the different and many other people who were involved in... 
it was not my direct involvement.   
 
It was after the interest of everyone who wish to... wish 
President Jacob Zuma a happy birthday and it has happened 
even now with Mandela Day and even the President Thabo 
Mbeki’s birthday.   
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now just on that, Ma’am.  You... if this 
was done by, and at the expense of BOSASA, would that not 
be a problem, a birthday party? 
MS MOKONYANE:  I cannot deal with the if.  All I know is 
that there were different things that happened on that 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 101 of 214 
 
particular day at the party and before.  I do not see myself 
being able to make a judgment.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now, will it be proper for a person who 
has a tender with government to sponsor a birthday party of 
party officials or government officials? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Chairperson, I do not find it actually 
being improper.  As I have said and I have proved here that 
even an SOE have come out to support activities of 
presidents of premiers and that was also what BOSASA has 
done.  Not only to President Zuma’s birthday but to many 
10 
other activities of the ANC and individuals. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now, Mr Agrizzi responds to your answer 
and his response and he says: 
“I have no knowledge of the actual role in respect of 
the catering for President Zuma’s birthday parties 
which were arranged mainly by Dudu Myeni but I 
state further that, at the specific request of Nomvula 
Paula Mokonyane, and over and above the use of 
BOSASA’s premises for conferences, elections, call 
centres on the diverse occasions when the Thuli 
20 
House celebrated President Zuma’s birthday, all 
catering were done Nomvula Paula Mokonyane’s 
request and was funded by BOSASA”. 
 
And you deny this? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 102 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now we then on the same page, page 81.  
We are dealing with the... what is stated by Mr Agrizzi in part 
of 82.5.5 of his main affidavit.  He says: 
“They 
also 
did 
maintenance 
at 
your 
house 
in 
Roodepoort 
which 
included 
maintaining 
electric 
fencing, generators, CCTV’s, gardening, pool gates 
and lightning...” 
 
On this... your response is on page 31. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
10 
MS MOKONYANE:  And my response remains as it is.  And 
as I have also indicated.  There is even an SMS where my 
husband responded when the media queried about what 
exactly had happened at what is alleged by Mr Agrizzi. 
 
And at no point has he ever indicated that I have asked 
him and my husband has also indicated that he took 
responsibility. 
 
And during my ten years at the MEC and the Premier, 
those responsibilities of the security were provided by the 
state but even now, where Mr Nixon has also confirmed that 
20 
he has not found anything that is actually raised by Mr 
Agrizzi’s affidavit. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now just ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second before we proceed.  I just 
want to find out from the transcribers whether they are able 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 103 of 214 
 
to hear the witness properly with the mask on or not?   
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry?   
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  [Indistinct] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but she... I think she said she has 
some conditions.  I think she would prefer to put the mask 
on.  Is that right? 
MS MOKONYANE:  I will try and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, we have to put it on if possible. 
MS MOKONYANE:  I would prefer for the ease of the 
10 
Commission, let us proceed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Well, I just wanted to find out 
because if they can hear properly then you could keep it on, 
but if they cannot hear properly it would affect what they 
type for the transcript.   
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think we will wait.  Probably it is a long 
story.  [laughs] 
MS MOKONYANE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That they will tell me.  
20 
MS MOKONYANE:  Okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair, it is as if they are struggling to 
hear the witness with the mask on.  Even my junior says 
even her sitting there, she is struggling to hear. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 104 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:  I will continue Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright. 
MS MOKONYANE:  [Speaking vernacular] 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs]  Okay.  [Speaking vernacular]  The 
witness just said she will be... she gets sick when she gets 
home.  I am hoping she will not get sick.  [laughs]  Okay.  
Alright. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair, if we let the witness, I have got a 
[speaking vernacular]  It is very good. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] 
10 
MS MOKONYANE:  [laughs] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  We can sort it out Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs]  Okay let us continue.  She just... 
she gave an answer to Mr Agrizzi’s evidence that BOSASA 
provided the maintenance of certain security features at 
home.  You want to take it from there Mr Notshe? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  Yes Chair.  Now, Ms Mokonyane 
you... there... it is confirmed also on the minute that was 
signed by the lawyers after they visited your house that 
when one enters your yard, there is a guard house on the 
20 
left.  Is that correct? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes, it is the ...[indistinct]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And it is manned, that the guards were 
there? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 105 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And supposedly, they had to check who 
comes in... who is coming into the house there? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now, no one would be able to come to 
your house to do maintenance without going pass those 
people? 
MS MOKONYANE:  No one would do that, yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And have you ever received the report 
that there were unauthorised people who came to your house 
to do repairs like you... people who were not authorised by 
10 
your family? 
MS MOKONYANE:  I have never received a report, other 
than the people that I know that have been doing work in the 
house. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And you read the affidavit and you have 
heard the evidence of Charl le Roux? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And his file is not far from you, where he 
says, he went and identified the house where he did some 
repairs and it is your house. 
20 
MS MOKONYANE:  I do not know what he has done.  It was 
not per my instruction.  All I know is that we had requested 
them to go and help us with an alarm that was going on and 
off. 
 
And that is all that we have asked them to do per the 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 106 of 214 
 
instructions from my late husband, who, as I have said, in 
his own SMS, after the Sunday Times story, he actually said 
he is responsible personally for the services that has to do 
with the security and the maintenance of the house. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now, just one thing.  The one instance 
which you say was authorised by your husband, did your 
family pay for that? 
MS MOKONYANE:  I do not know.  As I have said.  Those 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  I am sorry.  I did not hear the 
10 
question clearly. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Oh, sorry.  The question is.  In the one 
instance where she admits that the repairs were done at the 
request of her husband.  The question is, did he... did she 
pay for... or the family paid for those repairs? 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MS MOKONYANE:  As I have stated Chairperson.  These are 
the 
responsibilities 
that 
my 
husband 
would 
take 
responsibility thereof.  As to whether he was invoiced or not, 
that remains an issue that I cannot come and substantiate 
20 
here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  H’m. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now is your evidence Ms Mokonyane, if I 
understand it, that Charl le Roux could have done work at 
your place but he was not authorised by you? 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 107 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:  He was never authorised by me Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And you did not BOSASA for work 
...[intervenes]  
MS MOKONYANE:  I ...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Sorry miss.  You did not pay BOSASA for 
work that was done by Charl le Roux.   
MS MOKONYANE:  I do not know whether they were paid or 
not paid for the intervention with regards to the fence that 
had broken.  And any other extra work, I am saying for the 
record, and also would be texted that my husband responded 
10 
to the Sunday Times, he took the responsibility of the 
upkeep and the security of the house.  Only from 2014 when 
I moved from Gauteng and became a minister. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now, did you find out from your husband 
when the report came in the newspapers about repairs at 
your house, whether he paid for those repairs? 
MS MOKONYANE:  My husband actually responded in that 
SMS to say they took him ...[indistinct] because he has taken 
responsibility.  Then that text is there.  What they did beyond 
that, I do not know.   
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now... and still your answer is that you 
did not ask him whether he paid for it or not? 
MS MOKONYANE:  No, I would not ask.  It is his 
responsibility. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I see.  Now on page 32 of the record.  
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 108 of 214 
 
That is paragraph 37.2.  You say that your... you say: 
“I never requested BOSASA ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Notshe.  Maybe let us 
approach this differently.  You know the thrust of Mr Agrizzi’s 
evidence against you is that BOSASA had in effect a special 
relationship with you or Mr Gavin Watson had a special 
relationship with you.  A special relationship, maybe is my 
phrase, not his.   
MS MOKONYANE:  H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But as I understand his evidence.  He says 
10 
you were close.  I do not know whether I can go as far 
saying you were friends but you were close.  That is yourself 
and Mr Gavin Watson.   
 
He goes on to say, BOSASA gave your presents and 
gave you money monthly as you would have heard.  And he 
says all these, from what Mr Gavin Watson told him, that is 
Mr Agrizzi, was done effectively to buy your influence 
because he says Mr Gavin Watson kept on saying to him that 
you are a very influential person both in government and in 
the ruling party.   
20 
 
And that BOSASA needed to treat you very well because 
you would provide them with protection with regard to 
investigations that were being conducted by the SIU and 
protection from prosecution, criminal prosecution.   
 
And he says that Mr Gavin Watson emphasised that you 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 109 of 214 
 
had influence with the former President, Mr Jacob Zuma.   
 
Now you have already said you never got any... received 
any presents or gifts from BOSASA personally.  And I think in 
your affidavit, you deny having received any money.   
 
And one of the things that Mr Agrizzi said in his 
evidence is that there were two occasions on which he was 
present when you were given money by Mr Gavin Watson.  
One of those occasion, he said, it was in your house.   
 
He says he had been asked by Mr Gavin Watson to 
prepare the money and put it in a bag and they left it on a 
10 
chair for you in your house.   
 
Now you have said that with regard to security issues in 
the house, you never asked BOSASA to do anything for you 
and your family.  And I think you said Mr Agrizzi has never 
been to your house.   
 
And you must tell me if I misunderstand his evidence.  
So when it comes these issues, it is important that in putting 
your side, you provide what reason you would have, how Mr 
Gavin Watson... how Mr Agrizzi would know some of the 
features in your house if he had not been there.  So I think it 
20 
is important to deal with those things. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Thank you very much, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:  In the submission that he says, I think it 
is also one of his people who was saying they met at my 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 110 of 214 
 
place and I was not there.  So they... he came to my house 
in my absence.  He has never sat with me.   
 
And as he says... he says he left money in a chair and 
yet he says he was inside a meeting.  I have never received 
any cash coming from Gavin Watson, nor also through him, 
Agrizzi, as he claims that he was once at...  That is not what 
I know and that is not what ...[indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe... and maybe Mr Notshe, you can 
just run through some of those features that are agreed as 
common course that he mentioned.  Because as you would 
10 
remember Ms Mokonyane from his affidavit, he said certain 
things in order to show that he knows the house on the 
inside.   
 
He has been to the house.  He has said certain things.  
He said, there is this, there is this.  I think one of them 
was... but he first said the guard house is to your left as you 
enter.   
 
And then I think he says there are a few steps just 
before you enter the house.  And I think he said on the right 
hand side as you enter, there is...  
20 
 
I do not know whether he said it is a lounge or it is the 
kitchen or he said it is the study.  And then he says inside 
there is a, I think, a staircase if I am not mistaken.  So let us 
deal with those so that Ms Mokonyane can just deal with 
those things and...  
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 111 of 214 
 
 
Because it is important to deal with them and see how 
he would have known about those things if they are and if 
they cannot be seen from outside.   
 
Obviously, if it is something that can be seen from the 
road, then it cannot prove that he has been inside but let us 
hear those and then Ms Mokonyane can deal with those. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair, before we get there.  Can I just 
ask one question from Ms Mokonyane? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, oaky. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Ms Mokonyane, do you deny that Mr 
10 
Agrizzi visited your home? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Mr Agrizzi never visited my home in my 
presence. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It is... that is a ...[indistinct] answer.  Are 
you saying is... you said he never visited your home but then 
you add “in my presence”.  Are you saying he could have 
visited when you were not there? 
MS MOKONYANE:  He might have actually has said in the 
statement, but I deny the fact that Agrizzi had actually been 
in my house with me in presence.  They might have left with 
20 
my husband.  They might have met with people in the house 
as they alleged but never with me.   
 
And it was on one occasion.  But also, the knowledge of 
my house Chairperson, as I have said, when you have an 
occasion like a bereavement.  You are being visited even by 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 112 of 214 
 
members of the DA in my house.   
 
I have been visited by people that I do not know.  All 
because they have come to pay respect.  And for them to 
know my house, it is some people I meet even today.  They 
tell me:  “We came.  We saw you”.  And I cannot even 
remember.   
 
But the other things that are wrong about Agrizzi’s 
accessions.  I do not have a wooden staircase.  There is no 
wooden staircase in my house, including the one that goes to 
the bedroom.  It is not a wooden staircase.   
10 
 
Also, there is a lounge, a TV lounge, a private TV lounge 
on the right as you go towards the kitchen.  And thirdly, there 
is a dining room that has been in good use from the day I 
moved into that house.   
 
So his allegations of saying it is not actually... there is 
an open space that is supposed to be a dining room that is 
not being used.  That is also a lie.   
 
The thing that he is saying about knowing the features of 
the house, maybe it is on that day when they came to come 
to look at the fence.   
20 
 
I do not know.  I was not even present on that day.  I 
have never held a meeting with Mr Agrizzi in my house.  Mr 
Agrizzi indicates that this is what he has always been told by 
Gavin Watson.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Notshe, will you proceed to look at the 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 113 of 214 
 
features that Mr Agrizzi talks about or that are agreed as 
have being identified.  But I want to ask this question.   
 
Would it be fair to think that your late husband would 
have told you, at least after hearing Mr Agrizzi giving 
evidence, if he had ever met Mr Agrizzi in your house on any 
particular occasion?   
 
Is it fair to think he would have said:  “Well, that man 
was here.  Blah-blah-blah?”  Or not really? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes, it would have been fair but the thing 
that I know as a matter of record is that he said, “They are 
10 
talking nonsense”. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:  He is responsible. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:  It was only on this occasion when there 
was a problem with the alarm ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:  That he asked.  Because our own 24/7 
electricity and security company was on call because of the 
problems of flooding and storm in Gauteng. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but on that occasion, did he say or 
anybody in the family say, Mr Agrizzi himself ...[intervenes]  
MS MOKONYANE:  No, that he ever gave me that account. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, nobody ever said then ...[intervenes]  
MS MOKONYANE:  No. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 114 of 214 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...Agrizzi came?  Mr Agrizzi came? 
MS MOKONYANE:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay and did anybody say who came 
exactly or not really? 
MS MOKONYANE:  No.  [laughs]  They would actually 
...[indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  Mr Notshe. 
ADV 
NOTSHE 
SC: 
 
Now, 
Ms 
Mokonyane 
what 
the 
10 
Commission did last week is to write to your lawyers to set 
out what features Mr Agrizzi says he observed at your home, 
seeking confirmation whether those exist or not.  And 
these... I am reading from the letter.  The letter actually is 
on the last file.  It is file 11.  The last folder 11.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, it is a very... she might not need to 
go.  You can just read it.  It is a brief letter.  You can just 
read what the letter says. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  The letter says: 
“... the evidence of Agrizzi regarding his visit, to your 
20 
client’s place at...” 
 
And then the address is given, is inter alia as follows: 
“There is a guard house to the left as one enters the 
premises.  There is a small set of stairs what is the 
main door.  It seems, to the house, is a study to the 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 115 of 214 
 
right as one enters the house through the main door.  
If one continues the entrance passage, one sees a 
staircase to the far left.  This staircase leads to what 
is presumed to be the bedrooms upstairs. 
If one could go down the passage, one would enter 
into a kitchen area.  Off the kitchen area, it is what 
seems to be like an open area that was not in use.  
That leads out to the backyard area.  And linked to 
the dining room is a large lounge area...” 
 
And then your attorneys have responded and says: 
10 
“Nevertheless...” 
 
I am just reading the pertinent part: 
“Nevertheless, in the short time I ...[indistinct] to ask, 
we have obtained instructions from our client that she 
confirms 
most 
of 
Mr 
Agrizzi’s 
contentions 
but 
disputes that the contents in relation to where the 
kitchen is and the dining room not been used in this 
regard. 
We are further instructed as follows in relation to the 
features of your home.  Before you reach the kitchen 
20 
area, you pass the room that is used as a private 
lounge on your right and a dining room and is in 
use...” 
 
So it seems as if your lawyer is saying you agree with 
most of the features except the ones you have pointed out. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 116 of 214 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you answer Ms Mokonyane.  I am 
just wondering whether it is not better to take each feature 
one by one, so she is able to say that... because they say 
most.  So I do not know which ones or which ones fall out.  
They specifically mentioned some, I think two, where there is 
a problem. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Mokonyane, would you prefer to answer 
now or would you prefer that Mr Notshe mentions them one 
by one so you can be clear exactly which ones you say 
10 
...[intervenes]  
MS MOKONYANE:  I can respond even now Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MOKONYANE:  With your permission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Firstly, from the Google Maps that Mr 
Agrizzi downloaded, it is a given.  You will see where the 
guard house is because it is there and it is a guard house.  It 
is a brick and ...[indistinct]  
 
And correctly so.  There are a few steps that you take as 
20 
to go into... not what seems to be.  What is the main 
entrance and immediately there is a study.  
 
And immediately on your opposite side of the study on 
your left, not as you go further through the passage, there is 
a staircase.  Not a wooden staircase.  A tiled staircase. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 117 of 214 
 
 
Because of my health, I cannot actually live with any 
carpet or even wooden floor.  There is a staircase that takes 
you to the bedrooms.  That is immediately there. 
 
And you then immediately turn right.  That is when then 
you first go pass a private lounge and immediately on your 
other side, you then have the kitchen. 
 
And in front of you, you would not have to look for it, you 
will see then the dining room because it is an open plan.  So 
nothing is hidden there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Notshe, have you been able to see 
10 
which ones are... she is not admitting as being there? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Ms Mokonyane, as I am sure you read 
the letter? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  There is no mention of the wooden stairs 
in the letter. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  It might be in the affidavit. 
MS MOKONYANE:  In the affidavit ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
MS MOKONYANE:  ... that we have got and that we worked 
even overnight on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  It might be in the affidavit. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now, the... and is it correct that if one 
comes down... I am reading on paragraph 2.5 of the letter.  It 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 118 of 214 
 
says: 
“If one continues down the passage, one will enter 
into a kitchen...” 
 
Is that correct? 
MS MOKONYANE:  If you continue? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:  You do not even enter.  Because it is an 
open plan, you just reach the kitchen and across you see 
there is also a dining room on... in front of the kitchen. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And he says off the kitchen area there is 
10 
what seems to be like an open dining area.  And he said that 
was not in use that leads out to the backyard area. 
MS MOKONYANE:  My dining area... there is... we do not 
have any other dining room except that dining room and that 
has been there from the day we occupied that space and we 
have lived there.  Everyone can attest to it.  That is what I 
am disputing from Mr Agrizzi.  I have no unutilised space in 
the house.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And then ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you say, does it lead to outside, I 
20 
thought you were reading …[intervenes] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, it says off the kitchen there is 
what looks like an open dining room area, dining area, that 
leads out to the back yard, the back yard area. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that part correct? 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 119 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:   We have two exits, one to the front 
and one to the back and when we have functions, we 
actually open all of them so that people can move easily. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And the lastly, linked to the dining 
room is a large lounge area.   
MS MOKONYANE:   There is a lounge. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And is it where he exactly says it is 
…[intervenes] 
MS 
MOKONYANE: 
 
 
Linked 
to 
the 
– 
like 
I 
said, 
10 
Chairperson, it is an open plan, the kitchen, the dining 
room and the lounge but he also forgot to say there is a 
bar. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  And it is in your face as you walk 
because you walk past the private lounge and on your 
other side immediately it is just maybe two, three moves 
then it is the kitchen and as you come right from the 
entrance after you have turned away from the study you 
see a dark brown wooden bar, it has glasses, it has a – it 
is in your – it is like a mirror, you see it, it is unavoidable 
20 
not to see. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   You will agree with me that the 
features that are mentioned by Mr Agrizzi.  Let us leave 
the guardhouse for the moment and the stairs.  The 
features inside the house, they are features that have been 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 120 of 214 
 
observed by someone who was inside the house. 
MS MOKONYANE:   They would have been observed but 
not as accurately- but not as inaccurate as he is putting 
there.  I think he might have been told and hence he has 
forgotten what could just immediately come into your mind 
about the  Mokonyane’s house that there is a bar as you 
come in there, a small family bar and you walk across and 
you pass the private lounge and then you get into the 
kitchen on the other side and just there it is an open plan 
kind of a situation.  So I find very absurd that he would not 
10 
even recognise that one unless somebody has told him and 
they forgot to give him the position. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, even if he had been there, he 
might have forgotten that part or forgotten some features, 
is it not? 
MS MOKONYANE:   He has never been in that house with 
[indistinct – dropping voice] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I accept that you are saying he – I 
accept that your version is that he has never been to the 
house. 
20 
MS 
MOKONYANE: 
 
 
Mr 
Agrizzi 
has 
amended 
his 
submissions, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:   So many a time and surely if he wants 
to prove the probability that he alleges, yes, surely be that 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 121 of 214 
 
things that he will not even forget.  Anyone who you can 
ask, like I am saying even leaders of the Democratic 
Alliance, leaders of the IFP, leaders of the EFF, people that 
have come to that house, they will tell you that right in 
front of you – even during bereavements, Chairperson, we 
do not remove that dining room.  In fact, it gets used as an 
alter.  I am very Catholic.  So that dining room operates as 
a little alter when there is a bereavement.  When there is 
no bereavement that is the table that we all spend time 
because we are all busy people.  That is – we call it our 
10 
place of convergence where we all come together.  So I do 
not know if he had forgotten to see tables and chairs. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you said that when there are 
functions in the house and when there is a bereavement or 
a party people will come and you open both ends for 
people to move in and out.  
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I take it that you are not suggesting that 
Mr Agrizzi might have been to your house during one of 
those occasions but what you are saying is that he must 
20 
have got this information from somebody else about the 
features of your house, is that correct? 
MS MOKONYANE:   He might have gotten this explanation 
from somebody who has been in the house and that is my 
assertion. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 122 of 214 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Of he does not know the house at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Because, of course, if he was ever 
there in the house when there was some – there were many 
people, he is not the kind of person that you would miss, 
you would see him, there is no way you would not see him. 
MS MOKONYANE:   I would not miss if he would have 
joined us when we have mass.  You know, when you have a 
bereavement you then come then [African language] there 
is a prayer service and you come downstairs but most of 
10 
the time when there is a bereavement and when it is a 
bereavement in my house I am the chief mourner, I spend 
most of the time upstairs and with the loss of my son, 
Chairperson, I want to tell you, it was not an easy thing for 
me to accept.  I could not deal with it.  I was confined in 
bed.  I was under medical treatment and people came in 
numbers.  By the time I went to son in Botswana and 
confirm with his identity before he was taken the mortuary, 
I arrived when the house was full.  I cannot tell you, I 
cannot tell you who the white person who was there and 
20 
the black person who was there and all those kinds of 
things, I lived for the better part of that period being 
sedated.  I had to deal with the insides and all those things 
but just the people who come, I cannot really remember.  
Others still remind me today that we were with you and that 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 123 of 214 
 
is me with the issues of grieving(?) because the other time 
that opens any African home is when [African language] 
and the other time it is when you host [African language] 
and my [African language]  I will not invite Agrizzi, not 
mphahlele mpanza and all those things, I will not invite 
Agrizzi, I will not even invite Gavin because it has to do 
with me and my family and my interpersonal and that is 
what will happen.  When I entertain, I do entertain, I 
entertain my friends, not even Gavin has been entertained 
in my house because we do not relate at that level because 
10 
that is – I have never had a relationship where I will party 
with Gavin and stuff.  When I met with Gavin we will just 
relating about politics.  He was very passionate and very 
outspoken about politics and all those things.  And the 
other thing that will be - his own contributions will be us 
reminiscing about our past and all those kind of things or 
all of us working for the ANC and implementing the 
mandate of the African National Congress. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I guess you would agree with me 
that if he has never been to your house and he had to go 
20 
and look for somebody who knew your house inside then it 
means he really went to great lengths to try and get 
something which would create the impression that he has 
been to the house when in fact he has not been to the 
house.  Now the question that arises for me – and I am the 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 124 of 214 
 
one who must ultimately decide, make a finding which of 
these versions is true.  What arises is, why would he go to 
these lengths to do this to you?  It is important that you 
address that because I have no doubt that if he or his 
lawyers, as an argument, they might say why would he 
have gone to all of these lengths, why would he want to 
punish you, put you in a bad light and go and look for 
people who must – who know your house and say please 
tell me what are the features that one can find in the 
house? 
10 
MS MOKONYANE:   Thank you, Chair.  I think the extent of 
the desperate acts of Mr Agrizzi goes beyond just the 
description of the house.  The very fact that he thinks for a 
movement as old as the ANC, 108 years old, can actually 
be dependent on a Nomvula for it to remain a popular 
organisation that has – and being a leader of society 
smacks of his ignorance and naivety.  
 
Secondly, I just think whatever that has happened 
between him and Gavin, he is at pains to really not only 
tarnish Gavin but look for people who at that particular 
20 
time and even now their names have been tarnished both 
in the media as well as the perceptions that have been 
branded about them.  He himself has not actually denied 
the fact that he hates black people, he himself he has not 
denied 
the 
fact 
that 
he 
has 
complained 
about 
the 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 125 of 214 
 
relationship I have with Gavin.  He has actually put it on 
record.  Only him can indicate that I really think that Gavin 
trusted somebody who was never committed to actually 
being what he, Gavin, and the Watson family and all other 
people, not only Gavin, even other people who worked for 
BOSASA that actually were doing for the African National 
Congress like it has happened with other businesses.  Only 
him can explain but I do believe that he has a mission and 
his mission, as you can see, is going to an extent of saying 
I have influence.  It is like I am in charge of leaders of the 
10 
African National Congress and President.  I think that is 
also wrong and now the act of desperation pushes him to 
not even say – I wish he could have said I have gone to 
Nomvula’s bedroom and I found her lying on the mattress 
and that is where we agreed to sign off and do all the 
burials and everything.  Because that is where the decision 
of me and my family.  Like you know, Chairperson, [African 
language]  for in your home there are moments where the 
family comes together and [African language] and did all 
those things.  That is where issues are discussed, he does 
20 
not say in all those things about the things that he is 
saying that I met Nomvula or I met such Mokonyane and I 
was told that I must do this and this and that.  He says he 
was 
instructed 
by 
Gavin 
and 
I 
definitely 
can 
say, 
Chairperson, Gavin never bought a coffin for my child.  
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 126 of 214 
 
Gavin never paid for burial for my child. BOSASA never 
buried my child.   
 
He even goes to an extent – I think this desperation 
just irritates me.  Irritates me and hurts me so bad that – 
he even goes to an extent of confusing my two son, 
Retlabusa.  Africa, the eldest and Retlabusa.  And leave 
the aside the description of the house.  That is that.  So he 
does not even know their names yet in every other thing he 
is able to drop the names, Nomvula Mokonyane’s son and 
that is how my kids have gone through in this country, they 
10 
are 
all 
associated 
– 
they 
are 
all 
Nomvula’s 
son, 
Mokonyane’s son.  Now it is Mokonyane’s daughter and I 
think my own issue is, Agrizzi with how is has come into 
the Commission and how he is conducting himself and how 
he had also provided information, it is up to him to say 
what exactly is the motive and why has he handpicked 
those that he had handpicked?  Chair, just a simple thing.   
I have never been in any department that deals with 
the 
procurement 
of 
that 
department 
with 
BOSASA.  
Chairperson, I am not sure if the SIU and everybody had 
20 
stopped the investigations, I do not know, so I really do not 
– I [African language] I really do not know why but I think 
the man is full of hatred and there was a situation between 
him and Gavin and as I have said, that man tell those 
stories that really, really, I am saying Chair, you can go to 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 127 of 214 
 
my 
house 
immediately, 
once 
you 
pass 
the 
study, 
immediately you have the staircase and in your face, 
before you even see there is a kitchen you see the bar.  
You see the dining room.  You only realise once you have 
moved into the open space that there is a kitchen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Mr Notshe? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Ms Mokonyane, you confirmed that 
your house has got high walls, the perimeters of the 
premises is made of high walls. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, it is, as it was also shown by 
10 
Agrizzi on the Google Map. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  And I am sure one cannot be 
able to see the guardhouse outside the premises, one has 
to enter the premises. 
MS MOKONYANE:   No, you can see the roof even from 
outside and also through a Google Map you can see. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And one would not be able to see that 
the roof, that the roof of a guardhouse, one may just see 
the roof. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Come again? 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   One may just see the roof but would 
not know whether it is the roof of another building or a 
guardhouse, one has to open and enter the premises to 
see that it is a guardhouse. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, we have to open and enter but 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 128 of 214 
 
knowing that that has been a house of an MEC and a 
Premier, goes with logic. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now also the stairs that lead to the 
main house cannot be seen from outside, one has to enter 
the yard to see those stairs. 
MS MOKONYANE:   You can also when you Google – you 
do an aerial photography, you can see those stairs and 
yes, also when you enter, that is the main entrance. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   When you say that you can see the 
stairs leading to the main house to Google photography, 
10 
are you saying that is what Agrizzi did? 
MS MOKONYANE:   I do believe.  I do not understand what 
led him to actually downloading Google Maps.  I am saying 
yes, it is easy to find out that way and you can also be told 
by anybody else and you can also see it once you inside 
the yard. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now you also say in your answer in 
paragraph 37.2 and page 32 that your primary security was 
provided by the state and you say: 
“This included, as far as I was concerned, the 
20 
provision of close circuit television.” 
As you saying the primary security at your house, your 
private home, was done by the state? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now the – you say the affidavit of Mr 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 129 of 214 
 
Alan Nixon that he asked the state for details of this.  The 
state never confirmed that they put security at your place. 
MS MOKONYANE:   The state was responsible for my 
security and what had happened. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now when you saw …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I think it is important to 
clarify.  In one part of your affidavit you said the stage was 
responsible or you were entitled to being provided with 
primary security by the state and then here you say 
primary security was provided by the state so that is 
10 
separate from being entitled because you can be entitled 
and they do not provide.  So you are saying as a matter of 
fact the state did provide what you referred to as primary 
security, is that right? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, including the security guards that 
were provided as they sit here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I want to come to that to say what 
do you – what falls under primary security, what are you 
covering when you say my primary security was provided 
by the state.  Exactly who, is that the protectors only or is 
20 
there something else as well.  I just want to …[intervenes] 
MS MOKONYANE:   The state also provided a guardhouse. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Guardhouse. 
MS MOKONYANE:   The state also provided the burglars 
and the security in terms of cameras. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 130 of 214 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so the CCTV cameras? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the guardhouse. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I assume …[intervenes] 
MS MOKONYANE:   And the 24 hour guarding. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, the personnel in the guardhouse. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, it was the South African Police 
10 
Service. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. Mr Notshe? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now when you answered – when you 
were preparing this affidavit you had already heard and 
seen the affidavit of Agrizzi where he says the CCTVs were 
provided by BOSASA, right?  You had seen – where you 
were answering this… 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   You had seen Agrizzi saying these 
were provided by BOSASA, am I right? 
20 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now did you ask the state and say 
please show – give me the receipts or show me – confirm 
that you did provide.  Someone is saying here that they 
provided CCTVs for my house, I know it was provided by 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 131 of 214 
 
you, the state, please confirm this? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Chairperson, even the decision of 
having a protector you do not get any explanation from the 
state. 
Even 
when 
the 
state 
out 
of 
their 
own 
risk 
assessment resolves that I must not spent time in whatever 
because of the security issues, I must actually move to 
Bryanston.  I took time to move that official residence until 
I was forced by the South African Police Service VIP 
Protection that I have to move to that place because of 
their own concerns and they will never even explain to you, 
10 
you just see those things.   
So the state, I would never – and  think I took it as 
a matter of fact that everybody knows how the State deals 
with these issues and I have seen also Mr Nixon confirming 
that he had checked all those issues with the state.  It is 
up to Agrizzi himself to prove why he actually is misleading 
this house. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you mentioned Mr Nixon, I thought I 
would come back to that because earlier you did make 
reference to him having confirmed something and I did not 
20 
hear what it was.  So what is it that, on your reading of his 
affidavit, he has confirmed? 
MS MOKONYANE:   That the CCTV cameras could not be 
associated with those that say Agrizzi or whoever have 
come to the Commission to …[intervenes] 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 132 of 214 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would not be? 
MS MOKONYANE:   That he confirmed that the security in 
the house is not the same at that that is being alleged to 
have been bought, I do not know in what company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, is not the same as the security or 
CCTV cameras that Mr Agrizzi talked about? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MS MOKONYANE:   And all other issues that are in the 
affidavit by the gentleman. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well if you want to go to the 
affidavit feel free to do so but otherwise Mr Notshe might 
assist to find it. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   The affidavit is just on page 148. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Mr Notshe, if you know exactly 
whereabouts? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, on page – Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes? 
MS MOKONYANE:   On page 158. 
CHAIRPERSON:   158, yes.  Do you want to read the 
20 
relevant part, Ms Mokonyane? 
MS 
MOKONYANE:   Thank you, Chairperson.  The 
conclusions on paragraph 35 reads as follows: 
“The 
date 
of 
deposing 
to 
this 
affidavit, 
our 
investigations have not found any evidence that the 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 133 of 214 
 
purchases of CCTV security equipment from Regal 
Security and made on the Angelo Agrizzi cash 
account can be matched to the security installations 
done 
at 
Ms 
Mokonyane’s 
private 
residence 
in 
Krugersdorp.” 
And 34.2: 
“Ms Mokonyane received and security installations 
at her private residence as a consequence of the 
position that she held as the MEC of Gauteng, the 
Premier of Gauteng, or as the Minister of Water and 
10 
Sanitation.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I understand that to mean the 
following 
and 
I 
want 
you 
to 
confirm 
whether 
my 
understanding and your understanding is, you know, are 
the same.  I understand Mr Nixon to be saying as at the 
date of deposing to this affidavit his investigations have 
not found any evidence that the CCTV security equipment 
from Regal Security, which was made on Mr Agrizzi’s cash 
account, 
can 
be 
matched 
or 
matches 
the 
security 
installations at your residence.  That is the first point I 
20 
think he is making.  I think we agree on that one. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that right? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And secondly, I understand him to 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 134 of 214 
 
say his investigations have also not found any evidence 
that the security installations at your residence were 
security installations that you got as a result of the 
positions you held as MEC Gauteng Housing, Premier of 
Gauteng or Minister of Water and Sanitation.  Is our 
understanding on both points the same? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Okay, fine. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you.  Mr Notshe? 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   So just on this, just on this, you see 
that the state did not confirm that they did install the 
security equipment at your house. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Come again? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   On this paragraph, paragraph 34.2. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   The state did not confirm, did not 
confirm that the security TVs at your house were installed 
by it, by the state.  Did not confirm that. 
MS MOKONYANE:   That is what is says [indistinct – 
20 
dropping voice] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  So the state has not confirmed 
that they put the CCTVs at your house. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now it takes me back to my earlier 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 135 of 214 
 
question, the clarification I just seek from you, you had – 
you read Mr Agrizzi saying the CCTVs were installed by 
BOSASA and you say those CCTVs were installed by the 
state. 
MS MOKONYANE:   All security features in my house were 
installed by the state and every other further security 
feature, that was my husband [indistinct – dropping voice] 
post my departure from Gauteng.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:   No, all I am saying is, you heard Mr 
Agrizzi’s affidavit in that the CCTVs and security around 
10 
your house were installed by BOSASA. 
MS MOKONYANE:   And I am saying …[intervenes] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And you are saying no, they were 
installed by the state.  Did you find out from the state and 
ask them to confirm that these were installed by them? 
MS MOKONYANE:   I have not gone to the state because I 
have read Mr Agrizzi’s statement and I have also had the 
confirmation from my husband that he took responsibility 
and we do have a 24/7 security company that does all the 
maintenance and everything that is related to our security, 
20 
even as we speak today. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Sorry, Ms Mokonyane, did you go to 
the state despite the serious allegations made against you 
that the CCTVs and security equipment was installed by a 
private person at your house and you are saying they were 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 136 of 214 
 
installed by the state? 
MS MOKONYANE:   I never …[intervenes] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Sorry, sorry, I did not mean to speak 
over you.  Was it not easy for you to ask the state to say 
you installed this please, in an affidavit or confirm that 
these were installed by the state and not by BOSASA? 
MS MOKONYANE:   No, I have never done that precisely 
because I have never found it being my responsibility to go 
back to the state and go and find out what they have done.  
The guardhouse, for example, that is in my house, we had 
10 
to build after the state’s guardhouse had actually collapsed 
and it was post my being the Premier and moving into 
National Government because National Government does 
not actually provide security in your private residence and 
that is what we did.  So I never went back to the state for 
the purposes of the security. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And, of course, Ms Mokonyane, as you 
know this enquiry is an ongoing inquiry, you will obtain 
confirmation from the state that this was done by them and 
provide the Commission with that. 
20 
MS MOKONYANE:   Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:   If I am requested to get information 
from the state other than what Mr Nixon has obtained then 
I would have gone back to the state and they will have to 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 137 of 214 
 
give it to me. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   So, fine, Ms Mokonyane, do not 
misunderstand me, I am sure perhaps you might be 
misunderstanding Mr Nixon’s affidavit.  He does not say he 
obtained confirmation, he did not obtain confirmation. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, I would have to go and check with 
the state if I am requested to.  But also, if it is up to the 
Commission itself also, to call the state and let the state 
come and explain itself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  No, no, no, the Commission 
10 
has the obligation to investigate that but obviously you 
can, as you have been doing, give whatever cooperation to 
facilitate in terms of maybe who the right people are to talk 
to if that is information that you know but the Commission 
will continue to investigate and if they need to ask you for 
assistance, they will ask you. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I am confident that you will 
…[intervenes] 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes.  And I can also assist the 
20 
Commission by giving you a security company that is 
responsible for our own close monitoring. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:   For our firm. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 138 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:   For our own other extra security 
feature in the house. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, please do that. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Okay, I will through my lawyer 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would that be – would the company that 
is there now, the security company be the same one that 
would have been there that time or is it one that was 
contracted recently? 
MS MOKONYANE:   No, the company that does security 
10 
services in terms of guard of the house is different 
because those are the people who are dealing with static, 
the company that deals with electrical and close circuit 
monitoring and stuff, it’s a different company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that’s fine, so do provide that 
information then the Commission can look into that, yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now the – you then proceed to deal 
with paragraphs 26 and 27, that is now, I’m looking at page 
32 of the affidavit.  Dealing with paragraphs 22 and 26, 
this is about the analysis, the report that Agrizzi says you 
20 
sought for securities at hospitals and…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry Mr Notshe shouldn’t we 
complete the aspect that relates to what Mr Agrizzi and 
what Mr Richard le Roux and Mr Charl le Roux say in terms 
of what they say was provided to – the services that they 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 139 of 214 
 
say were provided to the – Ms Mokonyane’s home because 
it’s all connected, you have got Mr van Biljon deposing to 
an affidavit, dealing with that, you have got Mr Charl le 
Roux saying certain things about his visits to the house 
inside and – so we can finish that part and that’s an 
important part, to rather re-visit it with each affidavit. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, I left it because the way I 
understand 
the 
evidence 
of 
Mr 
Mokonyane 
is 
that, 
whatever was put there, it was not put at her request, the 
only incident that was requested was when there was a 
10 
problem with the security fence and therefore she denies 
all that the witness is saying was put. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no I think we must deal with it 
nevertheless. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No, that’s fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let’s go to is, I won’t necessarily go to 
the affidavits.  Ms Mokonyane Mr Richard le Roux, he was 
from BOSASA or rather let me start by saying, Mr Agrizzi 
says in one of his affidavits that Mr Gavin Watson 
instructed him that he should put together a team that 
20 
would, effectively, I think look after you in terms of 
maintenance of certain features in the house, security 
features and other things in the house and Mr Agrizzi says, 
Mr Richard le Roux from BOSASA was the leader of that 
team and he says – and Mr Richard le Roux, in his affidavit 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 140 of 214 
 
also says, they contracted another company to provide 
services, maintenance and other services to your home and 
a certain Mr van Biljon, I’m sure you’ve seen his affidavit 
as well, who now lives in New Zealand if I’m not mistaken 
explains in his affidavit how he got connected with 
BOSASA and he says he did some work at Mr Agrizzi’s 
house and he was connected to Mr Richard le Roux and his 
company did some work over a certain period of time in 
your residence and he says, initially he didn’t know whose 
house it was because he says he had been told not to ask 
10 
questions about whose house it was because he says he 
had been told not to ask questions about whose house this 
is and he says but he remembers the house, I think, quite 
well, he mentioned certain features and the work that was 
done there.   
Mr van Biljon who was contacted by the Commission 
where he is, I think in New Zealand, through investigation, 
puts up even invoices that he says he has been able to 
find relating to, I can’t remember whether it’s only those 
relating to your house or also to other houses that he did 
20 
at the time.  He says, here are the invoices that relate to 
that address and he – the invoices indicate the work that 
he says his company did and they showed the amount that 
they were going to charge it’s quite a few invoices there, 
they are all here and then – that’s Mr van Biljon and he 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 141 of 214 
 
says he went to your house, it must be about, I think he 
says about ten times, over a certain period of time.  Mr 
Charl le Roux who gave evidence here a few weeks ago, 
says, Mr van Biljon I think, is his cousin or nephew he 
worked for him or under him, so he says Mr van Biljon 
would send him to a number of houses, he mentions other 
houses as well but included in the – among the houses, is 
your house and he specifies what he did on some of the 
occasions there. 
 
So, the question that arises for me is, whether you 
10 
would say that these people must have done the work that 
they did in the house but, one without your knowledge or 
instruction, authorisation or you say it’s all fabrication they 
could not have done that work in your house without you 
knowing about it, what do you say? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Thank you very much Chairperson.  
Once more I want to state that issues of the security and 
the maintenance of the house have continuously been a 
responsibility of the father of the house also, there has 
been security companies that were sourced to provide 
20 
these kind of services including the maintenance, the 
maintenance of our own yard.  First, it’s a company then 
you’ve got people who are doing part-time who came from 
that very company that was doing house maintenance.  I’ve 
never instructed or actually requested anything to be done 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 142 of 214 
 
by BOSASA on my behalf not even on the issue of the 
alarm because I could not be reached at that time, I think I 
was at Lagodla or wherever but I’ve never asked nor have I 
actually, been told by BOSASA the extent of the work that 
they have done in my yard. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would it be fair to say that if you late 
husband had obtained the services of BOSASA, other than, 
maybe that one occasion to come and provide maintenance 
services in the house or to install any security features 
that there’s no way he would not have told you because he 
10 
would have known that you are close to Mr Gavin Watson 
who was the CEO of BOSASA? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Including himself, he also knows Gavin 
Watson, he knows the Watson family. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so there’s no way he would not 
have shared that with you? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so I’m trying…[intervenes]. 
MS MOKONYANE:   And on record when the Sunday Times 
issued 
that 
statement 
and 
there 
were 
enquiries, 
he 
20 
responded in a text message, that is available to say, he is 
responsible, he is the one who has appointed people that 
have 
been 
doing 
work 
except 
for 
that 
particular 
intervention that we had asked them to do because of the 
challenges of the storm and the alarm that was actually 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 143 of 214 
 
going on and off in the house. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Of 
course, 
what 
both, 
Mr 
van 
Biljon…[intervenes]. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Mr van Biljon. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It’s a difficult surname to pronounce. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Van Biljon yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, both Mr van Biljon and – not both 
actually Mr van Biljon, Mr Charl le Roux and Mr Richard le 
Roux, they all say that payment for the services that were 
provided by this company of Mr van Biljon, those services 
10 
were paid for by BOSASA.  Now I guess that you won’t be 
in a position to say whether BOSASA paid that company or 
not because you were not part of any arrangement. 
MS MOKONYANE:   We were not part of that arrangement 
except the call that, please come and help us because 
everybody was out in the area making interventions 
because of the storm, so I wouldn’t. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes and I think you – from what you 
say it’s difficult to think that your husband would have 
arranged a company to come and do work, a company that 
20 
was associated with BOSASA and he would not share that 
with you? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, it’s not a company that is 
associated with BOSASA that has been doing work in the 
house. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 144 of 214 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   No what I mean is if, what Mr Charl le 
Roux says and if what Mr van Biljon says is factually true, 
namely, they did come to your house on the occasions that 
they 
came, 
without 
your 
knowledge, 
they 
did 
the 
maintenance work that they say they did and if, indeed, 
they installed any security features, I’m saying that there 
seems to be very little chance that they would have been 
asked by your late husband to come and do that if your 
husband would not mention that to you and they are 
connected with BOSASA, if they are connected with 
10 
BOSASA and if he knew that. 
MS MOKONYANE:   I would have known but for now I don’t 
know what you are talking about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, so as things stand your 
position is, you don’t know of any arrangement in terms of 
which Mr van Biljon’s company may have come to the 
house to perform any maintenance work, you did not ask 
them, you did not authorise them, you husband never told 
you that he had anything to do with such a company but he 
was responsible for security matters in the house, is that 
20 
right? 
MS MOKONYANE:   It is right Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes okay, Mr Notshe? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And just on that finishing off, it 
seemed as if you cannot dispute that van Biljon’s company 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 145 of 214 
 
did the work at your place, you don’t know all you can say, 
I don’t know whether they did it or not? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Van Biljon was never asked, by us to 
come and do work, nor have we ever been told that van 
Biljon has come to do work because, amongst other things, 
for the record Chair, we had a company called Mafuta 
which is a company that was doing gardening services for 
my house, they’ve even gone to an extent where, after 
burying my own son, they actually went and helped us to 
stack the grave site and actually put stones and everything 
10 
until the grave actually goes down.  After that we then got 
one of their employees, because the company was battling, 
who came in and was actually doing work in the yard and 
as we speak now, we now even have another person who’s 
doing the part-time, so those are the ones that I can affirm. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   The reason I’m raising this, is that, Mr 
Charl le Roux gave evidence, one of the issues is one 
description of the house outside and the features that were 
there, which he went and pointed out, can you dispute that 
he has been to your house? 
20 
MS MOKONYANE:   I cannot dispute nor challenge whether 
he has been in the house but he has never been in the 
house to do things on my instruction or in my knowledge. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And also, just to deal with the issue 
you 
raised 
about 
Mr 
Alan 
Nixon, 
remember 
the 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 146 of 214 
 
investigator? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   There’s an affidavit of Mr Richard le 
Roux, remember Mr Richard le Roux is the BOSASA 
person…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let’s go to that affidavit what page is it? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Of Richard Le Roux is the other. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now, the – actually the …[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Actually, I wonder whether – I see that 
the first one here is that of Richard le Roux, can we 
quickly see whether there is anything to raise there, on 
that one? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Richard le Roux? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, well Ms Mokonyane I don’t know if 
you’ve been able to find, not the one for Charl le Roux but 
the one for Richard le Roux? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You have found it? 
20 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay it starts on page 1 – on this 
Bundle, Mr Notshe we haven’t said what Bundle it is. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair it’s – this should be Bundle C. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay so we call it Bundle C, that’s the 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 147 of 214 
 
Bundle that’s got Mr Richard le Roux’s affidavit, you know 
on page four of that affidavit, paragraph 18 Mr Richard le 
Roux says, 
“As part of this maintenance I used sub-contractors 
such as Renier van Biljon and a person that worked 
with him by the name of Charl le Roux to perform 
some 
of 
the 
work 
and 
Nomvula 
Mokonyane’s 
residence.  This was mainly in respect of the 
lighting, electrics, the swimming pool BB, the 
pond’s electrical work, the generator and the air 
10 
conditioners. 
 
It 
is 
likely 
that 
Mr 
van 
Biljon 
purchased the equipment himself and then invoiced 
BOSASA. These invoices were then, mostly, paid in 
cash”, 
 
That is in paragraph 18 and then he says at 19, 
 
“In relation to the maintenance at the Blouberg  
premises I also dealt with Ms Nomvula Mokonyane’s 
personal assistant, Ms Sandy Thomas who would 
arrange for certain repairs and maintenance to be 
performed when needed and in 20 he refers to a 
20 
message, in this regard I attach hereto a copy of a 
WhatsApp message sent to me on 1 June 2017 by 
Ms Sandy Thomas which states, dear Richard, 
there’s a problem at the house with the alarm 
system, for some reason it keeps ringing so now it 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 148 of 214 
 
has to be switched off at the switch, please let me 
know what to do”, 
 
So, I thought I might read this but the gist of it is 
something that I have put to you that Richard le Roux was 
employed by BOSASA and he says he used Mr van Biljon’s 
company and he refers to Mr Charl le Roux as well for 
purposes of performing some of the work, which he says, 
they performed on behalf of BOSASA.  You might need to 
say something or you might say, the response you gave 
earlier on stands. 
10 
MS MOKONYANE:   Chairperson the response I have given 
earlier still stands and hence even in his response he 
doesn’t elaborate on anything, further than saying, the 
alarm is sorted out. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, now I just want to also 
understand something, Mr Notshe referred, earlier on, I 
think it was before lunch to a message from Ms Sandy 
Thomas, your PA to Richard le Roux, this is the same 
Richard le Roux I believe and you said something about it.  
I seem to think you said there had been a storm of flooding 
20 
or something like that, did I understand you correctly? 
MS MOKONYANE:   This is the message Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This is the message? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 149 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:   When the alarm was going on and off 
because there was a tree that had fallen on the fence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:   And then the second one is that, that 
Mr Agrizzi was talking about, about the email about the 
ANC election, which I have also not denied and said it 
does not show anything about me having asked favours 
from them, it was again, in the operation of the work that 
has been done and that was it and for the record he was 
not even talking to me directly, I use my personal assistant 
10 
like 
people 
will 
know 
being 
a 
busy 
person 
then 
communication, 
including 
the 
personal 
assistant’s 
responsibility is to render service to the family of the 
Executive. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay, thank you, Mr Notshe you may 
proceed. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Just from there, Chair…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But before you go to Mr Charl le Roux, I 
think I have something on Mr van Biljon, I just want to refer 
to some of the matters he deals with.  On what page is his 
20 
affidavit. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Mr van Biljon is that file. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it a different Bundle? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, it’s Bundle A, Mr van Biljon will 
be Bundle AT14. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 150 of 214 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you started with Bundle B, earlier 
on. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I thought you said that was because 
in other proceedings Bundle A had been identified. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes, this is the Bundle A…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This is the same Bundle A? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   This is the Bundle, remember, Chair, 
you’ll see there it was when they gave – Charl le Roux 
gave evidence. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes – oh he’s the one? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   He’s the one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And then remember in it they had been 
put under 13 and then you gave direction that they should 
be broken up, the affidavits, into different T’s.  So, Mr 
Renier van Biljon is T14. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it T14? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   T14 yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, have you found it Ms Mokonyane, 
20 
yes thank you. I think that Mr van Biljon says that he’s a 
qualified electrician and during 2015 he got a call-out on a 
Saturday at Mr Agrizzi’s house, that’s how he made contact 
with Mr Agrizzi and he, ultimately, met Mr le Roux and he 
says, in paragraph six, 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 151 of 214 
 
“To my knowledge I was doing the work for BOSASA 
as a sub-contractor and the usual manner in which 
we operated was as follows:  Mr le Roux would 
inform me of an address where services were to be 
provided and I’d meet him on site.  6.2 I would 
evaluate the work to be done and then go to 
BOSASA 
for 
this 
work 
stipulating 
the 
items 
required, such as CCTV fittings and the like.  6.3 I 
would not stipulate the residential address on the 
quotation but would simply refer to BOSASA on the 
10 
quotation for example if the pumps for water 
features had to be changed at a residence the 
heading on the quotation would merely state, “water 
feature pump”.  6.4 As a freelance electrician I 
subcontracted and it was normal for me to quote by 
simply placing “water pump replace” as the wording 
on the quote and invoice, these were never high-
value jobs.  6.5 In certain instances I would 
purchase spares or equipment in order to effect the 
repairs and in other instances BOSASA would 
20 
purchase the items and provide these to me, I 
would then commence with the work and invoice 
BOSASA after completion.  He says, all of the 
quotations and invoices were made out to either 
BOSASA or cash and/or Richard.  6.7 There was 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 152 of 214 
 
normally no mention of the address where the work 
was provided on the quotation or invoice.   
I recall this as I had to redo certain quotations and 
invoices making sure that there was no mention of 
the address.  These instructions were given to me 
by Mr le Roux, I would email the quotations and 
invoices to Mr le Roux who would then arrange for 
payment 
into 
my 
account, 
and 
then 
here’s 
a 
heading, worked performed at Minister Mokonyane’s 
residence.  I recall that I performed work at house 
10 
number, he gives the address, the Commission’s 
investigation 
team 
has 
provided 
me 
with 
photographs 
of 
her 
house 
which 
depicts 
the 
entrance and outside of her house attached hereto 
as Annexure RVB1.  I confirm that this is the house 
situated 
at, 
he 
gives 
the 
address, 
where 
I 
performed the work and then later on, he says, 
below, that is 14, below is the list of some of the 
things I recall doing at the house.  14.1 repaired 
and re-programmed the generator changeover.  14.2 
20 
replaced the distribution board for the swimming 
pool, replaced the outside stair lights leading to the 
house, repaired the electric fence, called out to 
repair the air-conditioning system one night, called 
out to repair the generator one night, replaced and 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 153 of 214 
 
rewired some of the water features.   He says that, I 
would estimate that I went to the Blouberg site to 
perform work there on approximately ten occasions.    
Then he says at 16.1 I’ve searched for and located 
certain 
quotations 
and 
invoices 
for 
the 
work 
performed at, and he gives the address, and have 
managed to locate the following, 
And then he has got dates there and the invoice 
numbers one of which is on the 9 t h of October 2014 
he says, he inspected generator alternator, then on 
10 
the 15 t h of October 2015 he says, generator has 
been tested and is 100% operational a separate test 
report will be mailed and then 10 October 2015, 
replace pool DB, 15 October 2014 replace pool DB, 
18 April 2015, repairs to lighting and he gives the 
amounts that he – the work – he charged for the 
work”. 
 
So I just wanted to indicate that these are the 
details that – or some of the details that he puts up to say, 
he was there, he did the work, he says he did it on 
20 
instructions 
of 
BOSASA, 
he 
doesn’t 
say, 
on 
your 
instructions he did it on the instructions of BOSASA.  I 
assume that your position is, what you said earlier on? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Chairperson, yes, I do want to affirm 
what I’ve said earlier on but if you also go back to his 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 154 of 214 
 
affidavit on page three ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:  On paragraph 12 he says: 
“On one occasion I was called to the house one 
evening to attend to the backup of a system and met 
Sergio.  He was a friendly guy but he did not mention 
his surname and did not mention his wife’s position.” 
 
So it had nothing to do with my status.  It had nothing 
to do with who I am and as he says he was never even being 
informed that he is going to be working in the house of the 
10 
Minister or an MEC.  And as I have said I know nothing about 
this thing.  They are not in my space of responsibility and to 
my knowledge. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  You can proceed Mr Notshe. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair – so Ms Mokonyane I just want to 
take you – sorry Ma’am.  I want to take you back to Bundle C 
in Richard Le Roux’s affidavit.  That is the page that the 
Chairperson referred you to.  Look at paragraph 20 of that 
page.  Page 4 of that affidavit.  You have it? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes I have it. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Look at paragraph 20. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes I have it. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Just only – I want you to give just to 
explain to the Chair this.  This is a WhatsApp message sent 
to Richard Le Roux by Sandy.  Sandy says:  I want to read it 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 155 of 214 
 
again. 
“Dear Richard there is a problem at the house with the alarm 
system for some reason it keeps ringing so now it has to be 
switched off at the switch.  Please let me know what to do.” 
You read that? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes I did. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  From my reading I mean you can 
perhaps explain this.  It is in the – she is referring – she is 
reporting this for the first time that there is a problem at the 
house.   
10 
MS MOKONYANE:  She was actually indicating that as she 
was referred to talk to this person and hence even the 
person then responded and said the alarm is sorted out.  And 
in all his affidavits he does not then further indicate that she 
was – he was then contacted by Sandy to then come and do 
A, B, C, D after he had dealt with this matter. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But also here I would have noticed again 
perhaps you will help the commission.  He says there is a 
problem at the house.  She does not say which house as if 
Le Roux knows the house. 
20 
MS MOKONYANE:  There is only one house and that house 
is my house.  And I take it because Sandy did not just talk to 
him Sandy was asked to communicate with BOSASA because 
they were the guys available also in the vicinity over and 
above other security companies.  And surely, he was – I do 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 156 of 214 
 
not know how he came to know which house but it does show 
that there was communication about the – the house that is 
being referred to. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Does it not again you will tell me if I am 
wrong and explain.  Does this not indicate that Richard Le 
Roux is referred to a house he had been to before?  Because 
he is not too [indistinct 00:03:22] by it he says: 
“There is a problem at the house and he responds the alarm 
is sorted.” 
MS MOKONYANE:  There might have been telephonic 
10 
conversations that then ended up with the WhatsApp.  I 
cannot attest whether he has been to the house or not been 
to the house and I have also said never have I called them 
nor have I met them in my house. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now of course Richard Le Roux that your 
PA talks to or sends a message to happens to be the same 
man that Mr Agrizzi has said was given the responsibility to 
lead the team or to be responsible for attending to certain 
things in the house.  It is the same person. 
MS MOKONYANE:  That is Agrizzi’s story Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:  All I know is an instance where the alarm 
had gone on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MOKONYANE:  And off and it needed an intervention 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 157 of 214 
 
because of a challenge that we faced with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Any other thing Chair as it is stated even 
here I have never been in touch with [indistinct 01:34:20].  I 
have never been in touch with anyone and as they also 
attest, they actually interacted with the father of the house. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now whilst you now on that – on that 
affidavit turn to page 2 of the affidavit of Le Roux.  There he 
seems to explain what – you remember you had referred the 
10 
Chair 
to 
Mr 
Nixon’s 
affidavit 
regarding 
the 
invoices.  
Paragraph 11 Mr Richard Le Roux says the following: 
“I am unable to match any invoices to the work done at 
Nomvula Mokonyane’s residence.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry, I am sorry, I am sorry.  Where 
you reading from now? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  His place – Richard Le Roux’s affidavit 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Charl Le Roux? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Richard. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Richard Le Roux. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Richard Le Roux. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on one second.  Okay I am there. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now he says on page – Chair I am on 
page 2. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 158 of 214 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that Richard Le Roux’s affidavit is in 
Bundle B. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Bundle C. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm no it is B. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Richard Le Roux they say here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Bundle C. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What do you have Ms Mokonyane? 
MS MOKONYANE:  I [African language] Bundle A I only have 
Exhibit T21. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  We need to make sure that has 
one. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair we…hair we… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Earlier on I wrote Bundle B because I 
believe that is what you said.  Did I confuse things? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No Bundle B Chair is there.  It is Ms 
Mokonyane’s. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is the big one ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Ja the big one is Bundle D and then that 
is Bundle C. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So this is – what bundle is this? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Bundle C. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Sorry, sorry I beg your pardon Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Just for the purposes of the record 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 159 of 214 
 
wherever I have referred to Bundle B as being the bundle 
where Mr Richard Le Roux’s affidavit is that should – that 
was a mistake it should have been Bundle C.  Okay alright 
you said paragraph 11? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Paragraph 11 on page 2 of… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Then I start reading: 
“This is the affidavit of Richard Le Roux.  He says:  I am 
unable to match any invoices to the work done at Nomvula 
Mokonyane’s residence in Blouberg.” 
10 
And then: 
“As the work was performed in 2013 and the invoices from 
Regal Security are from 2014 onwards.” 
And then paragraph 12. 
“It appears that the Agrizzi cash account was opened with 
Regal Security in 2014 prior to this we may have purchased 
items for special projects on Regal Security under a different 
name.” 
Now I am referring the witness to this just to – because he 
had referred the Chairperson to the affidavit of Nixon. 
20 
MS MOKONYANE:  She – she. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Sorry Ms Mokonyane my Bantu education 
caught up with me there sorry.  I referred to her as he has – 
and he instead of she. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 160 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I apologise for my education. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And it is she had referred to – he had 
referred you to paragraph – to page 158 wherein Mr Nixon 
had said the purchases of CCTV is from Regal Security 
made on the Agrizzi account cannot be matched to secure 
TV installations.  So here he seems to be explaining that 
gap. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You understand Ms Mokonyane what I 
10 
am... 
MS MOKONYANE:  I do. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I am just referring you to this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes I hear. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now before I leave that affidavit – I am 
sorry that – that affidavit Ms Mokonyane is the Chair referred 
you the same affidavit where Mr Le Roux says he must have 
gone to your house not less than ten times.  You would not 
20 
dispute that? 
MS MOKONYANE:  I do not know and often… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry I think that was Mr Van Biljon 
who said no – ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Sorry I beg your pardon Mr Van Biljon. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 161 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And you will not dispute that? 
MS MOKONYANE:  I would not know that and when he says 
it was also those minor jobs that they were doing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MOKONYANE:  There is no way where I see any 
instruction that came from.  Either my husband or myself as I 
have been brought to this commission now to come and 
attest to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.   
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now Ms – let us go back to your affidavit 
– now to Bundle B. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You were going to Mr Charl Le Roux’s 
affidavit or have you been there without me seeing. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair no what I did is I took your 
summary of Charl Le Roux and I thought the witness had 
then dealt with it in the sense that… 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I think I dealt with – with – did I not 
deal with Van Biljon only. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  David Van Biljon but then summarised. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us go to Charl Le Roux. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Charl Le Roux is in – look in the plastic 
bundle.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you must deal with Charl Le Roux. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No that is fine.  Ms Mokonyane Mr Charl 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 162 of 214 
 
Le Roux testified and he also gave – gave a statement and 
he testified.  His – look at Bundle A at T13 page 4 of that 
bundle wherein she deals – he deals with the repairs at – at 
your house. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What page did you say we must go to? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Page 4. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Of T13 in Bundle A. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Are you there Ms Mokonyane? 
10 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes I am. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Under D – D repairs and maintenance. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  At – at your house.  He says on – I am 
reading this. 
“On an occasion during 2017 or 2018 I was again contacted 
by Mr Van Biljon to go to the premises situated at 
Noordheuwel where I was to meet Mr Le Roux.  Indeed, I did.  
In fact met Mr Le Roux there and he arranged for us to enter 
the premises.  The premises I recall had a high fence and 
20 
guard house to the left side at the entrance.  There was a 
guard post at the guard house.” 
Do you have any comment about that? 
MS MOKONYANE:  There is a guard house.  And there is 
always a guard. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 163 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And he says: 
“Here I recall” 
I am now reading paragraph 17. 
“Here I recall that the generator would not start on automatic 
when the power went out.  So the occupants had to go 
outside to start the generator.  The generator was situated 
behind the garage in a cage with wires fed through the wall 
into the garage where they were connected to the control 
panel.  I had difficulty in resolving the problem.  So Mr Van 
Biljon came to assist.” 
10 
Do you have any comments – to this particular – do you 
confirm that your generator at some stage had a problem? 
MS MOKONYANE:  The generator has had challenges like 
any other you know machine and as I have indicated this 
was the responsibility of my own late husband as he has also 
confirmed that he was responsible for the upkeep and the 
maintenance of the house.  And of course, the generator is 
behind the house not even behind the garage.  It is at the 
back of the house and I think when the investigators went, 
they saw the generator.  I want to assume because I was 
20 
never there.  I was not in their company. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And you confirm that it is in a cage with 
wires fed through the wall into the garage? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes it is wired.  It also has the wires not 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 164 of 214 
 
in the garage, not inside the garage.  The wires and 
everything of the generator is on a shed next to the garage. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  They are fed through from the generator 
through the – to the shed? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now he says on page 18: 
“We replaced lights fitted to the side of the walls on either 
side of the stairs.  The original lights were old and not 
functioning properly so we replaced them with new round 
lights.  We also replaced blown globes and I recall carrying 
10 
out repairs on the fountain situated in the corner.  Let us just 
stop before you deal with the blown globes.  You confirm that 
the lights on the stairs had problems and they had to be 
replaced?  Do you know about that? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Even now post the death of my husband 
we do actually do the maintenance of the globes and it is 
common cause that globes will go on and off.  But for this 
particular mission not to my knowledge. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But you do – you would confirm that 
there are lights that are fitted on the side of the walls on 
20 
either side of the stairs? 
MS MOKONYANE:  There are those lights on the staircases 
getting into the house. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And he says: 
“We also repaired blown globes and I recall carrying out 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 165 of 214 
 
repairs on the fountain situated in a corner.  I recall that we 
had to fit a small pump to the fountain in order to pump the 
water out and then I think I replaced some lights in the 
fountain.” 
Here Ms Mokonyane do you confirm you have a fountain in 
the – situated in the corner of your premises? 
MS MOKONYANE:  We have got a fountain with three pots at 
the back of the house.  That is a fact.  Big brown pots.  We 
have a fish pond next to the swimming pool and those are 
the features.  Then we have a little corner of a fountain that 
10 
has never been put to use.  
1. Because we wanted to save water and 
2. Because it was not of any use to us because it is 
obscured – it is far from our side and from anything. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Do you have… 
MS MOKONYANE:  It is not even in use as we speak. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Do you have – of any knowledge of 
works done on a pump situated at the corner? 
MS MOKONYANE:  No I have no knowledge Chairperson.  As 
I have no knowledge of them being contracted to come and 
20 
do this job. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Then he said: 
“we carried out maintenance on about four occasions within 
a month period as we had other work that we were busy with 
so we returned when we had – when I had the time.  On 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 166 of 214 
 
other occasions Mr Le Roux did not accompany us and I 
would hoot at the gate where the guard would let us in.” 
Do you know about this? 
MS MOKONYANE:  No I do not know.  I never was part of 
arranging their visits. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But you would confirm that the guards 
would not just let anyone there.  They would let someone 
that had been authorised to admit to your house – to your 
premises? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Of course, nobody would have easy 
10 
access.  They would have to be granted access by the 
security guards as it is part of their responsibility. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And would – would it be correct that the 
security guards would not allow anybody in that the family or 
somebody in the family has not said should be allowed in? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So if they allowed anybody in it 
would have – it would have had to be that… 
MS MOKONYANE:  It would have to be arranged. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That either somebody in the family has – 
20 
had authorised. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  And in terms of maintenance work or 
the installation of anything would it be correct to think that 
the only persons who could authorise in the house would 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 167 of 214 
 
either yourself or your late husband or could there have 
been somebody else who could authorise or make those 
arrangements? 
MS MOKONYANE:  I would never make any authorisations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You would not make any authorisation. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But in terms of people entering the house 
to carry out anything like if you would not make any 
authorisation then it would have had to be your husband – 
your late husband. 
10 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that right.  Okay.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now paragraph 19 in page 5 Chair says 
that: 
“Mr Le Roux and Mr Van Biljon had also informed me from 
the outset that I must not ask questions about who the owner 
was and that I should never admit or disclose what work I 
had carried out at the premises.  Whilst working in the 
garage I noticed what appeared to be a vehicle covered in a 
tarpaulin.  Out of curiosity I lifted the tarpaulin up and 
20 
noticed a new looking Aston Martin vehicle parked under the 
tarpaulin.  The vehicle was dark in colour and it could have 
been either dark blue or black.  I then knew that the person 
residing at the premises had to be very rich to afford a 
vehicle like that.” 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 168 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:  Chairperson yes there is an Aston 
Martin.  The Aston Martin is neither black nor blue.  It is  
cream white and cream white black and blue actually depicts 
that maybe the person was informed or the person was 
inside the garage.  But the fact that he wants to – said on 
record in his affidavit that he has sworn his oath of – I do not 
know whether he affirmed or he did whatever. He says it was 
– it was either dark or blue.  There has never been that kind 
of Aston Martin in my house. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So when he gave evidence here it was the 
10 
day after he had been part of the visit to your house.  That is 
Mr Charl Le Roux. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I think he said that when they made 
that visit to your house recently, they did see an Aston 
Martin but he said I think he said it was white.  Either he 
said that or Mr Notshe said that I cannot remember. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  He said – the witness said that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and then he was asked the question 
that in his affidavit earlier he had said that he had seen an 
20 
Aston Martin that was either blue or black.  And he then 
seemed unsure.  I think he might have said he is not sure 
whether the one he had seen was black or blue.  I do not 
know whether he said or white because I think I even said 
but there is a big difference between blue or black and white.  
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 169 of 214 
 
So became unsure when he was giving evidence here.  But 
the – the question that I want to pose and maybe you have 
answered it is – at the time he is talking about 2015 or is it 
2014 Mr Notshe – or is it 2017? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  2017.2018. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  You – there was no Aston Martin in 
the family that could have been in the garage that was dark 
or black. 
MS MOKONYANE:  There was never a dark or blue Aston 
Martin even at that time. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Chairperson which also demonstrates 
that he might have been misleading this commission because 
he is referring to the connections of the generator inside the 
garage when the connections have always been outside of 
the garage. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MOKONYANE:  And so I just take exception that he even 
went to the extent of – you know they curiosity has killed the 
cat he went and even lifted the cover of the car. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MOKONYANE:  But he still saw black or blue and saw 
white.  There has never been such a colour of an Aston 
Martin in my house. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Okay alright.  Yes Mr Notshe. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 170 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Just the – and tell me – just tell the 
commission this Aston Martin is it registered this – in what 
colour is –was it registered? 
MS MOKONYANE:  It is registered it is in cream.  The same 
colour as that we found this – the time when the commission 
went to visit my house. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS MOKONYANE:  It has never been sprayed, it had never 
been changed.  It has always been that colour. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  How long has – has – have you had 
10 
it? 
MS MOKONYANE:  From 2013. 
CHAIRPERSON:  From 2013? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now Ma’am I think that this would be an 
issue.  Whilst you are on the – on the bundle Bundle A – you 
still have Bundle A there with you – Mr Van – Yes that 
bundle. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Go to – Chair can we go to Exhibit T16 
Inspection In Loco.   
CHAIRPERSON:  What page? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Page T16. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Page 16? 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 171 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No T16 page – Exhibit T16.  Sorry Chair 
I tend to – I tend to wonder off. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is – that is – there is no exhibit 
T16. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  On Bundle A. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On A – what page on Bundle A? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  The pages Chair on Bundle A they go 
according to their exhibits in.  Does Chair know – is there is 
no – no 16? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why is that so because I have been saying 
10 
that that should not be like that? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair if I recall. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It should be sequential. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  If I recall you – you gave instructions 
that – remember this bundle came as T13 then we said it 
should be broken up into like T13 would be Charl Le Roux 
affidavit.  T14 would be the statements of Van Biljon.  T15 
would be the affidavit of Van Biljon and then T16 is the 
memorandum on the inspection in loco. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Okay 
I 
see 
this 
document 
with 
a 
20 
memorandum ja with an index.  Well it is not even marked in 
terms of page numbers at the top.   
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I do not understand how. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that is 1.  Remember we – so it is a 
document written T16 – MIIL-01. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 172 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ja this – something should have 
done to make sure that this would be user friendly.  Okay let 
us get going.  Yes just continue. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Are you there Ms Mokonyane? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes I am Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Okay.  Look at – this is – okay let me 
explain to you.  This is a memorandum which was – which 
was assigned by both and representatives of the commission 
and your representatives about the observations that were 
10 
made at your place.  Now look at paragraph 2 on page 01. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It says: 
“Generators situated behind garage in a cage with wires fed 
through the wall into the garage where they are connected to 
a control panel.” 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes.  That – it is that shed.  Because 
remember the garages have got those doors. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:  And there is that shed that I am referring 
20 
to which can be referred to as a garage but it is a shed it 
does not even have what you call it – it does not even have 
doors. 
CHAIRPERSON:  A door ja okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But this observation confirms Charl Le 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 173 of 214 
 
Roux’s affidavit. 
MS MOKONYANE:  But this observation actually talks about 
the control panel.  That control panel it is still as we speak 
now an orange it is on that shed which may be seen as the 
fourth garage, the fourth door.  And that is why I accepted 
this information. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Chair with your leave then I will move to 
– back to the statement of… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which bundle are you moving to now? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No I will move back to the main bundle 
10 
and just… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you done with… 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Just one second. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Charl Le Roux? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Just one second before I do that.  If we 
just sticking to the – to Bundle A the affidavit of Charl Le 
Roux paragraph 20 he mainly says that – are you there? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes I am there.  20? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say page 20? 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No paragraph 20 of Charl Le Roux. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Which is page 5.  He says: 
“I never saw the owner of the premises as when I would go 
there only the maid and the security guard would be 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 174 of 214 
 
present.” 
Do you see that? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes I see.  Yes I see that Chairperson. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And just on this I mean the person who 
works there as a helper I am sure if there were people who 
are unauthorised were going to your house she would report 
it to you? 
MS MOKONYANE:  They would – they will report to the 
immediate person who would be the owner of the house 
especially on matters related to maintenance and the up 
10 
keeping of the security of it not to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What appears – what appears to be 
indisputable and you must tell me if you agree with me.  
What appears to be indisputable is that this Mr Van Biljon’s 
company did some work in your residence.  Performed some 
jobs and that Mr Van Biljon and or Mr Charl Le Roux and Mr 
Richard Le Roux from BOSASA all had been to your house 
and that Mr Van Biljon as the owner of the company says for 
the work that they did in your house they were paid by 
BOSASA and they were there because BOSASA instructed 
20 
them to go there.  Now, you have already said that you do 
not know whether they were there or they were not there.  
This did not fall within your responsibility.  It fell within the... 
your late husband’s responsibility. 
 
And if anybody came to do this kind of work, it would 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 175 of 214 
 
have fallen under the responsibility of your late husband.  
But you have also said, if he had arranged for a company 
that was connected with BOSASA in way or another to come 
and perform work, he probably would have shared that with 
you.   So far, are you with me? 
MS MOKONYANE:  I am with you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are with me.  Are you able to accept 
that maybe what I have just said is what happened?  What 
remains maybe is whether your husband actually made the 
arrangements for these people to come? 
10 
MS MOKONYANE:  Chairperson, the fact that I do and as I 
have said even in reaction to the Sunday Times, because 
what my husband said, “These people are crazy”.  He is 
responsible for the upkeep of security and maintenance. 
 
They might have been to the house because of the 
challenge of those alarms that went on and off and upon 
them being in the house, they might have then done all these 
things but not as per my instructions and not to my 
knowledge. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  [coughing]  Excuse me.  The fact 
20 
that your late husband said at the time of the Sunday Times 
article or report, to the effect that these people are talking 
nonsense.  Can I take it that what he meant was:  “I do not 
know anything about these people coming to the house”.  
Can I take it you mean that or what should I take it to mean? 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 176 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:  I take it to mean that he has never asked 
them to come and do any work in the house. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, in the house. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Other than that intervention as recorded 
in the ...[indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  Yes, because you see... and I 
have got to put these things to you so that you can assist me 
because in the end when all of you are gone, I am the one 
10 
who will remain with the responsibility to say what actually 
happened here. 
 
If the position is that Mr Van Biljon’s company did come 
to your house, did perform certain jobs other than the single 
incident that you have referred to, and your husband had not 
arranged for them to come and you have not arranged for 
them to come, the question arises:  Who would have 
arranged for them to come? 
 
Because the guards, the security at the gate, as I 
understand it, would not allow anybody to come in unless 
20 
they had authority from within the family to say allow so and 
so to come in. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Chairperson, as I have said and as one 
of the people have indicated.  They came to the house in one 
instance and that is when they met the person who 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 177 of 214 
 
introduced themselves as Serge and that is the instance. 
 
I do not know whether it was at a time when they were 
coming to fix what we had ask them to come and deal with or 
not and that in the course of doing that, they then saw all 
these features in the house and whatever that happened 
there.  I do not know Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Mr Notshe. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now Ms Mokonyane, let us go back to 
Annexure B, the main file.  You can put the others away for 
now.  Now Mr Agrizzi in his main affidavit on page... on 
10 
paragraph 22.6 and 22.7 refers to ...[intervenes]  
MS MOKONYANE:  On page 46 or 47? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  I am sorry.  Mr Notshe and Ms 
Mokonyane.  We have just gone past four o’clock.  We 
normally stop at four.  So if we are going to go beyond four 
o’clock, let me make sure that everybody is happy with that.  
Starting with you Ms Mokonyane.  Are you happy that we 
proceed? 
MS MOKONYANE:  I am happy Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are happy? 
20 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Your legal team? 
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  [Indistinct] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Thank you.  Mr Notshe, you 
are available? 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 178 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I have no choice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. [laughs]  Maybe... let us have an idea.  
I do not think we should take too long but Mr Notshe might 
have a different view, but it is important that all important 
issues be covered and Ms Mokonyane should be able to deal 
with all of them and put her side of the story properly but 
since we are going to proceed.   
 
Maybe we should take a short comfort break and then 
we continue.  I do not know but my estimate it that once we 
resume, we should not take longer than an hour.  That 
10 
is...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It should not be more than... 
CHAIRPERSON:  It should not, ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But it depends on achieving more than... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No, that is alright.  Let us take a 
break.  It is now about ten past four.  Let us resume at 
twenty-five past four.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS   
INQUIRY RESUMES 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  with the additional affidavit that Mr 
20 
Agrizzi made.  The additional affidavit... supplementary 
affidavit appears Chair on page 388.1 of the record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  When you say of the record, you are going 
to...? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Of Bundle B. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 179 of 214 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  At what page? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  388.1.  It starts there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Is it 381? 
CHAIRPERSON:  388.1.  388 point 1.  That is Mr Agrizzi’s 
supplementary affidavit.  Well, the number is in the middle of 
the page.  It is not at the corner. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Oh, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the one we were talking about in 
the ...[intervenes]  
10 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes, thank you.  I have found it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MOKONYANE:  I am looking at this Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  [No audible reply]  
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes, Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now on page 389 of that affidavit, Mr 
Agrizzi deals with... the Chair referred you to this, to this 
issue where it is “I was present...”  I am reading Mr Agrizzi’s 
affidavit.  He says: 
“I was personally there when cash was delivered on 
20 
two occasions.  The one was in Bryanston whilst she 
was Premier.  We had to meet her with the MEC of 
Social of Development. 
The meeting was regarding incidents at the Youth 
Development Centre at Mogale where we had to 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 180 of 214 
 
assist to accommodating youth from another state-
owned facility. 
We sat in the lounge for about two hours waiting.  
Thereafter, we had a meeting with her.  Gavin Watson 
had earlier that day packed R 50,000,00 in a grey 
security bag and placed it in his briefcase. 
Once the meeting was concluded, he left the grey 
bag with the R 50,000,00 with her on the chair...” 
MS MOKONYANE:  Chairperson, I still deny ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MS MOKONYANE:  ...what Mr Agrizzi is saying.  I have 
never received cash and there is no cash that was ever left 
on the chair by Mr Gavin Watson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And you said he has never been to 
your house? 
MS MOKONYANE:  He has never been in a meeting with me 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  In the... ja. 
MS MOKONYANE:  ... in the house. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes, Mr Notshe. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And then in part of 14.3 of his 
supplementary affidavit, he then says that on the second 
occasion when the money was delivered, it was delivered to 
your house and he was present in Krugersdorp.  And you say 
you have never... he has never been to your house? 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 181 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:  I have not been in a meeting, nor with Mr 
Agrizzi in my presence in the house.  Not even received that 
cash that he is referring. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now in his answer... and his answer to 
your affidavit.  His answer on page 81.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Which affidavit? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No, the answer… where Mr Agrizzi 
answers to Ms Mokonyane’s answering affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On this issue? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  But we know that he can only be answering 
to a denial that he... I think just go there.  What does he 
say? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  No, he just merely expresses to say he 
has been there a number of times. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And... or I am also referring to it, just to 
put on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No, no.  It is fine. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And unfortunately, ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, I think it is fine because there 
are these crisp issues that we all have come to know.  We 
know that Mr Agrizzi said Ms Mokonyane received... was 
paid... was given monthly payments by BOSASA.  She has 
denied that. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 182 of 214 
 
 
We know that Mr Agrizzi said he has been to both 
business meetings and social visits or social and meeting or 
encounters with Ms Mokonyane.  She has denied that. 
 
We know that Mr Agrizzi said he was even as... and 
actually, I think he said, he coordinated Ms Mokonyane’s 50 t h 
birthday celebration party and Ms Mokonyane said, “No, 
there is nothing like that”. 
 
So there are these things that we know already.  Agrizzi 
has said and Ms Mokonyane has denied them.  So we do not 
need to repeat those. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you can move from there.  The one 
about receiving cash, I do not think he elaborates much, 
Agrizzi. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Well, only he does where I was referring 
to now, it is... there was an issue with that with where he 
then describes Ms Mokonyane’s house inside. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But Ms Mokonyane has dealt with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We have dealt with that. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  We have dealt with that issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja.  Because there it is a question of 
whether 
it 
is 
true 
that 
Mr Agrizzi 
has 
been 
to 
Ms 
Mokonyane’s house.  And if it is true whether he is... it is 
true that Mr Gavin left money or a security money with 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 183 of 214 
 
R 50,000,00 for Ms Mokonyane and Ms Mokonyane’s version 
in regard to that it has been given. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Well, Chair I will leave those and then 
just deal with the issues ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, that is fine.  Ja, where there is 
elaboration.  If it is the same thing. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If there is an elaboration that we have not 
10 
touched on, then we can deal with that. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To avoid going back to this same thing. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  No, I understand.  Now on 14.5 on 
page 391 of Mr Agrizzi’s ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on one second.  Ms Mokonyane, 
were you still wanting to attend to something? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes, my water Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Oh, shame.  Sorry, I was not looking.  
20 
Sorry.  I beg your pardon. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, we will wait for you. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Can you switch the thing off? 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you must indicate if you need a short 
adjournment or anything.  Okay.  Alright. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 184 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:  Ja, I am fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are fine.   
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You can take water to push it down. 
MS MOKONYANE:  No, I do not have to drink water. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You do not have to... 
MS MOKONYANE:  It is actually... 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Oh, shame. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes, I do not have to go to the stomach. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Oh, okay.  I thought you said you want to 
have to take water. 
MS MOKONYANE:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, Mr Notshe. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now, here Mr Agrizzi seems to be 
dealing with the issue of the food that was... food and liquor 
that was delivered.  On paragraph 14.1.5 page 391 of Mr 
Agrizzi’s supplementary affidavit.   
 
He says: 
“On one example of the demand from Ms Mokonyane 
20 
is attached hereto as Annexure FF...” 
 
Now if we go to Annexure FF ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  It is one example of what? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  He deals... it deals above Chair with the 
issue of the purchase of food products, meat, hampers, 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 185 of 214 
 
liquor and other items as set out in his original affidavit.  
Now he says that as an example of the demand from Ms 
Mokonyane, he refers us to a document which is marked FF 
which is on page 397. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Are you there Ms Mokonyane? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes, I am. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It seems to be an email from you to Mr 
Agrizzi on the 13t h of April 2012.  Do you remember, what is 
this email about? 
10 
MS MOKONYANE:  Thank you very much Chairperson.  As it 
is indicated here, the responses that have come and the 
communication was between Ms Ndaba and the people that 
were delivering.   
 
And all that they needed was to make sure that there is 
interaction between those people and the people in... and all 
I did, which I cannot also recall what it had to do with... the 
information that is herein reflects that I have just forwarded 
it.  And I did not even make a comment on the matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who is Ms Nonhlanhla Ndaba? 
20 
MS MOKONYANE:  She is a South African.  A member of 
Parliament.   
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Oh, 
okay. 
 
Ms 
(sic) 
Notshe, 
you 
...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  No, this is just what I want to find 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 186 of 214 
 
out. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  I just said Ms Notshe. [laughs] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Ms Mokonyane will be very unhappy. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Not for him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just to... [laughs] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  So we are square.  Now we are level. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  [laughs]  I wanted to say.  Tell us more 
about that Annexure FF Mr Notshe.  Mr Agrizzi says it is an 
example of a demand from Ms Mokonyane. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes.  Now, the only see... the only 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it a demand? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It does not... on the face of it, it does 
not... the court does not deem it a demand but what it does 
Chair, and I wanted to ask Ms Mokonyane to perhaps help us 
with this.  It seems as if it is a communication between her 
and Mr Agrizzi.  Now I want Ms Mokonyane to confirm.  Did 
you... were you communicating with Mr Agrizzi in 2012 like in 
here on the 13t h of April 2012? 
MS MOKONYANE:  I have forwarded this... this message 
20 
was forwarded from my gadget at that time and all the 
details thereof, I do not even know any basis thereof.  And I 
am definitely sure, it had to do with the body of what is on 
the email and the interest of those people who wanted to 
fund South African Partners. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 187 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But what I am saying is, who would have 
forwarded it from your email address to Mr Agrizzi, except 
you? 
MS MOKONYANE:  I am saying Chairperson, surely I might... 
I would have spoken to Gavin who have maybe said, “Send 
this thing to Angelo, Mr Agrizzi”.  And that is all that 
happened and that was the end of the conversation as you 
can see here, even on the letter.   
 
There was not any further contact and communication.  
Even Mr Agrizzi himself can attest, I have never since that 
10 
instance, there was never any other interaction with me 
because I had nothing to do or to show any benefit or 
interest in it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Notshe, is this not the document in 
respect of which Mr Agrizzi says... reflects possible business 
venture that he says Ms Mokonyane wanted BOSASA go into 
or is that another document? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  It is another document.  This one is 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, it is another one. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  This one is just... he says Ms Mokonyane 
is... he puts it up as proof of demand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And then in all fairness.  Ms Mokonyane 
in her and even in her reply there, it says:  “Well, this 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 188 of 214 
 
document, I am not demanding anything”. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  But what I wanted, the explanation now 
she has given, is in order to find out whether by that time he 
was conducting, Mr Agrizzi as shown in the email. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright.  Move on. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now the issue is.  On paragraph 15 of 
the 
supplementary 
affidavit 
page 
392, 
then 
mister 
...[intervenes]  
MS MOKONYANE:  Page? 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Page 392 of the supplementary affidavit.  
Then, in general terms, he says that you were... the question 
was, he must elaborate on what basis did BOSASA continue 
looking 
after 
Nomvula 
Mokonyane 
and 
he 
needs 
requirements and wishes. 
 
He says:   
“Well, Ms Mokonyane was a very... was a known and 
a very powerful person in South Africa.  She had 
influenced over the former president of South Africa.   
 
I think we have dealt with this. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  We have. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  In your answer, you... on page 85 of your 
answer...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I think Ms Mokonyane already gave 
evidence earlier to say Mr Agrizzi gives - I am putting to my 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 189 of 214 
 
own words – credit that she does not deserve to say she is 
so influential.  Am I right? 
MS MOKONYANE:  Yes, you are right Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:  It is the credit that I do not even need 
coming from him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Secondly, on the very issue that he is 
referring to.  It is also a demonstration that it is about, you 
know, experience and opportunism in the character of Mr 
10 
Agrizzi.  These matters of the Department of Environmental 
Affairs do not rest with the minister.   
 
And I found these processes in the department but even 
during my tenure, it was at the time when Minister Lindiwe 
Zulu was the acting minister and there was never been any 
decision around this particular matter that had do with 
Nomvula but it was put to make the headlines and to again 
go for my character. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  Mr Notshe. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  And then, on page... mister ... and then 
20 
Mr Agrizzi deals with the issue on page 86 of the main 
bundle, where he says that I have... on paragraph 15. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Paragraph 15? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Paragraph five zero Chair on page 086. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we still on the same bundle? 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 190 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  On the same bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What page? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Page zero eight six.  086.  Your page 86. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, I think forget about zero.  Just 86 so 
that we are consistent. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  86.  Okay.  Yes, continue. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Where he says on paragraph 15: 
“I have no knowledge of the SIU Investigation into 
Nomvula Paula Mokonyane’s department.  Safe for 
10 
the above, I deny the contents of this paragraph.  I 
confirm that I was personally present with the late 
Gavin Watson and knew Willem when the SIU 
Investigation as well as prosecution in the state was 
discussed by Nomvula Paula Mokonyane with us...” 
 
That is his response.  He says he was there and he 
discussed this with you. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Chair, as I have stated previously.  I 
have no such authority.  I have never been part of the 
Criminal Justice System Cluster.  I have never been in any 
20 
meeting 
with 
any 
of 
those 
that 
are 
responsible 
for 
investigations, including in the SIU.   
 
And I still want to affirm that he is actually lying.  I have 
no such influence to the extent that Mr Agrizzi wants to 
portray about me. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 191 of 214 
 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  Now, in your affidavit ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  He say somewhere...  I am sorry.  He says 
somewhere you had direct access to former President, Jacob 
Zuma.  What do you say about that? 
MS MOKONYANE:  You know, I even had direct access to 
President Mandela.  There is a picture in the house, Chair 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:  ... of us coming from Polokwane, post 
the National Conference in Polokwane.  Myself and other 
10 
comrades were assigned a responsibility.   
 
We went through the residence of President Nelson 
Mandela to go and prepare and make sure that the MEC 
comes and present ourselves to the president as it was a 
decision of the newly elected MEC.   
 
Chair, I have also had contact and just like any other 
African National Congress member and a leader in that 
regard, been able to also interact with President Thabo 
Mbeki’s office on many issues, including issues that are 
related to the youth programmes, the AIDS awareness 
20 
programmes, the issues around housing and so on and so 
forth, during his tenure.   
 
And hence I am saying, I have also been victimised 
as a Thabo Mbeki... you know, a project that was called a 
project, the 1996 Class Project.  That is me because of how 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 192 of 214 
 
I always carry myself.  I remain loyal to the organisation, I 
remain loyal to the leaders of the organisation, the same 
with President Thabo Mbeki, the same with Kgalema 
Motlanthe within his short stint as the President.  So I have 
done that. 
 
Chair, same with President Jacob Zuma, and as I 
have said, I had preferred Comrade Jacob Zuma in line 
with the processes of the African National Congress, I have 
supported President Jacob Zuma as I have supported even 
the current President who is now under attack.  You can 
10 
see how the media is now going for him, because I do 
believe internal party democracy.  So the access has been 
like that.   But, you know, for the record, I have never been 
to any of those national events that President Zuma will 
host in Nkandla and all those things, I would relate with 
President Jacob Zuma and even call him ubaba in the same 
spirit as any other person would have done it.  I think Mr 
Agrizzi is taking chances and maybe it is because this is 
all about trying to pin me down as somebody who had an 
influence over President Jacob Zuma to an extent that I did 
20 
not have.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Notshe? 
MS MOKONYANE:   And as I am saying, Chair, with your 
permission, as we speak now, you know, I would call 
officials of the ANC because of the responsibility I have 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 193 of 214 
 
now and ask the Secretary General to say come, we are 
meeting with Province X, join us on Zoom.  They will do 
that.  The President himself – I have been during this 
period of lockdown on behalf of the ANC’s organising 
committee gone all out to get our President to come in and 
hear from our own members of the ANC in the various 
provinces about the state of organisation and what is 
happening under lockdown during this particular pandemic 
and we communicate, communicate even when there is 
urgency.  I would even send a message directly to him 
10 
knowing where I stood in terms of the preferences.  Surely 
somebody will see me as a traitor but it is because of who 
I am and how I understand the workings of the ANC and 
therefore, I take serious exception but I will continue to 
respect President Zuma as I have respected President 
Thabo Mbeki, President Motlanthe and President Nelson 
Mandela. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Mr Notshe? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And then on the same page of the 
supplementary affidavit – I am sorry, Chair, on 392, just a 
20 
one liner.   
MS MOKONYANE:   3..? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   392, Chair. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Are you there? 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 194 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Okay.  Paragraph 15.3 he says: 
“On 
diverse 
occasions 
a 
discussion 
with  
Mokonyane and Watson pertained finalising the 
closure of the SIU matter, even to that extent where 
a meeting was arranged with Anwar Dramat, the 
then National Head of the Hawks. This was in order 
to get them to return the BOSASA docket to 
Advocate Nomgcobo Jiba so that she could arrange 
for the matter not to be proceeded with.” 
10 
Now you respond to that on page 37. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Paragraph 54.  You say the contents of 
this paragraph are denied. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, I do …[intervenes] 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   I have never – you say: 
“I have not been a party to any arrangement with 
Anwar Dramat or Adv Jiba who are not known to 
me.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think she wanted to make… 
20 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Mokonyane? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Insofar as what Mr Agrizzi is saying 
about my influence and arrangements with both Advocate 
Jiba and Anwar Dramat, that is the reason why I am saying 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 195 of 214 
 
I do not know, I do not relate to them on those bases.  I 
know them at that level that they were responsible in that 
space but I have never had this kind of a relationship in 
terms of their businesses and responsibilities.  It is a damn 
lie. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   He responds to your answer at page 
87. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We need to look for it because you could 
just – we know where Ms Mokonyane stands. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You can just read the relevant part. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes.  No, I just wanted to – so that she 
can get to it as well, then I will read.  Then he says – this 
is now Mr Agrizzi.  He says: 
“I deny allegations of this paragraph.  I state at the 
material time Mr Dramat was the head of the Hawks 
and Advocate Jiba was in a senior position as the 
Director of Public Prosecutions and at a later stage 
became the Acting Head.  It is indeed surprising 
20 
that Nomvula Paula Mokonyane would deny in the 
sense that these people are not known to her.” 
Now, Ms Mokonyane, you never had contacts with any of 
these people? 
MS MOKONYANE:   I have never had contacts with any of 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 196 of 214 
 
these people. I have never even had any influence on them 
nor even sitting in any meeting with them.  I have no 
relationship and hence on the basis of what is alleged I am 
saying I do know but I know them as individuals out there 
doing their job and myself doing my job somewhere else. 
ADV 
NOTSHE 
SC: 
 
 
And 
never 
had 
a 
telephone 
conversation or cell phone conversation with them? 
MS MOKONYANE:   No, I have never had any telephone 
conversation with Anwar Dramat nor have I had any 
telephone conversations with Nomgcobo Jiba. 
10 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Nomgcobo? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Nomgcobo Jiba. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Nomgcobo Jiba. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Ja, that is the only time that I can say.  
The only other time when you have the people out there 
being paraded and stuff you will know of them and you will 
celebrate them, Chairperson, you will celebrate them as 
women leaders and I think, amongst other things, it is a 
game, the onslaught that I said in my statement, about 
vilifying women and I am one of those people who will 
20 
always stand by women and support them when they are 
under attack. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Notshe? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   And your support was merely limited to 
moral support, not to call them and support them in two 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 197 of 214 
 
phone calls? 
MS MOKONYANE:   No, we would actually support them 
both in the organisation.  I belong to the ANC Women’s 
League.  I am a gender activist, I am a feminist and would 
forever, just like it happened with Riah Phiyega, just as it 
has happened with Bathabile Dlamini, just as it has 
happened with Nkosazana, we will always have to have 
that sister support. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair, just bear with me?  Chair, may I 
just approach…?  Chair, whether there is any other thing of 
10 
importance we need to raise, from our side I think that is 
all I need to deal with the witness to help the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright.  So I just want to go 
back to one point namely that Ms Mokonyane you say that 
to the extent that on your version Mr Agrizzi decided to 
falsely accuse of all the things that he has accused you of, 
you do not know exactly why he is doing that but you 
believe there is hatred involved, is that right? 
MS MOKONYANE:   There is hatred involved. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MS MOKONYANE:   And he has also played into the 
political gallery. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Because if you look at the timing, 
Chair, you will see that it was at a time when there were 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 198 of 214 
 
tensions within the ANC, healthy tensions in the movement 
because it is not the first time that there has been 
differences in terms of preferential leaders. 
 
He has also played into what everybody has done 
about President Jacob Zuma that anyone who can say I 
support Jacob Zuma is actually corrupt.   
But he also has his own issues to respond to 
because I do not even know the investigations of the SIU 
with BOSASA and I really am quite – very, very concerned 
about how he has actually jumped into this Commission, 
10 
come in and out, cleared things and everything.  I so wish 
that my – my assumptions and what I have come to believe 
are actually wrong. 
First, he has gone out to – on record to be known 
as a racist.  
Secondly, he has gone out himself to be the one 
who was frustrated about me not helping them.   So surely 
now he is punishing me because his mission and what he 
assumed that I have the capacity to do, was never 
realised. 
20 
Thirdly, I think Mr Agrizzi also wants to make 
everybody believe that he is a holy cow and everybody who 
was related with BOSASA and anyone who has been 
associated with President Jacob Zuma or anyone who has 
gone out to support the African National Congress is fine 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 199 of 214 
 
except for BOSASA.  And yet, as I am saying, we have 
state owned entities who have big companies like Group 5  
that has now gone under liquidation who have supported 
the ANC.  You have seen pictures of the Ruperts wining 
and 
dining 
with 
Presidents 
of 
the 
African 
National 
Congress, with Madiba, with President Thabo Mbeki and so 
on and so forth and because all these things were above 
board, you know of how the Guptas had funded the DA and 
Helen Zille wrote and accepted that contribution and Mr 
Agrizzi want to make this a monster.   
10 
It is only now that there is a Bill in parliament, 
Chairperson, that speaks about funding of political parties.  
There has never been a rule that says funding of political 
parties must not happen and so on. 
So all I can say [African language], but mostly 
importantly, it is about him pursuing an agenda that I think 
it is better known by himself.  I really cannot tell, Chair.  
And I so wish one day I would come to understand but I 
remain with the view that I hold. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you said some words in isiZulu just 
20 
now, you want to try and put them in English for the record.  
You said inzondo and you mentioned… 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, Chair, I think when you become, 
when you are emotional and hurt you… 
CHAIRPERSON:   You revert to your language. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 200 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, you do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja. 
MS MOKONYANE:   And this …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But for the record, ja. 
MS MOKONYANE:   For the record, Chair, it is hatred, it is 
misogyny, it is racism, it is character assassination and it 
is opportunism that goes with the character in Agrizzi’s 
personality.  He has flirted with all political parties, he has 
flirted with the media, he has protected himself as an 
extension of the Watson family only to find that he is the 
10 
extreme opposite of the Watson family. 
 
What was happening in BOSASA, like what was 
happening in Group 5, like what was happening in other big 
companies that have come out to support the ANC, I know 
nothing about that.  If there has to be a day for them to 
come and account, so be it.  And I think Mr Agrizzi must 
just appreciate that.  I am deeply concerned. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Now I think we got to a point with 
regard to jobs that were done in your residence, we got to 
a point where, as I understood the position, from your side 
20 
there was no denial that some jobs were done.  The denial 
was you did not give instructions, one.  Two …[intervenes] 
MS MOKONYANE:   Not to my knowledge. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Not to my knowledge. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 201 of 214 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well you do not mean you do not 
remember whether you gave instructions of not? 
MS MOKONYANE:   No, I have never given instructions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you have never given instructions, 
yes.  
MS MOKONYANE:   Never gave. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You never gave instructions, that is one.  
Two, with regard to your late husband, am I right to say we 
ended on a point where you said if he had made 
arrangements for these – this company of Mr van Biljon 
10 
which is attached to BOSASA in terms of arrangements.  If 
he had made arrangements, he would have shared that 
with you. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that right? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the fact that he never shared that 
with you points to him not having made any arrangement. 
MS MOKONYANE:   And his assertions also with that 
Whatsapp …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   In response to the Sunday Times article? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So – but what you also concede, I think, 
is that the security personnel at the gate would not open or 
allow anybody in unless they knew that the person was 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 202 of 214 
 
authorised to come in. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, Chairperson.  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  It seems to me that we – that leaves 
with a situation where Mr van Biljon’s company and Mr 
Richard le Roux and Charl le Roux may have come and 
done some work in circumstances where it is not clear who 
authorised that.  Is that your impression as well? 
MS 
MOKONYANE:   And who instructed them from 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who instructed them to …[intervenes] 
10 
MS MOKONYANE:   From the Mokonyane family, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, okay, alright.  Mr Notshe, I 
think there is one part which I seem to remember you did 
not touch on and I do not know whether that was 
deliberate, Ms Dube’s affidavit. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  ...[Indistinct – microphone off] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No I think you must cover it, Ms 
Mokonyane must know that there is somebody else who 
seems to corroborate the story of deliveries so that she 
can deal with it, other than Agrizzi. 
20 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes Ms Mokonyane go to divider 7.   
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes Chair. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  You see the affidavit of ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Where? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Chair it is on page 119. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 203 of 214 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’ve got it. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Now this is the affidavit of Mrs 
Bongiwe Eves Dube. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say Mr Notshe, did you say Mr? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Mrs. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Miss? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Mrs, I said Mrs Bongiwe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Ja, I thought you repeated 
...[intervenes]  
ADV NOTSHE SC:   No, no I got a very stern – I got a very 
10 
stern look from Ms Mokonyane never to repeat such a 
mistake. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well maybe I can quickly deal with this. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Bongiwe Dube and her other name 
Ms Mokonyane is Eves, she says that she was previously 
employed as a unit leader which she says is essentially 
manager in the kitchens at BOSASA and her work included 
oversight of staff, working out the specifications for diets, 
the preparation of food with the chefs and ordering and 
20 
receiving of stock and she sets out her movements within 
BOSASA and she says she ultimately worked at the head 
office of BOSASA and was running the kitchen and she 
says this was for staff, guest meetings and people who 
attended training and they provided catering. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 204 of 214 
 
 
She says Mr Alistair Esau was in charge at head 
office and she was second-in-charge.  She took over from 
Katherine Matabate when she moved to Lindela.  She says 
at 5.1 with regards to deliveries of food I would receive 
instructions from either Papa Leshabane or Alistair.  It is 
my understanding that in the instances where Alistair gave 
me instructions, he would have received instructions from 
someone higher up at BOSASA. 
5.1 
Christmas.  She says over Christmas time in 
December food would be delivered to Nomvula 
10 
Mokonyane, I know this as in the first December I 
was at head office.  In 2016 I was on my way to 
fetch an order from a butchery called Food Boys in 
Strydom Park when one of the butchery staff 
phoned me and asked me about a specific order.  
They asked me if I knew about it as it was normally 
dealt with by Katherine every December.  The staff I 
dealt with at the butchery were Precious, Happy and 
Laura ...” 
And she gives her cell number, she says Food Boys, she 
20 
says I phoned Katherine and asked her about the order 
whereupon she said I must not deal with the order as that 
was for Nomvula Mokonyane and she would deal with it.   It 
was a large order of meat, approximately R17 000 worth 
and the butchery staff informed me that the order was 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 205 of 214 
 
already in place.  The same occurred the following year in 
December 2017 as this was a standing order.  Thomas was 
the driver at BOSASA at the time and he would have made 
the deliveries, I did not deal with the delivery of any drinks 
and alcohol to Nomvula Mokonyane. 
 
So I wanted you to know that there is somebody 
else other than Agrizzi who has deposed to an affidavit 
who has something to say about you so that you can 
comment, you might say you stand by what you have said 
...[intervenes]  
10 
MS MOKONYANE:   Chairperson I stand by what I have 
said and I would wished, with your permission Chair, that 
the Chair would have then gone to page 122. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let’s go there, let’s go there, if you want 
to read you can read. 
MS MOKONYANE:   The lady says, who I have never met, 
who also confirms that there is nowhere where she says 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm, ja, she does not say she 
delivered. 
20 
MS MOKONYANE:   And I have really indicated what all 
these things were about and what they were meant for.  
She then goes on, on page 122 Chairperson where she 
says I came to BOSASA through Mr Angelo Agrizzi and in 
2018 
it 
was 
common 
knowledge 
that 
BOSASA’s 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 206 of 214 
 
management wanted to get rid of people of relating to Mr 
Agrizzi.  This was because there had been a fallout 
between them.  I think this is a mouthful, I just want to 
leave it there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:   And actually, go further and complete 
that statement.  She then goes further to say Alistair and 
other staff linked to Mr Agrizzi were removed by early 
2018.  In this period one of the staff said that I was 
receiving money from one of the guests and they had seen 
10 
me 
on 
the 
CCTV 
camera. 
 
I 
informed 
BOSASA’s 
management that I had received the money from Avon 
Products, I was selling and the person was delivering the 
money to me. 
 
I was however then dismissed for failing to declare 
my Avon businesses, which I did in my spare time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MOKONYANE:   I just want to leave it there Chair, but 
again this is the person who says she came through Mr 
Agrizzi but I really want the Commission to also underline 
20 
what she is saying, that all these things happened because 
there was a fallout amongst them. 
 
Some of us are becoming casualties of that fallout 
and I wish I can be able to corroborate what was the 
nature of the fallout and to what extent has it led to this 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 207 of 214 
 
Commission being given all this time to now listen to all 
these insinuations and allegations including peddling of 
lies. 
 
Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.   Mr Notshe you might have 
something that arises from this? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   No, no I do not have.  I do not have. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.   Then we are done, there 
has not been any indication from the – Ms Mokonyane’s 
legal team that they would like to re-examine or anything?  
10 
Yes, okay, that’s fine yes.  Oh, okay, just switch on your 
mic then.   
 
Okay, your counsel will re-examine, so he will put 
some questions to you, he says he will be five minutes, 
then you can just – he does so in order to just clarify 
certain things that he wishes to be clarified. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Thank you Mr Chairperson, I am 
indebted to you.  Ms Mokonyane would you please look at 
the document that is Mr Agrizzi’s response to your 
statement, you will find it at page 64, it is his response 
20 
dated the 18 t h of November 2019.  When was the first time 
that you saw this document? 
MS MOKONYANE:   This is the one that is dated 2019 
November? 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Yes. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 208 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:   I saw this document after it was 
already in the newspaper. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   This document here, where I want 
to put to you, perhaps you can clarify it with the leave of 
the Chairperson, this was only given to us over this last 
weekend. 
MS MOKONYANE:   It was given to us this Sunday, we 
worked on it Chairperson overnight and hence I am saying 
this we learnt of the story on the newspapers but we got 
hold of this document, this past weekend. 
10 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   But you wanted to proceed with 
this matter today? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Yes, I wanted to proceed with the 
matter today. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Now at page 70 of that document, 
and this is an issue that arose for the first time on the 
weekend, at paragraph 20.4 there is an issue that Mr 
Agrizzi says that I cannot cross-examine him because he 
dealt with me personally on numerous occasions together 
with attorney Brian Biba.  Is it still your wish for me to 
20 
cross-examine him? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Chairperson I will still wish that my 
legal representatives do actually cross-examine Mr Agrizzi 
and for now I don’t even know what is the conflict that he 
is referring to or his reservation.   
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 209 of 214 
 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well maybe I should deal with that 
because at some stage this – today I would deal with that.  
The – I saw that in your affidavit, in Ms Mokonyane’s 
affidavit there is a line somewhere saying she would like to 
cross-examine or to have her legal team cross-examine Mr 
Agrizzi, but she has not – that has not been dealt with as 
an application for leave to cross-examine simply because 
the rules make provision for what to do if you want to apply 
for leave to cross-examine and that didn’t come in that 
10 
way.  I think the affidavit came because we requested Ms 
Mokonyane to file an affidavit.  I think the legal team, her 
legal team if they wish to pursue an application for leave to 
cross-examine may be should just reflect on the rule and 
then take it from there. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   As you please Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so from – certainly from the 
Chairperson’s side it wasn’t taken as an application for 
leave to cross-examine but the legal team of – her legal 
team can reflect on that and take it from there. 
20 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   And just two remaining issues, 
thank you Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Then you will see at page 73 
Madam, 
at 
paragraph 
27.1 
Mr 
Agrizzi 
states 
here 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 210 of 214 
 
unequivocally that the meat was purchased from Zeeman’s 
Foods, Greenhills Butchery, Randfontein, and you have just 
been referred to Ms Dube’s statement where she says the 
food came from Food Boys in Strydom Park, do you know 
either of these companies? 
MS MOKONYANE:   No Chairperson I don’t know either of 
the two. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Then my final issue Madam is you 
have touched on it but you haven’t clarified it in succinct 
terms and I would like to be more specific about this if you 
10 
can.   You have two sons that are referred interchangeably 
to by Mr Agrizzi and he seems to have confused the two.  
He specifically states that your one son, whom he doesn’t 
name, had a drug problem and went to Clanwilliam and he 
implies that that is the son that then passed away.  Is that 
the case, is there any merits in that or not? 
MS MOKONYANE:   Chairperson it is not the truth, my son 
who had gone to Clanwilliam and got rehabilitated from 
substance abuse is still alive, he is trying his best to get 
out of it, and therefore Mr Agrizzi is not telling the truth.  
20 
My son who has passed on had nothing to do with the 
drugs, in fact he had challenges of being persecuted by the 
media and being chased around, just for him being an 
ordinary child and now being labelled as Nomvula’s son, so 
that 
is 
the 
difference, 
and 
I 
really 
think 
that 
the 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 211 of 214 
 
interchangeable use of the two indicates that he was 
actually clutching on all straws because Africa Mokonyane 
is alive and may he live long.  Retlabusa is now in his 
grave, he has been buried, he passed on in November 
2010 and there was a lot that surrounded what the media 
was saying about him, but again in my culture and in the 
manner that I respect bereavement we opted never to 
respond to the media and until today we have refused to 
take such issues into the public space, and hence I do 
believe that he is heaving ulterior motives.  He does not 
10 
even know the people he is talking about. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Then finally madam your son who 
passed away full name was? 
MS MOKONYANE:   It is Retlabusa Mohaho Mokonyane. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   And your son who is still alive and 
who seems to have confused with, that son’s full name is? 
MS 
MOKONYANE: 
 
 
My 
first 
born 
is Africa 
Peter 
Mokonyane. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Those were the only issues Mr 
Chairperson, thank you. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   No thank you.  I think there is just one 
question that I wanted to raise and you may have dealt 
with it but I want to be sure about it.   With regard to your 
son who went to, is it Clanwilliam, Mr Agrizzi said BOSASA 
paid or whatever expenses for him being accommodated 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 212 of 214 
 
there and he said BOSASA made all the arrangements for 
him to be accommodated there.  I think in your affidavit 
you have denied that but I just want to be sure. 
MS MOKONYANE:  Chairperson my son was part of a 
group of young people who were picked in the streets of 
this country and taken into rehabilitation.  He had to be 
removed even here because he was chased by the drug 
lords and trying to push him and he then out of the 
processes from here in Krugersdorp they then arranged 
that they would rather take him to a place that is away 
10 
from where the drug lords are and those that wanted to 
continue using him, and that is how Africa ended up in 
Clanwilliam.  It was part of that social programme that I 
was 
talking 
about 
where 
Orlando 
Pirates, 
various 
businesses against crime, various other organisations were 
part of in taking our kids away from the programmes, and 
he actually presented himself. I actually picked up other 
kids from the streets, from their homes with the consent of 
their parents and some who were above the age of 18 who 
volunteered to go to BOSASA. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   So would the position be that BOSASA 
may or may not have paid but that was not at your request 
if they did pay? 
MS MOKONYANE:   No it was not at my request. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 213 of 214 
 
MS MOKONYANE:   It was their own ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Initiative. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Initiative like I am saying Chair they 
have picked up so many kids., 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay, thank you. 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL:   Mr Chairperson just for the record 
the reference to that is at page 84, that is why it hasn’t 
been dealt with previously, we didn’t have this document 
before. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay no thank you. 
10 
UNKNOWN COUNSEL   Just for the record. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you.  Mr Notshe you are 
done? 
ADV NOTSHE SC:  I am done Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV NOTSHE SC:   The only thing is Ms Mokonyane had 
promised to give us details of people in government who 
can be contacted about ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you can get that through her 
lawyers, after, ja.  Ms Mokonyane we are done, thank you 
20 
very much for coming to give evidence in the Commission 
and that we have also stayed beyond four o’clock in order 
to finish. 
 
 
Thank you very much, we appreciate it. 
MS MOKONYANE:   Thank you very much Chair. 
20 JULY 2020 – DAY 235 
 
Page 214 of 214 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, we are going to adjourn then and 
tomorrow we will resume at normal time, ten o’clock but we 
are done with the evidence of Ms Mokonyane. 
 
We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 21 JULY 2020 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
