 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
29 OCTOBER 2019 
 
 
 
DAY 184 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 2 of 170 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 29 OCTOBER 2019  
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Ms Hofmeyr, good morning everybody.  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes are we ready? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  We are indeed Chairperson.  We are today 
commencing a week of evidence in relation to the New Age as you 
indicated at the conclusion of yesterday’s proceedings.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair with your leave I propose to do a few things in 
introduction this morning. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Before I hand over to my learned friend Mr Mbikiwa 
who will be presenting the evidence of the first witness.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair those matters  are – are really to locate the 
evidence of this week in the previous evidence.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  That has been received by the commission.  It is then 
to deal with certain procedural aspects that need to be addressed 
before we commence the e vidence and then in conclusion to highlight 
20 
some of the key questions that we submit are going to navigate the 
evidence in the course of this week.  So if I may with your leave do 
that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes please do that. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you so much.  Chair the New Age newspaper 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 3 of 170 
 
was launched towards the end of 2010 and we have received evidence 
on that already in the commission.  And as a new newspaper on the 
market it was looking for subscriptions and advertising spend.   
It also entered into an arrangem ent with the SABC to conduct 
what became as known as business breakfasts which would then be 
broadcast on SABC 2 on the Morning Live show.  And you have also 
heard evidence about that arrangement in the SABC evidence.   
The backdrop to the evidence that yo u will hear today also 
includes the evidence of Mr Maseko who you will recall right at the 
beginning of the commission’s hearings gave evidence that towards the 
10 
end of 2010 he was approached by Mr Atul Gupta asked for a meeting 
and on the day of the scheduled meeting Mr Maseko’s evidence was 
that he was contacted by the former President Mr Zuma who indicated 
to him that the Gupta’s wanted to meet with him and that they needed 
help and that he should assist them.   
Mr Maseko’s evidence was that he attended that meeting and 
during the meeting he was informed by Mr Gupta that the Gupta’s 
wanted the R600 million advertising spend of GCIS the Government 
Communication and Information Service to be directed to the New Age 
and he was further told at a later meeting that if he was not to oblige 
20 
he could be dealt with. 
Mr Maseko’s evidence was that he refused the instruction and 
that in February 2011 he was transferred out of GCIS.   
We have also heard evidence in the commission Chair of Mr 
Gilliland.  He was one of the early witnesses who is an employee of 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 4 of 170 
 
National Treasury.  And what he had done for the commission was 
tracked all of the payments that occurred on the BASS system which is 
the repository of National and Provincial Government spend within the 
country.   
And he tracked for the commission payments by National and 
Provincial Governments to the TNA.  The upshot of that evidence just 
to remind ourselves was that between 2011 and 2018 there had been a 
total of R248 million spent by National and Provincial Govern ments with 
the TNA. 
And of that R248 million R94 million was paid by National 
10 
Government various departments within National Government and the 
remainder was paid by the Provinces.  And the highest ranking spend 
amongst the Provinces were as follows:  
The Free State spent over that period R75 million with the 
TNA.  KwaZulu Natal spent R24 million and the North West spent R22 
million.  So that was a capturing of the extent of the spend within 
National and Provincial Government with the TNA over the period 2011 
to 2018. 
Chair the commission has also heard the evidence of Mr 
Manye.  Now Mr Manye was the person who was moved into GCIS after 
20 
Mr Maseko was transferred out to DPSA.  And Mr Manye’s evidence was 
to support the GCIS spend with the TNA.  
And you will recall Chair that he did so on a few grounds.  
Amongst them were the following: 
He indicated that the positive editorial stance of the TNA was 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 5 of 170 
 
something that was attractive for government advertising spend.  
He also listed the provincial reach of the TNA as be ing a 
particular aspect of what would justify spend with the TNA.  
And then he also indicated that it was not the most expensive 
of the newspapers in which advertisements could be placed.  
And off the back of that his evidence before this commission 
was that there was justification in spending with the TNA.  
Chair Term of Reference 1.6 of this Commission’s Terms of 
Reference requires the commission to determine amongst other things 
whether there were any irregularities, undue enrichment, corruption or 
10 
undue influence in the awarding of contracts and advertising spend with 
the New Age.  It is a specific Term of Reference and it is for that 
reason that there have been further detailed investigations undertaken 
in relation to TNA. 
The focus of this weeks’ evidence  is going to be to move to the 
state owned enterprises themselves and to look at the extent to which 
they contracted with TNA and the extent of their spend on various 
aspects of the TNA offering which included advertising in the 
newspaper, subscriptions for the newspaper and then support of the 
business breakfasts which was amongst the field of opportunities that 
20 
the TNA offered to state owned enterprises as well as departments.  
Chair the investigation has been taken – undertaken alongside 
existing investigations that have occurred and which we draw to your 
attention this morning in order simply to preface where those 
investigations went and landed and where the investigations of the 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 6 of 170 
 
commission have taken the evidence further.  
Chair the first of those is the  Portfolio Committee on Public 
Enterprises.  You will recall conducted its hearings into state capture in 
2017 and 2018 and in November of last year produced their report.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  I remember. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair that committee looked at on e of the key Eskom 
contracts that was concluded with the TNA.  They looked at some 
broader aspects but their particular focus was the third of the contracts 
that was entered into in 2014 between Eskom and TNA in the order of 
R43.2 million.  And Chair a num ber of findings were made in relation to 
10 
that which I will come to in a moment.  
 
The second investigation that we have uncovered that also 
occurred around this issue is an investigation by the Public Protector in 
2013, 2014 and 2015 which arose from a comp laint alleging a concern 
insofar as there was what appeared to be millions of rands of both 
Department spend as well as SOE spend on TNA since its beginnings in 
2010.  And the essence of the concern was at that point in time TNA 
had no accredited circulation figures and no verifiable readership.   
And so the investigation that the Public Protector undertook 
was to engage with the DPE and the various SOE’s who had spent 
20 
monies of advertising budgets with the TNA to understand on what 
basis that spend was justified against a complaint that said there is no 
verifiable circulation or readership for this newspaper why are millions 
of public funds nonetheless being directed to this entity?  
Chair we have been informed that that investigation of the 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 7 of 170 
 
Public Protector was actually never completed.  There was never a final 
report issued on it.  Albeit that there are one or two references to the 
TNA and the eventual state capture report which is the basis for the 
formation of this commission but that specific investigati on did not 
produce a final report.   
Nonetheless there was important interaction between the 
Public Protector ’s office, the Ministry as well as in particular Eskom 
and Transnet which we believe is important to put to the witnesses in 
the course of this week because it – it was a warning from Chapter 9 
Institution at the time that they were contracting with the TNA about the 
10 
justification for that contracting and the value for money that may or 
may not be received.  And so we will be putting those parts of 
interaction with the Public Protector to witnesses.  
 
Chair in summary the focus of the evidence will be on the 
Eskom and the Transnet contracts with TNA.  The reason for that is that 
you have already heard SABC evidence on its arrangements with TNA.  
 
There are some further aspects of that evidence which I 
understand will be presented in a later session of the SABC evidence.  
So we will not traverse that this week.  
 
You have also heard evidence from SAA about its spend with 
20 
TNA and so again we do not traver se that.  The focus will be 
particularly on Eskom and Transnet.  
 
And just in summary the evidence of this week will show that 
insofar as Eskom is concerned the total spend of Eskom over the period 
2011 to 2017 was in the order of R59.6 million.  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 8 of 170 
 
 
It was broken down into three contracts.  The big one, the third 
one was the one I have mentioned previously.  It was a contract for 
R43.2 million and then the remainder is made up by subscription 
agreements with the TNA. 
 
Insofar as Transnet is concerned the total spend over the 
period is in the order of R147 million and that comprised both support 
for the business breakfasts that were flited on SABC as well as 
advertising spend.  And the evidence will take you through those 
various amounts that were committed.   
 
Chair I indicated that the Portfolio Committee had made 
10 
certain findings.  And I indicated that what we propose to do this week 
is take some of those findings further.  
 
I would like to highlight what the three pertinent findings of the 
committee were.  Chair the bundles contain all of the relevant 
documents – we will take you to them in the course of the evidence.   
 
But just in summary at the outset the Portfolio Committee 
found in its November 2018 report that given the limited circulation of 
TNA it did not seem clear why Eskom would direct so much advertising 
spend to it.  We propose to deal with that aspect with the evidence of 
current and former employees of Eskom neither of whom gave evidence 
20 
before the Portfolio Committee in order to explore further wh at could 
have justified this spend and whether there was value for money when 
Eskom made the determination to enter into these agreements.  
 
The second finding of the Portfolio Committee was that Mr 
Collin Matjila who was then the interim Chief Executive of  Eskom had 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 9 of 170 
 
acted improperly in awarding the contract of R43.2 million to TNA in 
2014 and despite that there were no disciplinary consequences for Mr 
Matjila and there was no shareholder follow up in relation to his 
conduct which lawyers at the time had determined to be evidence of 
financial misconduct as that term is understood in the PFMA.  
 
We intend to probe that aspect further with former board 
members of Eskom in relation to their decision making at the time and 
probe with them why no further steps were  taken in relation to this 
irregular expenditure. 
 
And then third and related to that the Portfolio Committee 
10 
found that it was unclear why the board of Eskom which was appointed 
at the end of December 2014 ratified that R43 million contract with TNA 
and they found that it – they could not understand how that ratification 
decision could be justified. 
 
Chair in the course of this week we will receive evidence from 
the former Chair of the Eskom board at the relevant time as well as one 
other board member.  An d those aspects will be probed with them.  
 
Chair in relation to Mr Matjila there have been efforts made to 
contact Mr Matjila over the last number of weeks by the commission in 
order to have an opportunity to meet with him in advance of this week’s 
20 
evidence and indeed to have him present evidence.  
 
Those efforts have not met with success.  They have included 
telephonic attempts to engage him on all available public numbers 
associated with him as well as emails to the last known address for Mr 
Matjila.  But no response has been received as yet.  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 10 of 170 
 
 
Chair it is our hope that possibly with the publicity of today’s 
proceedings Mr Matjila may well come to – if he has not already 
understand that this evidence is being presented to the commission and 
we hope would voluntarily engage us so that we can engage with him 
further. 
 
If that does not take place Chair we suggest that maybe an 
appropriate case for a Regulation 10.6 Directive at the conclusion of 
the evidence this week or indeed a summons in due course.  But Mr 
Matjila is certainly implicated in the Portfolio Committee’s findings as 
well as in the evidence that you will hear in the course of this week.  
10 
 
And so it would be in the interests of the commission for his 
version of events to be placed before it.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Did he testify before the Portfolio Committee?  
ADV HOFMEYR:  No.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  And is there anything that suggests that he was 
invited and maybe they also experienced the same problems.  
ADV HOFMEYR:  There is a list of persons invited we wil l take you to 
that.  He is not included in that list.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And that was part of the reason for our efforts to – to 
20 
engage him further. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair once we probe those aspects that the Portf olio 
Committee left open we do Eskom first we will then move to Transnet 
and interrogate its justification for the R147 million spend with TNA 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 11 of 170 
 
over the period.   
 
And the evidence there will include two current Transnet 
employees as well as the former Chair of the Board at the relevant 
time. 
 
Chair there is one caveat that I need to state up front about 
the evidence of some of the witnesses and this relates particularly to 
the witnesses who were former members of the boards of Eskom and 
Transnet. 
 
Chair the focus of this week’s evidence will be on the TNA 
contracts.  But a number of these witnesses have knowledge and 
10 
information and insight that spans beyond the topic that will be 
addressed in the course of this week.  
 
We intend to probe the matters related to TNA and matters 
flowing from those aspects.  But it may well be that those witnesses will 
be asked to return in due course as the other aspects of their 
knowledge and insight become relevant in the other work streams and 
when they present their second phases of evidence. 
 
So it is just important that it not be understood that…  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  The questions that are being advanced this week are 
20 
the sum total. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Of the questions that may be relevant to the 
information that these particular witnesses may have.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No that is fine. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 12 of 170 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair if I can then move just to the procedural 
aspects so that I can give you an update on what has preceded the 
evidence of this week. 
 
We will receive the evidence of seven witnesses over the 
course of the next four days.  All of those witnesses have been 
summoned to appear and we are indebted to them for being here and 
for engaging with us in advance. 
 
Insofar as Rule 3.3’s are concerned 36 Rule 3.3 No tices were 
issued in relation to the evidence and of those 36 32 received more 
than the 14 days’ notice that is referred to in the Rules of the 
10 
Commission. 
 
The remaining 4 – of the remaining 4 3 received 13 days’ 
notice and 1 received 6 days’ notice.  The  reason for the shorter notice 
in relation to the last is it was a notice that had to go to the liquidators 
of TNA.  It was provisionally liquidated I think as early as 2018 and it 
took some time to be able to identify the liquidators but that has been 
successfully dispatched 6 days ago.    
 
Chair it is also important just to note that all of the former 
Eskom board members who were board members in early 2015 have 
been given notice in terms of Rule 3.3  As well as Mr – for Minister 
20 
Gigaba. 
 
Chair it is important that I then place on record what 
responses have been received to date by those various implicated 
persons.   
 
If I can begin with Mr Gigaba.  Mr Gigaba was implicated or 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 13 of 170 
 
may be implicated in the evidence of Mr Pretorius from whom we will 
receive evidence today as well as Mr Mkhwanazi who will be attending 
towards the end of the week. 
 
Mr Gigaba has responded to that notice but not with an 
application to cross-examine either of the witnesses.  What he has 
done is he has put forward to the commission his version in response to 
their evidence and he has asked that that version be placed before the 
commission.   
 
With your leave Chair it is our intention to put to the very 
witnesses to whom Mr Gigaba is responding his version so that they 
10 
will have an opportunity to respond thereto. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes that is in order. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  The second response is from Ms Mabude who is one 
of the former Eskom board members.  Ms Mabude has not applied to 
cross-examine a witness but her lawyers have indicated that she is 
currently indisposed as a consequence of an operation.  They have not 
as a consequence been in a position to take detailed instructions from 
her and so she has indicated a request to reserve her position until she 
is able to engage with them more closel y and after the course of the 
evidence this week. 
20 
 
We have also received a response from Doctor Naidoo who is 
also a former Eskom board member.  He again is not applying to cross -
examine any witness but has provided the commission with an affidavit 
and again with your leave where necessary we propose to put his 
version to the relevant witnesses.  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 14 of 170 
 
 
A similar position obtains with Ms Klein who is also a former 
board member.  Ms Klein is one of the former board members who did 
give evidence to the Portfolio Com mittee and so what she has done is 
in response provided us with her statement to the Portfolio Committee. 
She is not applying to cross -examine any of the witnesses but she does 
want here statement to be placed before the commission.  She has also 
provided a copy of a particular board minute which is relevant to her 
statement but which was already in the commission’s possession and 
which we intend to traverse with the witnesses.  
 
Ms Klein makes two further requests.  She requests that she 
10 
be notified if she is implicated in any way in the evidence this week 
beyond what is contained in the statement of Mr Tsotsi who was the 
evidence – who was the witness in respect of whom she received the 
Rule 3.3 Notice.  And she has also requested to be notified if there 
were to be any adverse finding made in relation to her in advance of 
that becoming a final finding of the commission so that she might be 
given an opportunity to make representations.  
 
Chair as a legal team we see no difficulty with those processes 
but we draw to your attention her requests in that regard.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the one about findings. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Does not – I think what she should be told. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that she would need to make sure that closer to the  
completion of the hearing of evidence of the commission she makes 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 15 of 170 
 
that request afresh because it may – it may be that I would not be 
inclined to tell people in advance.  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What I am going to find against them or in their 
favour. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But what I might do is give them an opportunity to 
make submissions on any possible findings that may be made.  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And – so they may be used to how as I understand it 
10 
the previous Public Protector I do not know whether the present one 
also does things. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I do not want anybody to necessarily think we 
would first give them findings in advance and say tell us what you have 
to say.  The inclination may be m ake submissions on any possible 
findings and then findings are made on the basis that people have been 
heard. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know as long as people have been heard I do not 
20 
think that there should necessarily be any obligation goin g beyond that. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – but we will allow people if they want to make 
representations on that at a later stage.  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair we will make a particular note to 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 16 of 170 
 
communicate with her lawyers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  In relation to your indication just now.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair the last response that we have received is from 
another former board member of Eskom Mr Kariem.  She indicates that 
she is still considering her position.  She requested yesterday a series 
of documents to be made available to her and that was done.  But there 
is no at this stage application to cross -examine or a version yet from 
Ms Kariem.  She will no doubt update us in due course and we will alert 
10 
the Chair to any further responses from other former board members.  
 
Chair those are the procedural aspects of the way.  If I may 
then just conclude with – what we submit are the five main questions 
that the evidence over the course of this week will seek to probe.  
 
Chair the first of those is why executives of state owned 
enterprises directed millions of rands of their media and advertising 
budgets to the TNA when it had no accredited circulation and no 
verified readership.   
 
The second is what if any proper value  for money analysis was 
done by the state owned enterprises before they committed millions of 
20 
rands to the TNA. 
 
The third is whether – is where there were proper processes 
within the state owned enterprises to regulate media advertising 
sponsorships and subscriptions to what extent may it be held or found 
that the arrangements with TNA were irregular because they flouted 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 17 of 170 
 
those processes. 
 
The fourth is what is the role of non-executive board members 
of the boards of SOE’s in relation to the spend of those SOE’s and in 
particular in this case what is their duty when irregular expenditure is 
identified where auditors are seeking to report on it?  What obligations 
do those boards have in the face of such irregular expenditure?  
 
And finally what is the role of the shareholder when financial 
misconduct occurs within a SOE?   
 
Chair we submit that these questions are all relevant 
potentially to the recommendations that you may consider making at the 
10 
conclusion of the evidence. 
 
Thank you Chair.  And with that back ground in place if I may 
hand over to Mr Mbikiwa who will lead the evidence of Mr Pretorius.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Mbikiwa. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Chair I intend to go straight into Mr Pr etorius’ 
evidence so with your leave he may be sworn in.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Please administer the oath or affirmation?  
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record?  
20 
MR PRETORIUS:  Pieter Johannes Pretorius. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the prescribed oath?  
MR PRETORIUS:  No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on your 
conscience? 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 18 of 170 
 
MR PRETORIUS:  I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give will be the 
truth; the whole truth and nothing but the truth; if so please raise your 
right hand and say, so help me God.  
MR PRETORIUS:  So help me God. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you.   
MR PRETORIUS:  Thank you.  You may proceed. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Pretorius just to assist you to get 
your bearings there are a number of files around you.  The files – Chair 
may we enter into the record as Exhibit MM1a and MM1b the statement 
10 
of Mr Pretorius and its annexures?  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  The lever arch file containing the statement or 
affidavit of Mr Pieter Johannes Pret orius and annexures will be marked 
Exhibit MM1a and the other lever arch file that has got further 
annexures relating to Mr Pretorius’ statement will be marked Exhibit 
MM1b. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Chair during the course of Mr Pretorius’ evidence I do 
intend to refer him to the affidavits and annexures of the other 
20 
witnesses we will hear during the course of the week.  Would it be 
convenient if we could enter in their affidavits at this stage as well as 
Exhibits? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it though the implicated persons?  Which affidavits 
are those? 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 19 of 170 
 
ADV MBIKIWA:  No Chair it is the witnesses who will be appearing 
during the course of the week and the…  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you… 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And the documents in their bundles I will be referring 
Mr Pretorius to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may refer without us admitting those, we will do 
that as and when the witnesses come.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may refer – you may tell the witness that there is 
an affidavit by so and so who says the following.  Okay.  
10 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Mr Pretorius you have provided a signed statement to 
the Commission.  That begins at page 1 of File MM1A and it ends at 
page 30 of that file.  Its annexures then run from page 31 all the way to 
page 751 in MM1B.  Can you have a look at the statement and confirm 
that that is the statement that you provided to the Commission?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes.  Indeed it is. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And can you go to page 30 and confirm that it is your 
signature that appears there?  
20 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes.  It is. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you and can you confirm that the contents of 
that statement are true?  
MR PRETORIUS:  I can.  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thanks.  Mr Pretorius are there - at the outset are 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 20 of 170 
 
there any corrections that you - that you wish to make to that 
statement. 
MR PRETORIUS:  No sir. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Okay.  Mr Pretorius to start can you tell us what your 
qualifications are? 
MR PRETORIUS:  I have a BA Communication Degree in - from the 
University of the North West and an Honours Degree in Journalism and 
Public Relations and a Post - Post Graduate Diploma in Marketing.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  And what is your employment history?  
MR PRETORIUS:  I have been employed at Eskom for the last 3 1 years. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry.  Mr Pretorius please just raise your voice a 
little bit …  
MR PRETORIUS:  Sir my apologies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or - or bring the mic closer.  Ja.  Okay. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Is that better Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is much better. 
MR PRETORIUS:  My apologies.  I have been employed with Eskom for 
the past 31 years in various roles.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Can you - can you take us through the roles that you 
held at Eskom? 
20 
MR PRETORIUS:  So my first position was I was appointed as a 
non-technical instructor.  So in the training department of Matla Power 
Station.  Nine months later I was promoted to the communication office.  
A position at the power station as it became vacant.  
From there I was appointed as the Communication Advisor to 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 21 of 170 
 
the then Group Executive for Generation Mr  Johan Van Der Berg and 
from there I was - I moved over to Corporate in the role of the Public 
Relations Manager for Eskom and then I applied for the position of the 
Head of Marketing and was successful and that is the position tha t I 
currently hold. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Okay and you - you say in your affidavit that you are 
responsible for strategic marketing?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Strategic marketing.  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Can you explain to the Commission what strategic 
marketing is and how that differs from marketing?  
10 
MR PRETORIUS:  So strategic marketing is specific - specifically aimed 
at specific business problem or a cause.  So in - easy to explain for us 
is - is Eskom.  We had some power constraints and an energy 
efficiency campaign would th en be a cause.  So it is not necessarily to 
generate more - more sales which is the other side of marketing that is 
marketing and sales. 
So Nestle would generate sales on a specific product.  So the 
sales team will have targets.  The marketing team will su pport them.  
Cause or market - strategic marketing is purely about a business 
problem that exists within the organisation that is solved not only 
20 
necessarily by marketing but also with some technical aspects.  
So in energy efficiency it was marketing campai gn as well as 
the light bulb exchange program that we had.  The geyser blanket 
program that we had.  The solar water geysers that we installed and so 
on.  So there is a - a product component to it - a technical component 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 22 of 170 
 
as well as a marketing component. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Now Mr Pretorius as you know the - the subject matter 
of today’s evidence is predominantly the relationship between Eskom 
and - and The New Age.  Before we get there though I would like to - to 
spend some time for you to assist the Commission to understand what 
the processes were that existed within Eskom in relation to advertising 
and - and sponsorship agreements. 
You - you say at paragraph 9 of your statement on page 3 
that Eskom uses agencies for its strategic marketing.  In - in what 
circumstances would - would Eskom use an agency?  
10 
MR PRETORIUS:  Eskom would employ five agencies generally.  So you 
will have a creative agency.  You will have a media buying agency.  You 
will have two PR agencies.  Of late we will have a digital agency that 
looks at the social media side of - so the - these agencies are 
appointed as agents at large.  That may enter into secondary 
agreements on behalf of Eskom and then invoice Eskom and Eskom 
would - would pay them. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And - and how are they appointed?  
MR PRETORIUS:  It is through a commercial process.  I open a 
commercial process.  So at this particular time we were still 
20 
advertising.  So we would advertise in the newspapers.  On the website 
and so on and then the age - the agencies then obviously do their 
submissions and those submissions are then evaluated in terms of 
Eskom’s BEE requirements and the successful candidates are then 
provided to the technical team who then evaluates individually in a 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 23 of 170 
 
room that is no - nothing else is allowed in there exc ept the individual. 
So that there could be no communication between the 
individual and any possible supplier.  So they will do the evaluation and 
once the evaluation is done.  The shortlisted agencies are then invited 
to do a pitch presentation.  So they w ill present their credentials.  Their 
former case studies and then that would be scored and all the scores 
will then be added up and then the PPPFA since it was signed into law 
would be applied. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And - and apart from actually concluding contra cts as 
an agent what - what role do - do the agencies play for Eskom?  
10 
MR PRETORIUS:  They play different roles.  So the - the media buying 
agency would be responsible for all media buying on behalf of Eskom - 
all forms of media.  The creative agency would be the advertising 
agency or we call it creative agency because they do more than just 
advertising - creative advertising. 
The PR agencies - you will have a corporate PR agency who 
looks after the corporate PR of the organisation and assists Exco in 
certain critical issues and so on and then you will have an activations 
agency.  As you can understand Eskom has a - a lot of customers that 
are on the lower end of the LSM Grouping and therefore we interact 
20 
with them on a - on differently and - and direct way. 
So we have activations agency and then the digital agency 
will look after the social media, Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, LinkedIn 
and so on. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Can we - can we focus on the media buying agency?  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 24 of 170 
 
As I understand it that is the agency that would be responsible for 
advert - advertising in newspapers for example.  Can you - can you talk 
us through the process that - that Eskom goes through with - with the 
media buying agency when it decides to advertise in a newspaper?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes.  So the process that - that would be followed in 
Eskom in terms of the - the policy and the procedure that is in place is 
a briefing document is compiled and the briefing document includes 
background information.  What is the problem?  What are - what do we 
already know about the problem etcetera and that briefing document 
will then be sent to all agencies and the agencies will have a look at 
10 
that and then we will a couple - a couple of days later we will invite 
them to a briefing session where we allow them to ask q uestions and to 
have a discussion and so on and in that meeting we will say okay which 
agency will take the lead. 
So then the creative agency would go and develop a creative 
idea and the advertising around that and once that has been signed off 
that will be - be placed in newspapers, magazines, television, radio and 
so on.  Whilst the creative agency is doing the creative work the media 
buying agency is doing a strategy as to how we best will connect 
because the briefing document will state very clear who i s the target 
20 
market and the target - the - the media buying agency will then go 
through the research and their access to research and their experience 
will then find the most suitable tools to connect with those specific 
target audience. 
So they will provide us with a media plan or connection plan 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 25 of 170 
 
and we will sign that off and it is in detail as to when the advert will 
appear on Highveld or on 702 or whatever as well as an overall plan in 
terms of the cost. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One second.  Thank you.  You may proceed. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Pretorius you - you say in your 
affidavit that particularly important for Eskom is - is frequency and 
reach. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Can - can you explain what you mean by that?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Well it is not just for Eskom.  So it is for most 
10 
marketers.  So frequency is how often does the advert appear on 
television or on radio or in a newspaper or magazine.  So the frequency 
is I cannot place an advert once in one newspaper and expert that I 
have now - have awareness around the specific issue.  
So the frequency is - is quite important.  The reach is also 
important in terms of connecting with the right people.  So if I want to 
talk to people in LSM 1 - one or two or three and I am using cinema 
then I am not going to connect with those people because they do not 
go to cinema. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And - and you mentioned that research plays an 
20 
important part of determining that.  What - what sort of indicators are 
used by the media buying agencies to determine your rea ch? 
MR PRETORIUS:  So the media buy - media buying agency will - will 
look obviously at the circulation of - of the newspaper and Eskom has a 
policy that we only deal with - with accredited publications that have 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 26 of 170 
 
been audited.  So - and/or viewership or listenership.  So it is just - it 
is not just about newspapers.  So we will look at the - the circulation. 
We will also look at the behavioural aspects around the - the 
target market in terms of the media.  So there is media research that is 
being done on a continuous basis and the media agency has access to 
that.  So they will be able to tell you how many people have read the 
YOU in the last seven days, who have watched Survivor on - on 
television in the last seven days and so on.  
So that has an impact.  Also the popularity of the program or 
- television specifically - popularity of the program will also determine 
10 
the price of the - of the advertising.  So sometimes it may be the best 
option but it is not cost effective.  So all of that research is then put 
together in a strategy document and the strategy document is then 
presented to - to the client and the client says well yes.  
We agree or not we do not agree.  We would like this or we 
would like that or we will ask for more money in order to do this or that , 
but eventually the strategy document is signed off by the client and 
from the - the strategy document the connection plan is then developed 
which is then translated into a buying plan.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  And Mr Pretorius you said that Eskom has a policy of 
20 
not dealing with - with publications that are not accredited.  What is the 
process for accreditation?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Well it is the pub - the publication itself or the 
television station or the radio station itself needs to - to apply to the 
ABI - the Audited Bureau of - sorry. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 27 of 170 
 
ADV MBIKIWA:  I believe it is circulation. 
MR PRETORIUS:  ABC.  Sorry.  Audited Bureau of Circulations.  My 
apologies.  They would apply and they - research will be done by them.  
An audit - audit will be done by them in terms of - of readership - 
circulation sorry. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And - and given the process that you have described 
would you regard it as unusual if Eskom entered into a long term 
contract or spent a significant sum of money with a media publication 
with - about which there was little or no market research?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes.  It would be very unusual. 
10 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And so can you - can you explain why - how or whether 
Eskom would every support small media publications or new entrants …  
MR PRETORIUS:  Hm. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Which perhaps did not have this market research 
about them. 
MR PRETORIUS:  We do and we do cautiously.  So we will not enter - 
as your previous question - go into a long term agreement with a lot of 
money.  So we will start small and help build the publicatio n with other 
marketers within - in South Africa and once the publication is audited 
and their circulation figures are up to standard and so on.  Then we 
20 
would support a publication. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you and - and Mr Pretorius the - the last aspect 
on - on the agencies I would appreciate your assistance with is 
remuneration.  How - how do you pay them - the media agencies?  How 
are they remunerated by Eskom?  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 28 of 170 
 
MR PRETORIUS:  By Eskom? 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Eskom pays them a fee.  So we would det ermine 
from all the - the strategic marketing initiatives we will determine how 
much the - the budget would be and from that budget we would pay 
them between three and five percent - is their fee that they get paid to 
do the work and they provide us with a resource plan according to that 
five percent whatever. 
So you will have the business unit director.  You do not need 
every second day.  So you may have 50 percent.  The strategist you 
10 
may use occasionally.  So you will have five percent of the strategist’ s 
time. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And - and I understand that the - that the agencies 
then also obtain a rebate from the - what you describe as the media 
owner i.e. the media publication.  Can you explain how that works?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Okay.  So up until very recently  there was a 16.5 
percent rebate which is a commission that is paid to the agents - 
agency for bringing the business.  It is similar to a car salesman who 
sells a car who - who earns commission. 
So that 16.5 percent can be used by organisations to - to pay 
20 
the agency and say the commission - the 16.5 percent is what you earn 
or alternatively is like I did in - in Eskom’s case and made it more cost 
effective for me is to - to pay them a fee and then take the 16.5 percent 
pay back to Eskom and that 16.5 percent is then used to pay their fee 
and it is used to pay the - the creative agency’s fees and the balance is 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 29 of 170 
 
implement - reinvested sorry - in - in the campaign. 
So the 16.5 percent is - was a standard but recently the 
Competition Commission said that it is uncompetitive.  Therefore the - 
the agencies can now or the media owners - sorry - can now determine 
their own commissions. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you.  How - how recently was that? 
MR PRETORIUS:  I think it is within the last six months.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Okay.  Can we then move onto the issue of 
sponsorship?  You - you deal with that at your affidavit from paragraph 
23 on page 6.  Can you being by explaining to us what a - what a 
10 
sponsorship agreement is and - and how it differs from advertising in 
the ordinary course? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes.  Sponsorship is - well firstly it is a commercial 
transaction between an organisation and the sponsorship property 
owner.  So this sponsorship property owner will come to you and say I 
have this property which is - and I am just going to use the rugby as - 
as an example because it is relevant now.  The - Absa Bank will - will - 
that sponsors the rugby they will do so because there is a commercial 
benefit for them. 
They either get more clients or they get more business 
20 
through this.  So there is a commercial benefit to that.  That is the first 
thing.  The second thing is that for every R1,00 that you sponsor you 
must have at least R3,00 to leverage that sponsorship to tell the world 
that I am sponsoring and that - you do commercials during break times. 
When it is half time you do commercials or squeeze backs on 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 30 of 170 
 
television and so on.  So that sponsorship agreement then very clearly 
spells out - out the role of the sponsorship.  In other words in this case 
- in this example - Absa Bank.  What is their role?  What are they to 
provide?  Clearly spells that out and it also clearly spells out the - the 
responsibilities of the property owner.  What they need  
So South African Rugby needs to provide this, this, this and 
this and these two things are measured at the end of the day and on 
the sponsorship from - from something like an Absa Bank would be 
what is the commercial benefit at the end of the day.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Okay; and - and can you describe for us what process 
10 
must be followed before a sponsorship agreement is entered into and 
how that differs from advertising through a media buying agency for 
example? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Okay.  In Eskom we have a - a sponsorship desk.  So 
all sponsorships that are received it does not matter where it comes  
from in the organisation is supposed to be sent to the sponsorship desk 
first.  That is the first port of call.  There is a specific criteria in - in 
which a sponsorship is measured against for Eskom and this is 
developed with the - the cooperation of - of Exco and it is part of the 
policy documents. 
20 
So it is signed off within the organisation and that -once - if 
the sponsorship is measured and it scores 75 percent and above it may 
be recommended to go to the Sponsorship Committee for approval.  
Provided that there is budget.  So if I get a sponsorship for an 
environmental conference I would go to the Environmental Manager 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 31 of 170 
 
within Eskom or the Sustainability Department and say are you 
interested in - in sponsoring this and is this a particular important 
stakeholder for you and so on. 
They may say yes and they may say they have the budget 
and then we will take it to the Sponsorship Committee and a 
presentation and - and submission documents will be done and then it 
would be approved.  Once the Sponsorship Comm ittee has approved it 
you still need to enter into a contract with the - the sponsor - 
sponsorship owner - the property owner in order to make sure that the 
responsibilities are spelt out and that we are protected and so on.  
10 
We then also sit down with them  before we conclude the 
contract and negotiate the benefits.  What is the benefits that we as an 
organisation will derive from this association with you as a sponsor - 
sponsorship owner and then contract is concluded and signed and the 
sponsorship then goes ahead. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  You have - you have mentioned the Sponsorship 
Committee.  What is that and where - where in the organisation does it 
fit? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Okay.  Originally up until very recently last year the 
Corporate Affairs Division - MANCO - fulfil - fulfilled the role of the 
20 
Sponsorship Committee as well as the Management Committee.  Sorry.  
Your question further was where is it positioned.  It is currently a 
subcommittee of the Corporate Affairs - MANCO - with its own terms of 
reference, its own Chairman and has been in operation for almost a 
year now. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 32 of 170 
 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you.  Can we just go to the Sponsorship Policy 
very briefly? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  That is at page 65 of - of your bundle.  It is Annexure 
2.  You - you have dealt in your affidavit with the various criteria that 
are applied and the objects sought to be achieved and I do not intend 
to go to those in the policy.  Can we begin just by con - with you 
confirming that the same policy which is dated 2000 and revised in 
2001 was still in force in 2012?  
MR PRETORIUS:  It was.  Yes, because there was no new policy.  My 
10 
understanding is that the (intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Can you just get the witness to confirm 
that the policy starts from what page to what page?  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Yes Chair.  Can you confirm that the policy begins at 
page 65 and that it ends together with its annexures at page 116?  
Sorry - 115. 
MR PRETORIUS:  15.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR PRETORIUS:  That is all the annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay and that is a policy on? 
20 
MR PRETORIUS:  Sponsorship Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sponsorships.  Okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Could - could we turn to page 67?  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am just looking …  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Apologies Chair. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 33 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  The expected cover page that would have  big words - 
Sponsorship Policy or something like that.  So - but - they are not 
there, but it is okay.  The witness has confirmed.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Could you turn to page 67?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And at Clause 4.1 - Scope of Approval. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Could you just explain to us in what circumstances a 
Sponsorship Agreement would need to go to the Sponsorship 
Committee? 
10 
MR PRETORIUS:  All sponsorships - anything above R50 000 has to go 
the Sponsorship Committee.  Anything below R50 000 can be approved 
by the relevant executive.  However the Sponsorship Committee should 
still be informed of that sponsorship that has been made.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  And - and if you turn the page onto 68. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   
ADV MBIKIWA:  It says: 
“The …” 
At A it says: 
20 
“The Management Board may approve sponsorships 
up to an including an amount of R10 million and 
that sponsorships exceeding R10 million may only 
be approved by the Electricity Council.”  
Can you explain to us what the Management Board and the 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 34 of 170 
 
Electricity Council are?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Ja.  That was during the time Chair when Eskom was 
still the Electricity Supply Commission.  So we had the Electricity 
Council which is the equivalent of the Board now and we had the 
Management Board which is the equivalent of Exco at this stage.  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the policy had been prepared during those days 
and it has not been amended to accurately reflect current structures?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Chair it has been amended but it was never signed 
off. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR PRETORIUS:  So there is - there is currently a new policy in place.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Which is not relevant to this period of - of what we 
are talking …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  But since this policy we have had  many attempts to 
update the policy, but it - for various reasons it was not updated …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  And not signed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR PRETORIUS:  So my understanding was then in that case we refer 
to the last signed …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Policy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 35 of 170 
 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And can we turn to - to Clause 4.2 which says: 
“The 
Executive 
Directors 
will 
ensure 
budget 
provision 
within 
their 
groups 
to 
fund 
those 
sponsorship initiatives which they wish to invest in .” 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  What is your understanding of - of the requirement of 
that provision? 
MR PRETORIUS:  So a lot of the - the Executive Directors at that stage 
- the Board - the Board Members were then referred to as Executive 
Directors - had the - the notion that the  - the Marketing Department 
10 
will have this massive amount of money for sponsorships and we only 
sponsors - funding for sponsorships that was of corporate interest.  
Like for instance the Eskom Expo for Young Scientists and so 
on.  So individual or niche sponsorships that people wanted to do they 
needed to fund from their own budgets.  We did not carry the budget 
and that is what that refers to. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Okay and then the last aspect of the policy I would like 
to turn to which - which is not addressed in your affidavit is at page 
109.  That is Annexure 5 to the Sponsorship Policy and it is headed 
“Measuring the Sponsorship” and it runs from 109 to 112.  Can you just 
20 
explain to us what the - what the requirements of the spons or - the 
Sponsorship Policy are in relation to the monitoring and evaluation of 
the Sponsorship Agreements that Eskom enters into?  
MR PRETORIUS:   Well simply put it is if you have put X amount of 
money into a sponsorship property you would want to see the  return on 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 36 of 170 
 
the investment.   
 
So as I’ve mentioned before there’s a contract, a contract 
contains certain performance clauses for both parties and have those 
performance clauses been met, have we reached the target audience 
and so on.  It is always advanta geous for an organisation to have a 
long-term relationship with a sponsorship property.  If we take, in South 
Africa, for instance, the rugby, the soccer, the Nedbank golf challenge 
its long-term relationships.   
 
So it’s better to have long-term relationship.  If so if one 
sponsors something for the first time the performance assessment that 
10 
one does on the sponsorship afterwards is very important because it 
also determines, do we want to continue to do this or not?  
ADV MBIKIWA:   Thank you, so having regard to this policy and the 
process that you’ve described, would it be unusual for Eskom to enter 
into a sponsorship agreement without going through the sponsorship 
Committee or the CAD MANCO as it was?    
MR PRETORIUS:   It would be unusual yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   And without applying any of the criteria set out in the 
sponsorship policy? 
MR PRETORIUS:   It would be very wrong. 
20 
ADV MBIKIWA:   And would it be unusual, after entering into such an 
agreement for there to be no monitoring or evaluation as to the succ ess 
or the impact of the sponsorship?  
MR PRETORIUS:   It would be unusual, not a norm. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Thank you.  I’d like now to turn to the…[intervenes].  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 37 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you able to indicate what the frequency may 
have been prior to the New Age era of  such unusual features, in other 
words, deviations from what you expected to happen?  
MR PRETORIUS:   Chair since I took over in 2007/2008 there has not 
been any apart from the New Age. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, and prior to that would you have known if there 
were any by virtue of the position that you occupied then?  
MR PRETORIUS:   Yes Chair because our financial business partner 
would do a check on the general ledger account for sponsorships so we 
will see if anybody in the business has spent any money on 
10 
sponsorship, on the general ledger account number and then those 
would be addressed if it had not gone through the proper process, it 
would also then constitute a condonation in such instances.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And had – are you able to recall any instances prior 
to 2007 when this had occurred, namely these deviations, these failure 
to do what would have been usual?  
MR PRETORIUS:   Chair I cannot recall. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You can’t recall? 
MR PRETORIUS:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you. 
20 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Mr Pretorius can we then turn to, what is really the 
focus of today’s evidence which is the contracts entered into between 
Eskom and the New Age and Chair can I just say that during the course 
of this I’ll be referring to TNA and the New Age interchangeably, TNA 
Media was the entity that owned the New Age newspaper.  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 38 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Mr Pretorius we pick that up from paragraph 29 of 
your affidavit where you say that you first became aware of an 
approach to Eskom by TNA on the 22 n d of March 2011 when Mr Jacques 
Roux contacted Mr Chose Choeu. 
MR PRETORIUS:   Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Who is Mr Chose Choeu? 
MR PRETORIUS:   He was my Divisional Executive who I reported to.  
ADV MBIKIWA:   And Mr Jacques Roux? 
MR PRETORIUS:   Mr Jacques Roux was from – well allegedly from the 
10 
New Age and I say allegedly because he’s email was not TNA it was 
JIC. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Okay can we turn to that email correspondence, it’s at 
page 117 it is Annexure three to your affidavit.  
MR PRETORIUS:   Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   And if we start from the bottom Mr Jacques Roux 
contacts Mr Chose Choeu and as you say Mr Jacques Roux’s email 
address is JIC, do you know what JIC is?  
MR PRETORIUS:   No I would have to guess, I’m assuming it’s some or 
other [indistinct] house. 
20 
ADV MBIKIWA:   And Mr Roux says, 
 
“Dear Chose, pursuant to our telephonic conversation we 
 
request a meeting during the week, if possible to introduce 
 
the New Age Newspaper to you.  I attach hereto a brief 
 
overview of the product for your perusal and asks for a  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 39 of 170 
 
 
meeting at your convenience – at Mr Choeu’s convenience”. 
 
Further up Mr Choeu then forwards that to Ms Raisa Wadja 
copying Jacques Roux and you and says,  
 
 
“Please find time to meet with Jacques Roux”.  
 
Who is Ms Wadja? 
MR PRETORIUS:   She’s a colleague, she runs the corpor ate 
communications 
department 
which 
is 
internal 
and 
external 
communication. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   And how did you understand Mr Choeu’s email to Ms 
Wadja? 
10 
MR PRETORIUS:   Well because I was just copied I accepted that is for 
information only, Ms Wadja had met wit h Jacques Roux and then 
realised that this is not in her area, it should be in my area, so she 
referred Mr Roux to me. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   And can we turn to the proposal that’s attached to Mr 
Roux’s affidavit, that’s at page 119 and I don’t intend to go throug h the 
whole thing but if we could turn to page 124 and there the proposal 
says that the New Age was launched on the 6 t h of December 2010 and 
that it is currently distributing over 100  000 copies per day.  How would 
you have verified whether that statement was true? 
20 
MR PRETORIUS:   We would have checked up with ABC.  
ADV MBIKIWA:   Okay and was the New Age accredited with ABC?  
MR PRETORIUS:   No they were not. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Do you know whether they had ever applied for 
accreditation with ABC?  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 40 of 170 
 
MR PRETORIUS:   They – Mr Howa informed me at some point that 
they have but we have not – until its demise we have not seen the 
certificate from ABC. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Okay, Chair we have obtained an affidavit from ABC 
which confirms that TNA never applied for accreditation , I can take you 
to that affidavit, it’s at page 752, it’s in Bundle MM1B, so the second 
file containing Mr Pretorius’ Annexures.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   And it simply confirms that TNA never applied for and 
was never granted certification. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  
ADV MBIKIWA:   We’ve simply included the affidavit because we don’t 
understand this to be a contentious point, but of course we do so 
provisionally and if any dispute arises in due course we will deal with 
that appropriately. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes that’s fine, so I think for present purposes it’s 
enough to just identify where it is to be found and you have said what 
is says in substance and we don’t need to go beyond that.  
ADV MBIKIWA:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well if you want to read , it’s a paragraph or 
20 
something it’s fine. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   It’s not necessary Chair it literally says what I’ve just 
described. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Mr Pretorius can we then return to your affidavit, 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 41 of 170 
 
that’s – and to paragraph 32 where you say  that a meeting did happen 
between – well with Mr Roux, do you know if Ms Wadja attended that?  
MR PRETORIUS:   No she didn’t. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Do you know who attended?  
MR PRETORIUS:   I was there, Mr John McArdle who worked for me at 
that time and my immediate GM, Mr Tsehepo Moremi. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Sorry Mr Pretorius I think you’re referring to a 
subsequent meeting that I’m going to get to shortly, this is a meeting 
that followed immediately after the correspondence I’m referring to and 
you indicate at paragr aph 32 that you understand the meeting took 
10 
place as scheduled but you did not attend.  
MR PRETORIUS:   I do apologise I did not – I could not attend the first 
meeting, I’m not sure, I think it was in April, I may have been on leave 
so John McArdle would have stood in for me or acted on my behalf and 
he attended that meeting. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Mr McArdle attended that meeting?  
MR PRETORIUS:   Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   And who is Mr McArdle? 
MR PRETORIUS:   He was the Corporate Marketing Manager who 
reported to me and has subsequently retired for four years ago, three 
20 
years ago. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Okay and now we can move on to the subsequent 
meeting that occurred which you describe from paragraph 33 and you 
say that Mr McArdle was contacted by a TNA representative.  Can y ou 
describe what took place at that meeting?  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 42 of 170 
 
MR PRETORIUS:   It was TNA and the same proposal that we’ve just 
looked at for the New Age breakfast and that Eskom should be part of 
that…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry I may have missed this, can you c over who 
requested the meeting, what was the purpose of the meeting and then 
before going into the contents of the discussion of the meeting?  
MR PRETORIUS:   Of course Chair.  The request came from TNA to 
have a meeting with Eskom and the objective of the meeting was to 
discuss the proposal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you. 
10 
ADV MBIKIWA:   And what was the proposal at that point?  
MR PRETORIUS:   It was a proposal that we had looked at so it was for 
– specifically for the New Age breakfasts that they wanted Esk om to 
sponsor. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   And can you just describe for us broadly what these 
breakfasts were? 
MR PRETORIUS:   Okay so the breakfasts…[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry I know you said Mr Mbikiwa you’re not 
going to spend much time on the proposal but if that’s the proposal that 
was the subject of the discussion at the meeting let us have the 
20 
important features of the proposal before we go into the meeting.  I 
assume that the proposal was given to you ahead of the meeting or not 
really? 
MR 
PRETORIUS: 
 
 
Chair 
I 
don’t 
recall 
but 
I 
would 
assume…[intervenes]. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 43 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh is your recollection that you got it at the 
meeting? 
MR PRETORIUS:   Chair I really cannot recall, my boss…[intervenes].  
ADV MBIKIWA:   Chair can I try to assist?  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   The proposal that I referred you to a moment ago is in 
fact a proposal only for advertising it – that proposal, as far as I 
understand doesn’t contain any proposal for any business breakfasts.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay. 
ADV 
MBIKIWA: 
 
 
It 
was 
a 
proposal 
– 
if 
you 
are 
10 
interested…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No we can look at it at the time that you think is 
right, I thought that it was going to be the subject of the discussion of 
the meeting that he’s going to now.  
ADV MBIKIWA:   Yes, Chair as far as I am aware there was no proposal 
circulated in respect of business breakfasts before that meeting.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that’s fine. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   But I do understand that it forms – that business 
breakfasts formed part of the discussion at that meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No okay that’s fine, let’s go ahead, you said the 
20 
purpose of the meeting was to discuss a proposal?  
MR PRETORIUS:   Ja a proposal from the New Age. 
CHAIRPERSON:   New Age? 
MR PRETORIUS:   So my understanding was, as – that it was to 
discuss advertising and then when Jacques Roux came it was 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 44 of 170 
 
advertising and the business breakfasts.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   And sorry where we left off Mr Pretorius, is I asked 
you just to give a sort of broad description of what these bus iness 
breakfasts were? 
MR PRETORIUS:  So the proposal included a breakfast at one of the 
hotels in the city with SABC’s morning live programme being broadcast 
live from the venue to – for an additional hour so they are from six to 
eight so it was from seven to nine, more specifically the business 
breakfasts.  The TNA then sold tickets to the event, so people who 
10 
wanted to attend either had to buy corporate tables or single seats at 
these events and they would then, according to New Age, they would 
also then promote the business breakfast through their newspaper, the 
New Age and allegedly SABC would also promote it on radio and on 
their website they would be – promote and advertise that the business 
breakfast with whoever the celebrity or Minister or whoever it was 
would be and then they would sell tickets for that.    
ADV MBIKIWA:   And what was it that it was being proposed, Eskom 
would do? 
MR PRETORIUS:   It was proposed that Eskom would sponsor the 
20 
breakfast, initially for R1million a breakfast.  
ADV MBIKIWA:   Okay thank you.  Chair I see that we have reached 
quarter past eleven, it might be an appropriate time for the tea 
adjournment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We’ll take the tea adjournment and we’ll resume at 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 45 of 170 
 
half past eleven, we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS  
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Mbikiwa you may proceed. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Pretorius if we can pick up where 
we left off which was the meeting that you and Mr Magardil [?] had with 
Mr Roux and you say that the proposal was for business breakfas ts 
which Eskom would sponsor at a R1 million a breakfast.  How did you 
respond to that proposal at the meeting?  
MR PRETORIUS:  I declined it immediately. 
10 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And why? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Because they did not have the circulation.  They 
were a new publication and I am – I – one would not – well most 
marketers will not take that kind of money and put it into a publication 
that does not have a track record.  Also if you look at it from a 
sponsorship point of view if you wanted to sponsorship in Eskom one of 
the criteria in which we measure has this sponsorship been – been 
done before and have this people had success with this sponsorship?  
Because we cannot associate any brand name it does not matter which 
brand but in this case Eskom with something that i s going to be 
20 
absolute disaster.  So if there is no proven track record then we would 
not – we would definitely not get involved.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  And did you express those concerns to Mr Choeu your 
executive – your – the Divisional Head? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes we gave him feedback from the meeting on – 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 46 of 170 
 
with Mr Roux. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And how did he respond?  
MR PRETORIUS:  At that point in time he agreed with us.  There was – 
I considered the matter closed and then later there was an instruction 
that we will enter into an agreement.  I am not sure if I am jumping 
ahead. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  No I was – I wanted to get exactly there. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  But I see the Chair has a question.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but are we still at the meeting that you were 
10 
telling us about or have you gone beyond the meeting?  
MR PRETORIUS:  We have gone beyond the meeting Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I did not hear – I did not think that what I heard 
was a full content of the discussion at the meeting.  There was a 
proposal for the breakfast shows. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that right? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Also for advertising in the New Age?  
MR PRETORIUS:    Yes Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it was at that meeting where you took the 
position that you have just described? 
MR PRETORIUS:  What my position was – sorry Chair I just…  
CHAIRPERSON:  At the meeting. 
MR PRETORIUS:  At the meeting? 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 47 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Was that no we will not take you up on your offer or 
your proposal but I did say because you are a new entrant into the 
market that we will put – give some advertising budget towards the New 
Age.  I did not confirm any amount at that point in time because I 
needed to discuss it with the team.  Just maybe for the Chair to 
understand that.  Although I a m the Head of Marketing there is 
Marketing Project Managers that execute each one of these strategic 
marketing initiatives. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR PRETORIUS:  And as a manager I do not prescribe to them what 
publications they need to go in.  I am assuming they are qualified and 
they do – they make the decisions based on this.  I will check it from 
time to time and I will step in and if they do not meet their targets then 
obviously they get penalised for that.  So I would not have made a 
commitment to Mr Roux at that meeting with regards to advert – any 
advertising amount.  So that was the – in my opinion the end of the 
meeting and the feedback because Mr …  
CHAIRPERSON:  And in relation to that what was their response, the 
New Age people?  What did they say to  that?  If you are able to 
20 
remember. 
MR PRETORIUS:  I am – Chair if I was to give you my opinion it would 
be … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You cannot remember? 
MR PRETORIUS:  I cannot really remember. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 48 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  I think I remember but I am not sur e. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but there was simply no agreement.  
MR PRETORIUS:  There was no agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And – and then on the breakfast – on the 
breakfast show what – what did you convey to them?  
MR PRETORIUS:  I said… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  I said absolutely no – no we will not and we did not 
commit to anything. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  And did they seem to accept that or you cannot 
remember what their attitude was?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Ja I cannot remember the – what the – it was just 
Jacques there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  That – from the New Age. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  So we said no.  I cannot remember really what his 
reaction was. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But there was just no agreement.  
20 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You indicated that in principle Eskom could give them 
some advertising insofar as they are a new publication.  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you did not commit yourself to any amount?  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 49 of 170 
 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you Chair.  And Mr Pretorius as I understand 
your evidence earlier you said that – that the way in which Eskom 
would often deal with smaller publications or new entrants was to offer 
smaller deals? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes absolutely. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  So let us now turn to what happens after the meeting.  
CHAIRPERSON:  So – I am sorry Mr Mbikiwa.  So at the meeting you 
have no recollection whether the New Age delegation tried to persuade 
10 
Eskom that there was value for Eskom in sponsoring the breakfast 
shows? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Chair they did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They did try? 
MR PRETORIUS:  But they were not – they did not convince me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  I – I … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You could not see where the value – what value there 
would be? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Ja I could not see and I have been a marketer for 
20 
almost 30 years. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  And from what they were offering. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR PRETORIUS:  It did not make sense to me. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 50 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Where would my R1 million be goin g. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  If you selling tickets. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Pretorius you then say that you 
communicate these concerns to Mr Choeu?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Well it was not concerns at that point in time.  It was 
feedback.  If you recall the email that was sent to Raheesa and then 
subsequently to me as my – I was reporting to Tshepo Moremi, Mr 
10 
Tshepo Moremi who was the General Manager who reported to Mr 
Choeu.  At that point I gave feedback to Mr Choe u and said we have 
met with New Age as per your instruction and we are not going to take 
them up on their offer but we will offer them some advertising.  And I 
and I am – my – I cannot assume for Mr Choeu but I assumed that this 
was the end of the story.  But it was not. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And then you – from paragraph 36 of your affidavit 
from page 11 you say that you communicated these concerns or not 
concerns this feedback to Mr Choeu and that he told you to conclude 
the contract because an instruction had co me and that is what you were 
20 
getting to next. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Okay.  So after the – the feedback meeting to Mr 
Choeu there was – the New Age had not gone away.  The New Age had 
met with Mr Choeu in his office – Nazeem Howa and there was one 
other person – her name –  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 51 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you can look at in your statement if that will 
refresh your memory. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Ja the Mr Howa and Ms I cannot remember the 
second person’s name that was there – they had met with Mr Choeu 
and I was invited to the meeting a nd the discussion was about the 
business breakfasts again.  I again expressed my concerns around this.  
I was asked to leave and then Mr Choeu – I – we had the discussion 
where I raised the concerns and he said to me, Pieter it is an 
instruction.  It comes  from the Minister.  Brian Dames had told us that 
you will do this.  And I arrogantly…  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us go back to the meeting.  Who asked you to 
leave the meeting? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Mr Howa from the New Age. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh was it his place to ask you to leave? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Not in my opinion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and Mr Choeu he did not protest at that?  
MR PRETORIUS:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And are you able to say what may have 
prompted Mr Howa to want you to leave?  
MR PRETORIUS:  I can only assume Chair  that is was because I was 
20 
against the business breakfast and I did not want to spend the money.  
CHAIRPERSON:  You had already expressed that view by – when he 
asked you to leave? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At the meeting had – at that stage had Mr Choeu also 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 52 of 170 
 
expressed his view where he stood on the issue or not yet?  Or you 
cannot remember? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Mr Choeu’s style has always been that this is the 
Head of Marketing and he will make the decision and he will give you 
feedback.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  So I was giving feedback and directly after that Mr 
Howa just looked at me and then he said to Mr Choeu if I remember 
correctly I cannot remember the exact words.  We have other business 
to discuss.  And then he turned to me and he said,  Mr Pretorius you 
10 
may excuse yourself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you Chair.  And you say that Mr Choeu 
communicated to you that the instruction had come from the Minister?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes.  Well that was implied.  So it came from the top 
and the – there was subsequent emails where some of the Ministers 
staff was copied on the New Age discussions that we were having and 
some of those staff members Gmail accounts were used.  So it was 
clear to me that this was an instruction and Mr Choeu had spoken to Mr 
Dames and Mr Dames had said the Minister said you will do this.  
20 
ADV MBIKIWA:  So Mr Choeu communicated to you that Mr Dames had 
communicated to him that the Minister had said that you will do this?  
MR PRETORIUS:  That is my understanding yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Okay.   
CHAIRPERSON:  And who was the Minister at the time?  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 53 of 170 
 
MR PRETORIUS:  Minister Malusi Gigaba. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Chair as – as Ms Hofmeyr referred to earlier we have 
received an affidavit from Mr Gigaba.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  In response to the 3.3 Notice that he received.  Can I 
ask you to go to the affidavit?  It is at page 776 in File MM1b.  
MR PRETORIUS:  77? 
ADV MBIKIWA:  6.  776.  And if I can ask you to turn in particular to 
page 778 at paragraph 7 before tha t Mr Gigaba effectively summarises 
10 
the allegation that is made.  And he says:  
“I deny that I ever gave any such instruction.  Such 
would amount to me as a representative of a state 
shareholder interfering with the operational matters 
of Eskom which I never  did.” 
What do you say to that?  
MR PRETORIUS:  I disagree with the Honourable Minister because had 
interfered in the operations of the business on many occasions on many 
other things as well.  So the – there would be no plausible reason for 
Mr Dames or Mr Choeu to force me to go into a contract other than an 
20 
instruction from somebody higher up.  And Mr – the Honourable 
Minister is – is saying that he denies that he gave such an instruction 
saying that would be interfering with the operational matters of Esk om 
which I never did.  That statement is not true because Mr Gigaba had 
often when – especially when we went through load shedding and 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 54 of 170 
 
various other things Mr Gigaba was there.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Is – is your evidence that you cannot say for sure 
whether he gave the instructions that were told about – the instruction 
that you were told about but that you have no reason not to believe 
what you were told by Mr Choeu who said he had been told by Mr 
Dames that the Minister had given instruction?  But that you are sa ying 
to the extent that the Minister says he would never interfere in 
operational matters you say on that one you say that is not true, that 
cannot be true because you know of many instances where he 
interfered in operational matters.  Is that – is that what you are saying 
10 
or are you saying something different?  
MR PRETORIUS:  I am – Chair that is what I am saying is just that 
there was a lot of interference from the Department of Public 
Enterprises since the load shedding that started on the 24 January 
2008.  So the DPE or Department of Public Enterprises had often come 
to the – to Eskom and telling Eskom or instructing Eskom to do certain 
things.  So you look at the coal contracts which was also discussed.  
Some of the procurement issues and so on was discu ssed with the 
Minister and the Minister had been part of the discussions.   
CHAIRPERSON:  And when you talk – when you say Minister in this 
20 
case you still referring to Mr Gigaba?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Mr Gigaba yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Pretorius can we then go – move 
onto paragraph 8 of his affidavit?  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 55 of 170 
 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Where he says that: 
“It also does make sense that the fact that I was 
scheduled to be a guest speaker at a TNA breakfast 
of 12 April 2012 could serve as a reason for the TNA 
contract to be concluded.  According to paragraph 37 
of the Pretoria statement I had already agreed to be 
the guest speaker and clearly this had nothing to do 
with the conclusion of the TNA contract.  I was not 
even aware of the negotiations between Eskom and 
10 
TNA and or the SABC which was the broadcast of the 
TNA business breakfasts.”  
What do you say to that?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Well the Minister was not aware that this 
negotiations.  Remember that I pushed back on the contract wit h the 
New Age and then we had to conclude the contract. So the Minister 
would not have been aware that we are in the process of negotiating 
the first contract and that we were in talks with the New Age.  Secondly 
the – the instruction came that he is the guest speaker and we should 
own that breakfast.  So – because the Minister can talk about energy 
20 
efficiency and Eskom and the 49 M campaign in that session.  So yes.  
The fact that he already said yes to be the guest speaker had no 
bearing on our decision because the decision or the instruction had 
already come that you will do it. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Indeed and Mr Pretorius do I understand correctly and 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 56 of 170 
 
this is – I am jumping ahead a little bit but – but – that the contract for 
the business breakfast that Eskom signed was signed on the 13 April 
but in fact operated retrospectively from the beginning of the month?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  So that it did include Mr Gigaba’s…  
MR PRETORIUS:  It did. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Con – business breakfast? 
MR PRETORIUS:  It did yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Can we then move to paragraph 39 and 40 of your 
affidavit and this is where you begin to talk about the conclusion of the 
10 
first contract with TNA.  This is at page 11 of your affidavit.  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And you say that Mr Choeu contacted you asking you 
to meet with Mr Roux to quote “close the deal”.  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Can we go to that correspondence?  That is at page 
131 of the same bundle.   
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And I would like us to star t from the earliest part of 
this correspondence which appears at the bottom of page 133.  And at 
20 
the bottom of page 133 Mr Choeu emails you and Mr Roux and says:  
“Please meet with Jacques so you could close the 
deal on the TNA 49M breakfasts as part of the  
Minister’s National campaign.”  
Can you explain what the – what 49M is and the Minister ’s National 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 57 of 170 
 
campaign? 
MR PRETORIUS:  So 49M at the time of – of the load shedding there 
was very – Eskom’s reputation took a huge knock and there was also 
very little credibility within the brand.  So with the creative agency at 
that time we sat down and we developed a strategy how could we put 
something between Eskom and the public?  That can talk to the public 
because we still needed to talk to the public to save electr icity and so 
on.  So the agency came up at that stage we were 49 million South 
Africans in the country and that is the 49M campaign – that is what it 
stand – stood for.  The Deputy President Honourable Malema – ag – no 
10 
sorry Motlanthe that the – the opening or the launch of the campaign.  
So we wanted the Deputy President’s office to take – be the champion 
of the campaign and he took the lead in that.  The Minister played a 
role in the 49M campaign in that I was also asked and it is not part of 
this questioning but I was also asked or instructed to include LSM 1, 2, 
3 and 4 in the campaign.  And we were specifically talking to high end 
users so in the residential markets so we were talking to LSM 8, 9 and 
10 where the people have the money to waste electrici ty.  They put 
under floor heating and so on and so on.  So our primary market was 
not LSM 1, 2, 3 and 4.  But the Minister wanted to – to meet with these 
20 
people and we had organised various road shows to various traditional 
townships within the country to promote 49M.  And that is why this is 
part of the Minister’s the comment of the Minister ’s National campaign.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Please enlighten me Mr Pretorius on LSM what – what 
… 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 58 of 170 
 
MR PRETORIUS:  Sorry Chair my apologies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not know much about it as you might think I do. 
MR PRETORIUS:  My apologies Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  LSM is Living Lifestyle Measurement so it is an 
organi – it is done by SARF the South African Research Foundation.  
They measure the various aspects of the p opulation.  So LSM 1 would 
be the poorest of the poor.  So they are able if you by the LSM 
documentation you will be able to determine where they live, how they 
live, what is their average income, what they own and so on and so on.  
10 
So and then going to th e middle classes is 5, 6, 7 and ja 4, 5, and 6 the 
middle classes what they own, what electricity compo – equipment they 
have in their house and so on and that is why that was quite important 
to us.  So when we did our research as to the consumption the 
consumption was obviously in – sitting in LSM 8, 9 and 10 who are the 
– the wealthy people in a country.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no thank you. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And as I understand your earlier point the – the – 
because high income users tend to be higher users of electricity the – 
49M was initially directed at the higher income earners according to the 
20 
– to the LSM measure? 
MR PRETORIUS:  The 49M campaign as by its name was to include the 
whole of South Africa to create a national movement in order to declare 
war on electricity wastage. That was the main aim but the primary 
target audience for the launch of the campaign was LSM 8, 9 and 10.   
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 59 of 170 
 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Okay.  If we can then return to the correspondence 
that we were at at page 133. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Mr Pretorius I am just interested in the – 
in the high use of electricity by the high income earners.  Would there – 
what would be the difference I mean a lot of people in what you may 
regard as you would put at LSM – low LSM’s you know have television 
sets there and they use electricity to – to cook and I am sure they – 
some have music systems and so on.  So I am just interested in apart 
from businesses in terms of home what – what would be the type of 
things that the high earners do which are unlikely to be d one by in 
10 
terms of electricity by the low SMM’s people other than that maybe high 
earners might have three or four television sets in the same house – 
house whereas maybe the people in the lower category might have one.  
MR PRETORIUS:  Chair ja.  That answer to this is twofold.  One is just 
that it is behavioural.  So – although you – you refer to the lower LSM’s 
having television, music sets and also using maybe a two plate electric 
stove to cook on and so on.  The attitude or the behavioural aspect of 
those people are already in a savings mode.  Because they are not high 
earners in terms of salaries.  So they need – I have to make a choice 
do I send my child to school or do I cook.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR PRETORIUS:  So they already…  
CHAIRPERSON:  They care more about saving. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And therefore with regard to electricity they would be 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 60 of 170 
 
trying to use it minimally. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Especially because of – of the price and so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  So they would already be frugal. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  To answer the second part of the question Chair 
where you asked what does the higher LSM have that the lower LSM 
does not have.  Yes you are quite right. They might have three or four 
television sets. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
MR PRETORIUS:  They have dishwashers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Which you will not find in the lower LSM.  They have 
automatic washing machines, tumble driers, under floor heating, 
swimming pools and so on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  So for us – for Eskom in particular at that point in 
time was the peak period in the afternoon.  So from 5 to 8 or 5 to 9 was 
the peak period.  So we did not want those people with the swimming 
pools and so on and the automatic washing machines and durin g winter 
20 
to switch on all these stuff during peak time because it created a 
problem for Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Because that is when we ran out of capacity and that 
we had to go into load shedding as a last resort.  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 61 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Well I guess you also true would be that 
because they are wealthy the question of the costs might not be a big 
thing to them. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Chair the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Compared to people at lower levels.  
MR PRETORIUS:  So Chair the research that we did specificall y after 
the 2008 and to set ourselves up to deal with – with load shedding 
because remember it was – it was a long term issue that we had to deal 
with as a country.  So the research that we had done is we looked at – 
at convenience factor, cost and the env ironment.  Sadly the 
10 
environment did not score very high.  People did not want to save 
electricity to save the environment.  They did not want to.  There was a 
very few people that made the connection and only in the higher LSM. 
In the lower LSM there was no appetite for saving for environment.  The 
cost element was at the lower LSM and at the higher LSM was the 
convenience factor.  I have money, you are supposed to supply 
electricity so supply me with electricity.  I am not cutting back and I 
have the money to pay for it.  So that was the attitude that the higher 
LSM’s had at that point in time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
20 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you.  Mr Pretorius can we then return to the 
correspondence at page 133?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  In response to Mr Choeu’s email if we move up the 
page Mr Roux responds: 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 62 of 170 
 
“Thanks Mr Choeu for suggesting the meeting and 
asks when would be – when you would be available”  
And then further up the page you respond to him and you say:  
“Hi Jacques perhaps in preparation f or our meeting 
you could put a sales proposal together.”  
Now that – that suggests that – by that point you had not received a 
sales proposals? 
MR PRETORIUS:  We had received a proposal that was one sided.  So 
the proposal that they came and saw us with - with the breakfasts and - 
and the advertising was in there but subsequent to that as I said there 
10 
is - many meetings have taken place …  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Huh-uh. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Across - with Mr Choeu and Mr Howa - (clearing 
throat) my apologies and so we were a t a different point in that and I 
had a budget in - in mind which I got from - from Mr Choeu saying how 
much we should be spending with The New Age.  So that is why I asked 
him for a sales proposal …  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Because now we had two components in - in this 
document.  We had the sponsorship component and we had the 
20 
advertising component. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And - and in this email you ask that - that he provide 
some sort of discount or added value if you are going to enter into a 12 
month sponsorship. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes.  My middle name is “Added Value”.  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 63 of 170 
 
ADV MBIKIWA:  If we can then …  
CHAIRPERSON:  So this is at a time when you were now basically now 
carrying out the instruction that you were told had been given?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And - and Chair if I can ask a follow on question from 
that.  Is your understanding from Mr  Choeu’s email at the bottom of the 
page of “close the deal” …  
MR PRETORIUS:  Hm. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  That you must go ahead and sign the contrac t? 
10 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  If we then turn to page 132 at the bottom Mr  Roux 
says that they have kept four breakfast’s open for Eskom to sponsor.  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And then in the middle of the page Mr  Choeu responds 
to Mr - to Mr Roux and he says that the 49M breakfast that we are 
proposing here are the breakfasts that would be aligned to the 
Minister’s 49M National Campaign and he asks for the breakfasts to be 
specifically styled in - in the 49M style - design. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think I have lost you Mr … 
20 
ADV MBIKIWA:  I apologise Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where …? 
ADV MBIKIWA:  We are on page 132.  It is my fault.  I did not indicate.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  When we get to correspondence we - we need to work 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 64 of 170 
 
backwards in order to go in chronological order. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  So - so I started on page 130 …  
CHAIRPERSON:  You can - you can rest assured I know that part.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  We started on page 133 and we are now on page 132.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And I am in the middle of the page.  I am looking at 
Mr Choeu’s’ email. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And I see there that someone by the name of 
10 
Mr Mzwandile Radebe … 
MR PRETORIUS:  (Intervenes). 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Is copied. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Who is that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  It would be Radebe. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Radebe.  Apologies Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Radebe. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Mr Radebe - Mzwandile Radebe was working directly 
with the Minister and was the liaison between us and the Minister.  I am 
20 
not sure what his official title and role was at DPE but he was not there 
Head of Communication.  So it would be unusual for us - for my 
department because I am not responsible for stakeholder engagement 
to engage with - with anybody else at DPE other  than the Head of 
Communication. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 65 of 170 
 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And when you referred earlier to people within the 
Minister’s Office being copied on correspondence were you referring to 
an email such as this? 
MR PRETORIUS:  I was referring to Mr Radebe because instructions  
came from him verbally.  I just wanted to mention actually earlier that 
and - and it relates to a question that the Chair asked earlier.  That 
unfortunately I did ask for - arrogantly asked for this to be put in 
writing because I do not - I will not execute this if the - if it is not in 
writing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR PRETORIUS:  I never received any of the instructions in writing.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Now you - you - your request for this to be in writing 
was it directed at Mr  Choeu? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did he promise to give it in writing?  He did not?  
MR PRETORIUS:  He did … 
CHAIRPERSON:  As far as you remember.  He did not?  
MR PRETORIUS:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you never received the written instruction?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Neither did we receive writte n instruction from 
20 
Mr Dames. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  So we were sort of court in the middle of this …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  And this is when - when Mr Roux starts copying 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 66 of 170 
 
Mzwandile.  Mzwandile was giving instructions to everybody.  To the 
Chairs of the various State Owned Entities, the CE’s, to us.  So if 
Mzwandile asked us to - to put a pink pillow on the Minister ’s chair.  
We had to do it.  We had no - no questions asked.  You just do it …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  And if you did not do it then he reported you to the 
Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  So that made it very - incredibly difficult for us to - 
to operate … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  As an independent State Owned Entity.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, hm.  I guess that a lot of what Mr Pretorius may 
have to say about such instructions might come out in the other phase 
that Ms Hofmeyr talked about where I could be told more about some of 
those things. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So - so I am just mentioning Mr Pretorius in 
case anybody might wonder why we are not probing into some of the 
things you are mentioning.  That Ms  Hofmeyr did say that there will be 
20 
another phase where …  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Some of the - of the Eskom witnesses would come 
back and then deal with other matters.  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes Chair. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 67 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
MR PRETORIUS:  I understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Then Mr Pretorius if we can go further up the 
correspondence.  Mr Roux then thanks you for the update.  Says it is 
an exciting opportunity that they will be willing to explore with you and 
then suggests that you close the initial deal of the four breakfasts first 
this week. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  If you then turn over to page 131 .  Mr Choeu three 
10 
says that you - you will - that you will be working with Pieter - that is 
you - and Tshepo.  Who is that? 
MR PRETORIUS:  It is Mr Moremi, my GM - General Manager - that I 
reported to directly. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Okay and - and then the correspondence ends towards 
the top of the page with a meeting scheduled for the next day.  Do you 
recall if that meeting took place?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And what occurred at that meeting?  
MR PRETORIUS:  That is where Mr Roux and presented the proposal to 
20 
us and it was still about the business breakfast and some advertising 
and I said to him that we will have a look at it and come back to him on 
that. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And - and how did the proposal at this point differ from 
the previous meeting that you  had? 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 68 of 170 
 
MR PRETORIUS:  If I remember correctly that there was - the 
advertising spent was much higher than what we were willing to spend 
from the proposals and this had four breakfasts in.  They were talking 
about four breakfasts for Eskom which later then c hanged to six and 
because he - Mr Roux had indicated that they had sold all the other 
breakfasts. 
So there was only four left and he kept those specifically for 
Eskom.  However two - two breakfasts were added to the contract at a 
later stage. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And - and how did you respond at that meeting to - to 
10 
the request? 
MR PRETORIUS:  So I said to Mr Roux that I will discuss it with my 
media agency.  So I discussed it with Donald Depoko (?) who was the 
Business Unit Head at MediaShop and I asked Donald to  - 
Mr Depoko (?) to come up with a proposal that is more palatable for 
Eskom. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Okay.  Let - let us just pause there.  You mentioned 
the MediaShop.  What is the MediaShop?  
MR PRETORIUS:  The MediaShop was our media buying agency.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Right. 
20 
MR PRETORIUS:  At the time. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And - and Mr Depoko (?)? 
MR PRETORIUS:  He was working for MediaShop and he was the 
Business Unit Director on the Eskom business.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  And - and did Mr Depoko (?) express any - any 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 69 of 170 
 
reservations about the - the contract? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes.  He did. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  What did he say? 
MR PRETORIUS:  He also agreed with me that it is not a - a good idea 
to go ahead with this and I said to him Donald we have no choice.  We 
have to do this. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And was it normal practice for a sponsorship 
agreement - which I understand the business breakfast component to 
be - to go through a media buying agency such as the MediaShop?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Well not the sponsorship component but this - this 
10 
particular proposal contained an advertising component.  So we said 
that because of that we will put - to put it through the MediaShop.  The 
issue here Chair was that if we wanted to enter into an agreement - this 
was my advice to Mr Choeu at the time. 
If we enter into an agreement with The New Age we might find 
the other media asking why were we - we not given an opportunity and 
according to Eskom’s Procurement Rules and Regulations that it should 
go out on open tender, but if I was to - gone to place an advert in the 
Sunday Times because I have gone through open tender to appoint a 
media agency as the media buying agency I would just say to - to 
20 
MediaShop that we want to place an advert in the Sunday Times for a 
new Chief Executive or whatever the case may be.  
So that is - is different but this New Age had a proposal 
which they believed rightly or wrongly that could help Eskom solve its 
problems, but we had not checked the market.  So we would have - the 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 70 of 170 
 
- the prudent thing would have been to do an RFI - a request for 
information first to see - to test the market and then decide on a 
process. 
That - that would have been the prudent thing, but because 
we did not have a choice I suggested that we add the advertising 
component and we do it through MediaShop.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Can I then ask you to turn to the next chain of - of 
correspondence?  That is on page 139.  It is Annexure 5.  At the bottom 
of the page and then of course it - it goes over to page 140.  Mr  Roux 
contacts you and thanks you for your meeting.  Attaches a presenta tion 
10 
of the event as well as an estimate of the investment breakdown.  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  You then - if we go further up on page 139 - contacts 
Mr Depoko (?) … 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And you - you set out there a - a division of 
responsibilities. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Can you - can you explain that to us?  
MR PRETORIUS:  I - I wanted to make sure that The New Age takes 
20 
care of what they - that it is documented that they will take care of 
what they said in the proposal which was a PowerPoint presentation.  
This was to be a contract that they needed to be signed.  So that there 
is a clear - we understood that there is a division of - of duties or/and 
responsibilities and that is what we - that is why I am saying we will - 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 71 of 170 
 
what Eskom will do and what they are supposed to do.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  And then if we go over to - to 138.  Mr Depoko (?) 
responds to you and says Tshepo has impressed on me the importance 
of finalising this proposal with TNA and he has committed R10 million 
to TNA. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The - these interactions at this stage were in regard 
to both The New Age and the breakfast shows?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes.  The advertising and the breakfast, yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  The advertising and the breakfast shows?  
10 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Chair perhaps to - to make that clear … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  If you - if you go to page 142 that is the attachment to 
Mr Depoko’s (?) email at the top of 138.  So …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  On 142 is the - is the breakdown … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Of the proposed spend. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Mr Pretorius could you just take us through this table 
and explain to us what here is - is the advertising and what is the 
business breakfast? 
MR PRETORIUS:  So the top part talks about the Eskom programs.  
Those are the various Eskom programs that we were running at the 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 72 of 170 
 
time - the Eskom Development Foundation Energy Losses Integrated 
Demand Management.  Then we took a proposition - Mr Depoko (?) took 
a present - ag - a percentage of their budget spend and then calculated 
their contribution to the R4 million that we were going to spend on 
advertising with - with The New Age. 
So you will see right at the bottom 49M we had to contribute 
20 percent because we had the highest budget.  So we had to - to place 
R800 000 worth of advertising.  So that is the first component.  The 
second … 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Just to pause you there.  So in other words the top - 
10 
the top eight rows are all related to advertising?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  In - in The New Age Newspaper?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes.  So each of the - these - these Program 
Managers were made aware and said this is - you are responsible to - 
to - or you must make sure that in your media plans you include N ew 
Age and for the Eskom Development Foundation you need to spend 
R160 000 over the year. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Okay and then let us - let us move down to the - to the 
- where - where it reads brand 100 percent and it gives a figure of 
20 
7.185 million. 
MR PRETORIUS:  That is for the business breakfast.  So that was to 
talk to - to the brand and the 49M brand.  (Coughing) my apologies.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  And … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Just explain that to me.  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 73 of 170 
 
MR PRETORIUS:  Sorry Chair that was … 
CHAIRPERSON:  The brand part.  What was to be done?  Why was it to 
be done?  Who was going to do it?  
MR PRETORIUS:  So this is the business breakfasts.  So the - the R7.2 
million that we spent was to - the sponsorship for the - for the business 
breakfasts.  So we would pay a million Rand to New Age for the 
business breakfast.  I am not sure if I am …  
CHAIRPERSON:  To - to say for the - for the business breakfast what - 
what does that mean?  For what exactly?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Okay. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  In terms of Eskom. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Chair so for the - the format - am not sure if you are 
asking about the format of the business breakfast.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I am - I am trying to - to understand what Eskom 
was going to get for that R7 million.  
MR PRETORIUS:  Okay.  So we were going to get si x breakfasts over 
the course of the year.  The - the speakers at the breakfast was 
determined by The New Age.  Not by Eskom.  So they would have a 
Minister and they would have a breakfast and they would say okay 
Eskom here is an opportunity.  Then we - we or Transnet would take the 
20 
opportunity to - to sponsor that breakfast.  So the sponsorship then 
included that we would have branding in the venue similar …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Just - just like this? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Pictures like this.  The difference is it is Eskom - it is 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 74 of 170 
 
written Eskom. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Well it was - it was 49M Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  49M? 
MR PRETORIUS:  And - and New Age was a backdrop banner exactly 
as that is behind you and then we had opportunity to put up some pull 
up banners and then we had an opportunity to - the Editor of The New 
Age always sort of opened the breakfast and then Eskom - an Eskom 
representative of Exco or the Chairman or the Chief Executive was 
given an opportunity to do a speech, but this was off air.  
It was not on air.  So nobody other than the people in the 
10 
venue heard this.  Then the breakfast was served and then they went 
live to - to the - the SABC2 Morning Live and then Mr Ndoro would ask 
questions to the Minister - whoever is there - and even then the - the 
public then via Twitter and via the studio SMS line also asked questions 
and Mr Ndoro from SABC then asked those questions as well.  
The challenge that one - I had with - with all of this was that 
the Minister if it is the Minister of Water Affairs and Sanitation that 
Minister will not talk about 49M and energy efficiency.  That Minister 
will talk about her or his portfolio.  Not about energy efficiency.  So for 
me it did not make sense to have that Minister because the message 
20 
that I needed to get out was to get 49 million people to rally around 
energy efficiency. 
So once we have made the speech - the Eskom speech and 
they went on air we never as Eskom got the opportunity to talk about 
49M and what it stands for and so.  There may have been - and I admit 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 75 of 170 
 
to that - there may have been the odd comment or question around 49M 
or energy efficiency from Mr Ndoro but it was not common practice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But even before you get to whether it is somebody 
from Eskom - whether somebody from Eskom speaks to the people 
present or his or her speech is broadcast on television even before you 
get there.  Why did - why would Eskom want to spend money - maybe 
let us leave that part of speaking for now.  
Why would they spend such a lot of money for simply having 
these things at such breakfasts and even if they are shown on TV and 
so what? 
10 
MR PRETORIUS:  No Chair.  I cannot answer that question.  It - it did 
not make sense to me either. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No.  I - I mean I know I have read your 
statement.  I know your difficulties with it.  I - I mean I - I could 
understand maybe - I could understand that maybe if a private business 
wants to advertise their business and so on and so on.  Maybe it might 
make some sense depending on what they pay for it, but Eskom is a - is 
a State Owned Entity and why - why is it important to it to just have its 
name in such breakfast shows - just the name? 
MR PRETORIUS:  No Chair.  It did not make sense because it was not 
20 
even the Eskom logo.  It was the 49M logo which was …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Completely a different brand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  It was black and - and yellow …  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 76 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  And Eskom’s corporate colours are blue.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  So the 49M logo if you did no t have context around it 
some people in - in the market research that we did at that time some 
people thought it was a radio station.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Well I am not surprised. 
MR PRETORIUS:  So - so we - we did not have the opportunity to 
engage on 49M.  Plus if you look at the - the target market the people 
that watch SABC Morning Live were also not our primary target market 
10 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Because it goes up to ANN6 and people that at 9 o’ 
clock in the morning is still at home …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Watching television are most probably economically 
inactive. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  So they are not part of the target market …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR PRETORIUS:  And they are not the decision makers when it comes 
to what we pay or what we spend the money on.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  So for us as an organisation it would not - for me a 
marketer and for us as an organisation that would not be sufficient.  I 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 77 of 170 
 
would not pay a million Rand …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  For that.  I would negotiate a completely different 
package, but as I have mentioned before Chair we were forced into this 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  And this was the format …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  And when the - there was a period in - in - during the 
- The New Age Breakfast that the other media had complained about 
10 
this and - and why - why is - is The New Age and Eskom or State 
Owned Entities in this transaction and The New Age’s reaction to that 
was on their - they wrote in - in the newspaper that other newspapers 
are just jealous because they came up with this concept but it was not 
true because Mail & Guardian during POP17 had come up with exactly 
the same concept which we - Eskom sponsored for R300 000 at POP17 
in Durban where we had a far better brand exposure and we had an 
opportunity to talk about our sustainability and environmental issues at 
- at that event. 
So if you take that an example versus this as an example.  It 
20 
just simply makes no financial sense for Eskom to spend that kind of 
money on a breakfast and then I am - I know I am jumping head - but 
then Chair you also have to ask yourselves the question.  If you are 
selling seats.  So I am paying for my breakfast.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Well I was still coming there.  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 78 of 170 
 
MR PRETORIUS:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No.  No.  Continue, because I am looking at exactly 
what you pay 7 million or a million Rand per breakfast show for.  
MR PRETORIUS:  So the - the tables will be sold.  So Eskom got two 
tables of 10.  So that is 20 seats an d then two - two seats at the main 
table - whoever the Minister was that was there.  We - we would have 
two seats there.  Unfortunately because of the reputation of - of The 
New Age which spread very quickly.  
You found it very difficult to get people to - to fill the tables.  
So some of the tables were filled by Eskom staff and that defeats the 
10 
object, but those - those tables - the rest of the people in the venue 
would pay for their - for their seats. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Their seats? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Ja.  So if one is financially astute you would 
calculate the cost of the ticket which will include those 20 seats that 
you are giving away for free or 22 seats that you are giving away for 
free - you would include it in the cost of whatever a seat was.  I cannot 
remember how much it was. 
So they would sell those seats which would pay for the 
breakfast, would pay for the - the venue hire and table decorations if 
20 
there was flower - I cannot remember if there were flowers on the table 
and so on, but nothing elaborate.  No elaborate breakfast.  It was a 
normal kind of breakfast at - at a three, four - four or five star hotel. 
So my question was where does my million Rand go because 
it cannot go into the business breakfast because you have already paid 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 79 of 170 
 
for that by selling tab les and - and seats. So where does the million 
Rand go because this is Eskom money.  It is public money.  Why is it 
going there? 
So my - that was my question and I asked this question to 
Jacques and I asked the same question to Mr  Howa as well.  I am yet to 
receive an answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And at that time Mr Choeu was he in agreement with 
your views about the breakfast shows and advertising on - on The New 
Age except that he said we are under instruction or something like that 
or did have different views?  
10 
MR PRETORIUS:  Mr Choeu has a different style Chair if I may - 
Mr Choeu always used the - the phrase you need to manage your boss.  
So you need to manage upwards.  So I needed to manage him which I 
failed to do, but …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  So Mr Choeu said Pieter way make yourself sick by 
worrying about this because there is nothing you can do about this.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  So let us do this to the best of our ability …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR PRETORIUS:  Because this is what we have been instructed to do 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Or told to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 80 of 170 
 
MR PRETORIUS:  So he has a different style in terms of that.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  I think and - and when Mr Choeu testifies you can 
check with him but I think that Mr Choeu had very similar views …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Around this …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Than what I have. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Okay.  Thank you, but even if the Eskom 
representative were to be allowed to speak and his or h er speech was 
10 
allowed -was broadcast.  Would the position not be that if - if Eskom 
wanted to address the public about any issue of interest such as load 
shedding if they called a media conference they could easily get that 
broadcast? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes; and we do Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  So if we call a media conference I mean …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Everybody attends and it is lined with cameras in - in 
our … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you pay nothing for it. 
MR PRETORIUS:  We pay nothing for it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you Chair.  I am - I am indebted for those 
questions because that - that traverses much of the ground I wanted to 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 81 of 170 
 
cover on - on value for money. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Just two residual issues on that score, the one is, Mr 
Pretorius do you know whether the New Age, as part of the costs you 
referred to was paying for the broadcast – paying SABC to broadcast 
the show? 
MR PRETORIUS:   My understanding, it was for free.  
ADV MBIKIWA:   and you mentioned earlier that the – while it was 
broadcast on SABC2 the morning live show didn’t target the LSM Group 
that 49M was directed at, being the higher LSM Groups.  Chair, Mr 
10 
Pretorius has attached to his affidavit a presentation done b y the Media 
Shop which indicates that 28% of the viewers of morning live were from 
the high LSM’s of 8 to 10 and that 72% were from the lower ones, It’s 
not necessary for us to go there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Ms Hofmeyr reminds me that there is one important 
aspect of that presentation, it’s at page 165 of MM1A.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   You see there that underneath the table it says that in 
2012 Morning Live had an average of 600  000 adults who viewed the 
20 
programme.  The data that I just gave you Chair is immediately below 
that of the 28% of the higher…[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes I can see that ja. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Thank you…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course – I don’t know to what extent, at that 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 82 of 170 
 
stage, this might have been a  factor, namely illegal connections may 
have been an issue that may have needed to be attended to as well as 
part of saving electricity but I don’t know whether those who engage in 
illegal connections would have any incentive not to use electricity 
because they would not be paying for it anyway.  
MR PRETORIUS:   Chair if I may you refer you back to page 142 with 
the table that Mr Tobogo had put together you will see that on that table 
that there’s – the second programme from the top says energy losses 
programme.  So energy losses, there’s two types of losses in 
electricity, technical losses.  So transmitting electricity over long 
10 
distances you lose electricity that’s why you have step-up transformers 
to step-up the voltage again, so that’s technical losses, t hen non-
technical losses includes everything that are illegal connections, ghost 
vending, whatever you can think of is part of that.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja okay. 
MR PRETORIUS:   And then just underneath, integrated demand 
management is a programme called public  safety.  Public safety is a 
legal requirement for Eskom that we have to inform the public of the 
dangers of electricity so that people don’t climb pile -ons and touch 
wires and so on and so on and the public safety campaign does not 
20 
necessarily look at illegal connections but unsafe connections.  So both 
of those are also covered in that.  So if the question was, why did we 
not talk about this on morning live, we never got the opportunity 
because I said to Mr Howa that we need to, then the first 30 minutes of 
the programme that is being broadcast needs to be an Eskom 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 83 of 170 
 
representative talking on one of these topics but that never 
materialised. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But of course SABC would allow a Eskom 
representative to come and be interviewed on issues of – such issues, 
public interest issues I would imagine, maybe not as regularly as 
Eskom would like but I would imagine that they would be interested in 
Eskom conscientising people about, for example saving electricity and 
talking against illegal connections and you k now being safe with 
electricity. 
MR PRETORIUS:   Chair we had a meeting with one of the Boards of 
10 
the SABC of which there were many and at that Board meeting we had 
presented this and the Board – sorry not the Board, the Exco had 
agreed of the SABC that yes, we will or they will and they will include it 
into the DJ’s or the on -Air talent’s narratives talking about the 
electricity safety, saving electricity etcetera, etcetera.  Unfortunately, 
things unfolded differently at SABC so that agreement became null and 
void because a new Board – new members were appointed and then the 
whole debacle around the SABC that you’re aware of I’m sure.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you recall around about when those discussions 
had been…[intervenes]. 
20 
MR PRETORIUS:   I’m trying to think who the Chairperson was 
because…(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes because I think Mr Mbikiwa mentioned there was 
a new Board in 2015 or was it Ms Hofmeyr?  
ADV MBIKIWA:   It was Ms Hofmeyr, it was appointed at the end of 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 84 of 170 
 
2014 – December 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mmm.  Does that more or less ring a bell in 
terms of…[intervenes]. 
MR PRETORIUS:   Ja it could be – it could have been that – at that 
time, the Chief Executive was a lady who came up through the ranks at 
SABC, she used to work at Eskom and that’s how I knew her. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR PRETORIUS:   And now her name has just – I’m not good with 
names Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mkobo not Mkobo something. 
10 
MR PRETORIUS:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you say there had been discussions between 
Eskom and the Board of SABC at a certain time, precisely relating to 
Eskom being given an opportunity to talk at SABC and talk to the public 
about electricity saving and safety and so on and on a number of issues 
and that didn’t happen, even though an agreement had been reached 
because there was a new Board that came and things took a different 
direction? 
MR PRETORIUS:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And of course you were not going to pay anything or 
20 
were you going to pay anything with SABC?  
MR PRETORIUS:   Chair this is where there was always a contentious 
issue between Eskom and the SABC, we see public safety as a public 
service announcement a PSA which we should not be paying for.  The 
SABC sales people who are the people that we deal with have certain 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 85 of 170 
 
targets to make an order for them to get bonuses.  So the PSA or the 
public service announcements never went any further.  We had 
meetings with the Education Department within the SABC around this, 
we had asked our Chairman to meet with their Chairman which had 
taken place and they agreed but it never ever got implemented. So we 
always paid so all of these programmes…[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   But nothing anywhere near what we are looking at 
here…[intervenes]. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Sorry Chair for interrupting it would be more than 
what we spent here on New Age. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh? 
MR PRETORIUS:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh that’s – that comes as a surprise to me, okay 
alright. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Mr Pretorius can we then turn to the first contract that 
Eskom entered into with the New Age, you describ e that from paragraph 
48 of your affidavit but – sorry I’d like you to go to the contract itself, 
that’s at PP6 on page 144. 
MR PRETORIUS:   Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   You’ll see that at clauses 1 and 2 the advertising and 
20 
business breakfast sponsorships commitme nts are set out, that’s what 
we’ve been discussing, the R4million and the R7.1million but what I’d 
like to refer you to is to page 149, that’s Annexure B.  
MR PRETORIUS:   Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   This, as I understand it, is a table that sets out how 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 86 of 170 
 
the million rands is arrived at, is that correct?  
MR PRETORIUS:   Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   And could you give us your comment on the values 
that are attributed to each of these items, to SABC live coverage, brand 
naming, advertising coverage?  
MR PRETORIUS:   The SABC live coverage, R627 000 is a bit low in my 
opinion I can’t give you the exact figure because I’d have to calculate it 
per 30 seconds. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   It’s low as a value but it’s R627  000 too high as an 
actual cost to TNA?   
10 
MR PRETORIUS:   No but they’ve – Eskom did not derive the value 
from R627 000 because the discussion on-air was not about Eskom.  So 
in my opinion that has no relation to Eskom…[intervenes].  
ADV MBIKIWA:   And – sorry to interrupt you, that’s partly because, as 
you say, the Ministers who di d speak or the Eskom representatives who 
did speak about Eskom spoke before the broadcast was actually 
televised? 
MR PRETORIUS:   Yes, so the Minister would be talking about 
whatever, their portfolio would be.  The advertising coverage of 
R377 000 that would be the adverts in the New Age, so it is very 
20 
difficult to determine that because there is no audited bureau of 
circulation figure, it is very difficult to determine the cost of 
advertising, the cost of an advert in the New Age.  So the New Age had 
taken a very expensive model in charging for advertising there but I 
don’t believe in, as a marketer that we derived any of that value from 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 87 of 170 
 
that.  The venue hire was covered by the ticket sales, the catering was 
covered by the ticket sales – sorry the editorial coverage is valued at 
R406 000, there was very little editorial coverage.  In the beginning 
there was on the Minister but thereafter – on Minister Gigaba and DPE 
but thereafter the coverage – the editorial coverage was not about 
Eskom, it was what the Min ister was talking about.  So that was 
actually to no value to Eskom, the catering as I said has been – they 
put a value for the banner at the back of – on the stage at R300 000, I 
have no idea how they derived that value.  The subscriptions of 
R207 000, so they -  the subscriptions eventually was free, they just 
10 
dropped it at our offices and other places, offices and the tables – the 
two tables and the two guests is what he – Jacques had given me and 
say this is what it costs. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Thank you, to wrap up on the first contract, can I just 
confirm in terms of the extent to which it complied or the manner in 
which it was entered into complied with the sponsorship policy at the 
time.  Was there an available budget before it was entered into?  
MR PRETORIUS:   No. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   So how was it financed? 
MR PRETORIUS:   It was financed, initially from my marketing budget, 
20 
so the first couple of breakfasts I paid for from the marketing budget 
before I applied for more money. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   And you gave evidenc e earlier that in terms of the 
sponsorship policy a proposal like this would have to be assessed 
against the criteria in the policy, was it ever assessed?  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 88 of 170 
 
MR PRETORIUS:   No it was not. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   And was it ever submitted to a sponsorship 
Committee? 
MR PRETORIUS:   No it was not. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   So would it be fair to say it didn’t comply with the 
sponsorship policy at all?  
MR PRETORIUS:   To be fair I would have to say it has to go through 
the criteria and the sponsorship professionals in my department  would 
have to do that, but my gut feel tells me that this would not 
have…[intervenes]. 
10 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Yes sorry, Mr Pretorius perhaps it’s the way I phrased 
the question.  I don’t mean you to apply the sponsorship policy to it, I 
simply mean that the spon sorship policy was not applied at all?  
MR PRETORIUS:   No it wasn’t. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Thank you, just the last point on the first contract, 
you say at paragraph 60 of your affidavit that you repeatedly raised the 
concerns about lack of value with Mr Choeu th e lack of value you were 
getting from these agreements, can you tell us how you raised these 
concerns and what his response was?  
MR PRETORIUS:   It was mostly verbal, I don’t think I specifically put it 
20 
in writing so in my one-on-one meetings on my portfo lio with Mr Choeu 
I would have – I raised this.  My concern was that this was coming back 
to bite us and there isn’t proper governance followed, that was my 
biggest concern internally, apart from the fact that we were not deriving 
the value, internally there wasn’t the proper process being followed and 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 89 of 170 
 
that is what I raised with Mr Choeu.  Mr Choeu’s reaction to this was, 
once again, on a previous question that the Chair asked, Peter don’t 
fight this, it’s already happening so let’s just do this because we have 
to do this. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Okay I’d like now to move onto what you describe as 
the second contract.  It isn’t necessary for us to deal with this in 
anything near level of detail that we dealt with the first because – and 
correct me if I’m wrong, but I understand many of the concerns you 
have with the fist contract will apply equally to the second?  
MR PRETORIUS:   More so because between the first and the second 
10 
contract we started getting Parliamentary questions around the New 
Age and we had to answer those questions and as I predicted that we 
were going to get a backlash from this.  
ADV MBIKIWA:   Ja and I’ll address that in some detail in due course.  
Can we just deal with the question of accredited circulation figures 
from ABC?  Can you start by just explaining to me what circulation is as 
opposed to readership? 
MR PRETORIUS:   So the circulation is the actual transaction that 
takes place, you buy a newspaper and you pay a certain amount for 
that newspaper and that’s readership so X amount of people bu y the 
20 
newspaper and that is circulation.  However, I take that newspaper 
home and I have a wife and I have adult children who also read the 
newspaper and that becomes the readership.  So most media owners, 
when they do a presentation to you, whether it’s r adio, television or 
print or magazines they will show you the circulation versus the 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 90 of 170 
 
readership.  The readership is not determined by ABC, the readership 
is determined by SAAFF or AMPS which is a behavioural study that is 
done on brands and media.  So ABC only works with the actual 
transaction that somebody has bought, Peter has bought a newspaper.  
ADV MBIKIWA:   That would give you circulation figures?  
MR PRETORIUS:   Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   So when the New Age describes itself as having 
distribution numbers of 100 000 what does that refer to?  
MR PRETORIUS:   That refers to outside – they claimed that they had 
sales of 39 000, we don’t have the proof of that, they had a print run of 
10 
100 000.  For a daily national newspaper that’s far too little, I mean we 
have 52million people in the country so I mean, not even the Sunday 
Times would be able to do that on a daily basis but they claimed that 
they had sold 39 000 copies and the rest was delivered to Eskom, 
SABC, SAA, Transnet and so on, so it was just a drop at ou r turnstiles 
for instance and I’d walk in and I could or could not take it.  
ADV MBIKIWA:   Yes so those newspapers are dropped off, for example 
at Eskom and they’re dropped off for free?  
MR PRETORIUS:   Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Now you said earlier that readers hip might be higher 
20 
than circulation when you’ve got, for example…[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry Mr Mbikiwa the “for free” was that for free 
in the sense that the staff members could just pick them up and not pay 
for them? 
MR PRETORIUS:   Correct Chair. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 91 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But it didn’t necessarily mean that Eskom was not 
paying for those newspapers, directly maybe there was an indirect 
payment but directly? 
MR PRETORIUS:   Initially there was a contract between Eskom and 
the New Age where we did pay for the circulation, I was not involved in 
that so I can’t really comment on that, I just know that there was an 
agreement but thereafter  we said that we are no longer going to pay 
for the newspaper and then they came and they – and that’s why Mr 
Roux has indicated that the subscriptions is part of the million rand and 
that’s  R207 000 that they – but it was at the turnstiles so employees to 
10 
it for free. 
CHAIRPERSONS:   Okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   And sorry, Mr Pretorius the readership numbers might 
be higher than circulation numbers, where, for example a member of a 
family buys a newspaper and every member of the family reads it.  
MR PRETORIUS:   Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Do I understand that correctly but in a situation where 
newspapers are dropped at turnstiles, readers hip might, in fact be, 
significantly lower than the number of newspapers that are dropped off 
in that way. 
20 
MR PRETORIUS:   It could be because people could take the 
newspapers because they’re moving and they needed something to 
wrap their glasses in. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Indeed yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   What was your observations in terms of how much 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 92 of 170 
 
interest there was among Eskom staff members in the publication on a 
daily basis, assuming that where they were dropped you could see 
when you came to work and when you left, did they sell like hot cakes?  
MR PRETORIUS:   Chair, ja they were – by the end of the day there 
was no newspaper left, so at the turnstiles where staff go through it, it 
was lying there so staff did take it.  
CHAIRPERSON:   They did take them? 
MR PRETORIUS:  And ja the question is, did they actually read it or did 
they just page through it?  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR PRETORIUS:   I don’t know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   And in terms of who the New Age was reaching, can 
we just refer to your affidavit at paragraph 59.3, that’s at page 18, you 
say there that the Media Shop your media buying agency determined 
during 2013 that it only reached 0,5% of the total population of LSM’s 6 
to 10 and that was the primary target market of 49M?  
MR PRETORIUS:   Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   And can we move to the table that’s below that which 
I understand was also prepared by the Media Shop.  
20 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Can you explain to us what the table is saying about 
the New Age circulation and readership numbe rs? 
MR PRETORIUS:   So the circulation and the first column you will see 
that, that’s the circulation of the various newspapers and you’ll see that 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 93 of 170 
 
under New Age that is highlighted there, there’s no a figure in because 
it’s not ABC accredited.  The 87  000 – the 39 000 sales that is now 
including readership and that research would have been done by AMPS 
and the CPT leadership is the cost per point, so how much does it cost 
me to reach one individual.  As a marketing person how much am I 
going to spend to reach one person, so you will see the third from the 
top, the Business Day is at R276.47 where the New Age is at R317.00. 
So it simply does not make sense if you just look at the circulation of 
the Business Day versus the circulation and readership of New Ag e. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Do I understand the CPT readership column to 
10 
effectively be a kind of cost effectiveness measure?  
MR PRETORIUS:   Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   And that the higher the number the less cost effective 
it is? 
MR PRETORIUS:   Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   And so on that table the New Age is the least cost 
effective for purposes…[intervenes].  
MR PRETORIUS:   It is the least cost effective but it does not mean, 
just to clarify and for correctness sake, it does not mean that if it is, 
one does not necessarily only select on this, the medium you are going 
20 
to use the cost per point because it also depends on the mix, the media 
mix that you’re going to use at the end of the day.  So this is just one 
indicator plus the behavioural component needs to be taken into 
consideration. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Indeed thank you.  Can we then move to the second 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 94 of 170 
 
contract that’s entered into?  We spoke about monitoring and 
evaluation requirements under the sponsorship policy.  A contract is 
entered into, the first contract and before the secon d contract is 
entered into has there been any monitoring and evaluation as to the 
success of the first? 
MR PRETORIUS:   None. 
ADV MBIKIWA:    Now a major difference between the first contract and 
the second contract is that, whereas the first contract was between the 
Media Shop as Eskom’s agency and the New Age.  Eskom was added as 
a party to the second contract, why is that?  
10 
MR PRETORIUS:   So in the media business, the media owners and 
business – and agency business media agency business, when the 
media agency buys media from the media, they have 45 days to pay.  
They pay within 45 days they get their discounts and their commissions 
and all of that.  So Media Shop applied the same rule to the New Age 
and the New Age then was not happy with this arrangement  because, 
according to them it was taking too long and they soon then issued, via 
their lawyers, a letter that they’re going to take Media Shop to Court 
because they haven’t been paid.  They also addressed it, Mr Chair, that 
this has not been paid so for this they wanted – in the second contract 
20 
they wanted Eskom to be co-responsible for the payments because they 
needed the payments at a certain time.  
ADV MBIKIWA:   And my understanding is that this contract unlike the 
first contract did in fact, go to the sponsorship Committee , it was 
tabled before – or at least the proposal was tabled before the 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 95 of 170 
 
sponsorship Committee, is that correct?  
MR PRETORIUS:   Ja I think so yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Well can I refer you to an Annexure to Mr Choeu’s 
affidavit, Chair we haven’t admitted this as an Exhibit but it is – it’s, 
can we call it provisionally MM2.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you might not need to do that, you might just 
need to tell him what is in the affidavit if that will assist him what the 
position is. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   In - attached to Mr Choeu’s affidavit is a round robin 
resolution of the 20 t h of July 2012, it is a round robin resolution for 
10 
purposes of a sponsorship agreement and it indicates that it has been 
approved by Mr Choeu and Mr Mtakati, two members and that th e other 
ten members of that Committee all signed, not approved, do you 
remember this? 
MR PRETORIUS:   I recall yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   So do I understand it correctly then that the round 
robin resolution rejected the proposal?  
MR PRETORIUS:   Yes they did. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   But that the contract was nevertheless entered into?  
MR PRETORIUS:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MBIKIWA:   How did that come to be…[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   Just remember to raise your voice so that it can be 
captured, recorded. 
MR PRETORIUS:   I apologise Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes thank you. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 96 of 170 
 
MR PRETORIUS:   Sorry, yes I do recall the round robin and the reason 
why the second contract was entered into in spite of the round robin 
was that, once again we were forced to, we were told, you will.  So my 
opinion – personal opinion was that the New Age was suffering 
financially and that’s why – they were not selling enough newspapers to 
run a newspaper and they had no way of increasing sales.  So the State 
owned entities was used to fund this.  
CHAIRPERSON:   So this time around can you tell me more about the 
instruction or being forced to do this, how did that – who did this come 
from? 
10 
MR PRETORIUS:   It came – I was instructed by Mr Choeu who I 
assumed was instructed by the Chief Executive and the Chief Executive 
would have been instructed by the Chairman, the Chairman by the 
Minister, I would assume that we have to do this.  
CHAIRPERSON:   But do you have a recollection that on this occasion 
Mr Choeu did say again, we have to do this because we are instructed 
or is the position that because of what had happened before, you 
assumed that there was an instruction this time around that this also 
should be done, which is which?  
MR PRETORIUS:   It’s the latter. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   It’s the latter? 
MR PRETORIUS:   Ja I assume that this is what we need to do and in 
spite of the round robin there was already contract negotiations going 
on between the parties. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the position would be, you don’t know for sure if 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 97 of 170 
 
there was an instruction on this occasion but as far as you  played, 
whatever role you played you played on the understanding that it was 
part of – the position was that it was something that you had to do in 
line with the instruction that had been given earlier?  
MR PRETORIUS:   You’ll see Chair, the second contrac t is co-signed – 
this person who signed the contract was Mr Choeu, so my assumption 
would be that it’s the same – it followed the same route. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Chair I see it’s almost time for the lunch adjournment 
but if I could have one more question because the one that you’ve just 
10 
asked leads into my next one, which is, Mr Pretorius I understand that 
you were asked to sign – to be the signatory to the second contract?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   But you refused on principle to do so? 
MR PRETORIUS:   I refused. 
ADV MBIKIWA:   Why did you refuse? 
MR PRETORIUS:   Because I did not want to be associated with the 
New Age and I had, subsequent to – well gathering from the 
Parliamentary questions and the discussion that were happening i n the 
country at that time, started to realise that this is linked to the Gupta’s.  
20 
So I did not want to be part of that.  
ADV MBIKIWA:   Thank you Chair, we can pick that up after lunch.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And who gave the instruction that you refused was it 
Mr Choeu? 
MR PRETORIUS:   No, nobody gave me the instruction I…[intervenes].  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 98 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   You took the stand that you are not prepared?  
MR PRETORIUS:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then you were left alone?  
MR PRETORIUS:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you, we’ll take the lunch adjournment, 
we’ll resume at two o’clock. We adjourn.  
INQUIRY ADJOURNS  
INQUIRY RESUMES  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us continue. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you Chair. Mr Pretorius before the lunch 
10 
adjournment we were dealing with the second co ntract. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And you were explaining that you took the position that 
you would not sign it. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And that Mr Pretorius did sign it?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And that contract was concluded in November of 2012? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And what was – what was included in the second 
20 
contract? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Only the breakfasts. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Just breakfasts and how many?  
MR PRETORIUS:  4. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Okay.  Can I  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 99 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So under the new – under the second contract only 
the breakfasts were covered not advertisement in the New Age?  
MR PRETORIUS:  No.  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  So because they actually in the same financial year.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR PRETORIUS:  So we had originally scheduled six breakfasts and 
then asked for an addi – there was an additional four. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
10 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Yes can I refer you to paragraph 70 of page 21 of your 
affidavit?  That – that sets out the – the breakfasts that were included 
as part of the – the second contract.  Mr Pretorius according to our 
records there is one breakfast that is missing from that table.  
MR PRETORIUS:  That is correct yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Which one is that? 
MR PRETORIUS:  That was – no there was only three breakfasts that 
took place in the end.  I remember correctly – my memory served me – 
the fourth one did not take place.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  The – the – we will come to it in a moment but the 
20 
response that was given to the Public Protector indicated that there 
was a breakfast that – at which Ace Magashule spoke on the 6 March 
2013. 
MR PRETORIUS:  That is correct you – sorry my memory is a bit – ja – 
you are correct.   Yes. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 100 of 170 
 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Before we move onto the third – third contract which 
was concluded in 2014 of May 2014.  I understand that – well perhaps 
help me with this?  When did negotiations begin for a subsequent 
contract after the conclusion of the second contract?  
MR PRETORIUS:  The negotiations for contract or for an other contract 
or continuation of the contract was ongoing.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Okay. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Mr Howa and his sales people were there on quite 
regular basis or in contact with us by email or with Mr Pretorius in fact.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Right. 
10 
MR PRETORIUS:  They did – at that point they did not speak to me 
anymore. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And at some point after the conclusion of the second 
contract you prepared a presentation that motivated for the – the TNA 
proposal to be submitted to the sponsorship committee?  
MR PRETORIUS:  That is correct yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  The CAD Manco Committee.  Can I refer you to that 
presentation?  It is at page 754 of MM1a.  754.   
MR PRETORIUS:  Of MM1? 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Of MM1a.  The same file that your affidavit is 
20 
contained in.   
MR PRETORIUS:  Okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  I apologise it is MM1b.  It is MM1b I apologise.  
CHAIRPERSON:  It is B ja. 
ADV MBIKIWA:    I apologise. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 101 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  714? 
ADV MBIKIWA:  754. 
CHAIRPERSON:  754. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Page 754 sorry. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Page 754.  I made an error it is MM1b. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Oh okay sorry. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Have you got the place Mr Pretorius?  
MR PRETORIUS:  You looking at the second con – no the presentation.  
Sorry I am a bit lost.  Page 77?  
ADV MBIKIWA:  754. 
10 
MR PRETORIUS:  Hey I should have – okay sorry I have got it. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  You have got it? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Ja. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Do you remember this presentation?  
MR PRETORIUS:  I do indeed. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Could you explain to us what the purpose of this 
presentation was? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Because of the previous contracts and the contract 
or the continuous pressure on Eskom to continue with the New Age 
breakfasts I wanted to make sure that we had a process or had followed 
20 
a process for the subsequent New Age breakfasts.  Although I did not 
support them I wanted to make sure that we as corporate affairs and in 
particular my boss is covered in terms of this.  And this was my 
suggestion to him to make this presentation but to make it as open and 
fair and state the facts.  So you will see on page 758 the same  table 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 102 of 170 
 
that we looked at earlier. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  That the most expensive on 759 there penetration 
has them 6 to 10 and so on.  So this was the whole point of – of that 
presentation and then my recommendations were that it is not 
recommended and then I sub…  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Sorry that is on page 766. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes sorry apologies.  Page 766.  This was the 
reasons why I did not recommend it.  So just to interrupt myself for a 
second here.  At that point in time the Eskom structure was a l ittle bit 
10 
different than what it was before it is changing now.  We as corporate 
affairs were reporting to Enterprise Risk and MR PRETORIUS who was 
reporting to Ms Johnson who was the Group Executive for a number of 
– or divisions.  So she also had her own  EXCO with her direct reports 
and I made on page 767 I made – I said if you still feel that this needs 
to go further then that would be my suggestion in terms of a 
presentation to the Enterprise Development EXCO and then the 
contract could be concluded between Eskom and the New Age directly 
as not to involve the media agency.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Okay so just help us to understand the – what is 
20 
happening on 766 and 767?  766 seems to contain a clear 
recommendation that the sponsorship is not recommended for the 
following reasons. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And it says it does not meet the minimum 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 103 of 170 
 
requirements. There is a reputational risk.  Circulation remains an 
issue and the amount of more than R800 million is equivalent to what is 
spent across media – other media organisations.  So there seems to be 
a clear recommendation on page 766 not to recommend it.  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  But then on 767 with the heading Resolution Required 
the 
resolution 
is 
that 
CAD 
Manco 
recommends 
the 
following 
resolutions.  So just explain what the purpose of that slide was?  
MR PRETORIUS:  So if you look at page 766 that is my 
recommendations which I put together for this presentation that I do not 
10 
support this.  And that was – I made it very, very clear in my refusal to  
sign the second contract as well.  But I said that there is certain 
circumstances where a situation may arise that you do not necessarily 
or – a stakeholder opportunity may arise which you may not want – that 
does not meet the necessary criteria but then stakeholder is important 
and therefore you will then consider it as strategic of – in nature.  So I 
was use – try using that line.  So page 767 was my suggestion to MR 
PRETORIUS to say if you feel that you still needed to take this to 
Enterprise Development EXCO then use this slide as the resolution.  
Then let them make the decision that it is strategic of nature and that 
20 
we will go ahead with this.  At least then you have it somewhere on - 
minuted that they have made the decision and it is not you alone th at 
have made the decision. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Okay I understand.  Was this presentation ever 
submitted to or presented at Manco?  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 104 of 170 
 
MR PRETORIUS:  I submitted it to MR PRETORIUS and he did not want 
us to present it. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  So it was never presented?  
MR PRETORIUS:  No. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Before Manco.  
MR PRETORIUS:  No it was not presented. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And why did he say he did not want to present it?  
MR PRETORIUS:  I am not sure why.  Probably because it – I do not 
know.  I have to – I would have to speculate. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  But he did not give you a reason at the time he just 
10 
said he would not present it?  
MR PRETORIUS:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And on the reasons you gave in the presentation for 
not supporting the – the – or not recommending the sponsorship did he 
have any issues with your reasons?  
MR PRETORIUS:  We never discussed it – the presentation Chair.  I 
emailed it to MR PRETORIUS. 
CHAIRPERSON:    To him.  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  And he as the Chairman of the committee.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR PRETORIUS:  It is his decision whether he wants to put it on or 
not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Can we then turn to the – to the third contract and that 
appears from your affidavit from paragraph 72 on page 21.  Now we – 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 105 of 170 
 
we discussed earlier that the first contract was b etween the Media 
Shop and the New Age.  The second contract was between the Media 
Shop and Eskom and the New Age.  The third contract was directly 
between Eskom and the New Age it did not include the Media Shop at 
all.  Why was that? 
MR PRETORIUS:  I was not involved in – in this discussion.  At this 
point in time I was completely excluded from – happily excluded from 
any interaction with the New Age.  So I was not even aware of this 
contract until it was signed.  So they decided to and I say they – I am 
not sure who they were or they are to negotiate it directly between 
10 
Eskom and TNA and that is what TNA wanted right from the start.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  They did not want a third party involved.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  And you say that you were excluded from the process 
– you played no role really in the negotiations.  Why were you 
excluded? 
MR PRETORIUS:  I can only speculate once again and that is that 
because I made it abundantly clear that I do not want to be part of this 
because this is not kosher.  And R43 million at that point in time was 
more than my entire budget – marketing budget after it was cut.  So I 
20 
could have done far better with R43 million in the marketing budget 
than paying for New Age breakfasts.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Can we deal with that issue  of the budget?  Do you 
know whether the third contract was budgeted for?  
MR PRETORIUS:  No it was not.  Not to my knowledge.  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 106 of 170 
 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And was it submitted to the – to the sponsorship 
committee or CAD Manco for [indistinct]?  
MR PRETORIUS:  No it was not. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And who signed that contract on behalf of Eskom?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Mr Collin Matjila. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  You refer at paragraph 77 that is on page 22 to a 
report – to a review conducted by Sizwe Ntsaluba Gobodo?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Which reviewed the process of the third contract.  
Were you aware of that report at the time?  
10 
MR PRETORIUS:  At the – sorry at? 
ADV MBIKIWA:  At the time it was published sorry – in November of 
2014 when it was – when it was published? 
MR PRETORIUS:  When the Gobodo I was aware – I was aware but I 
did not have a copy of it but I was aware that there was an audit done 
on this. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And what is your understanding of its key findings?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Well that the contract was actually – it – the Chief 
Executive did not have the authority to sign the contract so it was done 
outside of the guidelines within Eskom.  So just to make – explain it a 
20 
little bit further it is just that a lot of people find Phakamani or Brian 
Dames whoever the Chief Executive is it is not difficult to find the email 
address.  And they forward this their request directly to him or her 
whatever the case may be.  And the process is it does not matter where 
a sponsorship comes in from whether it is from the Chief Executive or 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 107 of 170 
 
somebody far lower down it needs to come to the sponsorship desk first 
for evaluation.  And that is the starting point of all of the sponsorships 
within the organisation.  Every single one.  And we keep a register of 
every single sponsorship that comes in and th e response we have 
given. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Can I take you to the – to that SNG Review?  It is at 
page 208. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Same file?  Yes.   
ADV MBIKIWA:  And if you can then go forward to page 231 which is 
where the conclusions are contained.  At paragraph 4 .61 sub paragraph 
10 
a effectively reflects what you have just described which is that Mr 
Matjila exceeded his authority.   
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  But can I ask you about over the page on 232 which is 
– and sub paragraph c.  That a contract without  the termination clause 
was ultimately concluded.  Did you know anything about that?  
MR PRETORIUS:  I did not know but that is not Eskom’s standard 
practice.  There is always a termination clause.  And in fact Eskom only 
enters into enabling agreements.  B ecause of the volatility of our 
business and budget that we in – have enabling agreements so make 
20 
use of you when we can or need to and then if we do not need to then 
we do not make use of it.  So there is no fee that is being paid.  But 
there is always an exit clause.   
ADV MBIKIWA:  And were you aware as indicated in sub-paragraph D 
that the – that the termination clause was removed pursuant to 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 108 of 170 
 
correspondence between MR PRETORIUS and Mr Adam?  
MR PRETORIUS:  No. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Okay. 
MR PRETORIUS:  I was not aware. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Can I then take you to page 234 it is just two pages 
on?  And that is the SNG Reports recommendations and it makes 
recommendations in relation to Mr Matjila and over the page it makes 
recommendations in relation to MR PRETORIUS.  The 
– the 
recommendations are effectively that corrective action should be taken 
against them.  Do you know whether any corrective action was taken 
10 
against them? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Not to my knowledge. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And you indicate at paragraph 80 of your – of your 
affidavit that in February 2015 the Eskom board resolved to ratify the 
third contract. 
MR PRETORIUS:  I – ja – I believe so. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And one of the resolutions of the – of that board 
resolution was that CAD should be instructed to ensure that maxi mum 
value was derived from the contract?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
20 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Did you know about the resolution?  
MR PRETORIUS:  I was informed of that after the fact.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  What steps did CAD take to extract maximum value 
from the contract? 
MR PRETORIUS:  I can only speak for my department and that is 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 109 of 170 
 
Strategic Marketing we did nothing.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you.  I would like – I would now like to turn to 
the parliamentary questions which is a subject you have referred to on 
a few occasions.  You explai n that Eskom received a number of 
parliamentary questions regarding its relationship with TNA.  I do not 
intend to traverse every one of them but if we can begin at paragraph 
85 where you refer to a parliamentary question on the 14 November 
2012.  And just to orientate you in time that is about a week after the 
second contract is signed.  Can I ask you to – to go to that question?  
It is in Bundle MM1b and it is at page 661.  Do you have it?  
10 
MR PRETORIUS:  I do. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  It is a question from Mr Lee to  the Minister of Public 
Enterprises.  The first question asks whether his department or any 
entity reporting to him placed any advertisements in the New Age and 
then asks when the advertisements were placed?  What the nature of 
the advertisements were and what the spend was.   
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  The second one asks whether any of these 
advertisements were placed through Government Communication and 
Information System GCIS.  The third asks whether an independent 
20 
analysis was conducted prior to  placing advertisements to ascertain 
whether the New Age is read by the intended market, if not, why not?  If 
so who conducted the analysis and what were the main findings and 
recommendations?  And fourth were there any independent studies of 
said advertisements were conducted to ascertain whether they were 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 110 of 170 
 
effective in the relevant target market, if not, why not?  And similar 
questions after that.  Can I ask you then to turn to page 663?  This is 
an email from Phindie Mabena and she says:  
“Good afternoon, please find attached a PQ for your 
urgent attention.  We knew there would be follow -ups 
but I guess our estimated time of early 2013 was too 
generous.  Here we go again with the TNA 
questions.” 
What – do you know what that is a reference to?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Well essentially what Mr Mabena is admitting to is 
10 
that we had non-stop questions about the New Age and different forms 
and different formats and different configurations so this is what she is 
referring to that the – another question has arrived.  They expect or 
she expected I am gathering from this email that they were only 
expected the questions to be asked early in 2013 when parliament 
would have opened. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And then further up the page Mr Moremi forwards it to 
you and asks you to look into i t. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Was that – was that the normal course that you would 
20 
do the necessary work to prepare the response to the parliamentary 
questions? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Ja Ms – because it is an advertising and in – Mr 
Moremi’s structure I was strategic marketing initiatives reporting to him 
so he would have sent it to me normally, yes.  This was – there I a 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 111 of 170 
 
formal parliamentary question process within Eskom and policy in place 
now which I am the representative of corporate affairs in any event .  
But ja he – that would have been normal. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Can I then ask you to go to page 666?  And this is an 
email from you to Laiza Zikalala, who is that?  
MR PRETORIUS:  She was the business unit director that took over 
from Mr Depoko. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  At the Media Shop? 
MR PRETORIUS:  At the Media Shop yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And you email Ms Zikalala and you ask for effectively 
10 
help in answering the four questions that you have received?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Can we go then back to 665?  This is j ust following 
chronology of the correspondence.  And Ms Zikalala responds and it is 
these responses that I would like to – to go through.  Could you read 
Point 3 for us? 
MR PRETORIUS:   
“I have spoken to Donald when TNA initially we could 
not do an analysis on the paper as it has not been 
measured by the ABC nor by AMPS.  Donald’s 
20 
recommendation back then was not to advertise in 
the paper as we have no research on it.  Donald was 
then instructed to advertise in the paper and spend a 
certain amount of money.  The instruction was 
executed as per Eskom’s request.  Since the 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 112 of 170 
 
newspaper has been – since then the newspaper has 
been measured by AMPS which I just remind you is 
behavioural research.  The numbers are not looking 
good they have 39 000 readers compared to the 
Citizen 508 000 readers, the Star 643 000 readers. 
So we can do an analysis for you but it will not look 
good. 
 
The 
newspaper 
has 
never 
been 
our 
recommendation.” 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you.  And then – and then Point 4 where Ms 
Zikalala says: 
10 
“We 
cannot 
do 
an 
advertising 
effectiveness 
measure.” 
Just to remind you this is in response to a parliamentary question 
asking whether any independent studies have been done to determine 
whether the business breakfasts have been effective.  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And Ms Zikalala says: 
“We cannot do an advertising effectiveness measure.  
We do not have any research and I doubt anyone 
has.  We cannot measure whether a 49M Ad in the 
20 
newspaper 
resulted 
directly 
in 
people 
using 
electricity.” 
MR PRETORIUS:  Less electricity. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Less electricity sorry.    
“There is no way anyone can answer this question as 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 113 of 170 
 
our advertising is not direct response therefore 
results are seen holistically not by medium:”  
How – what you understand that response to mean?  
MR PRETORIUS:  So what we need to take into consideration at this 
point in time that there is quite a number of people in the market 
talking about energy efficiency.  So it is Eskom is talking about energy 
efficiency.  The government is talking about the energy efficiency and 
then you have all the contractors that supply generators and all these 
things and everybody uses load shedding or bough interruptions as a 
reason for sales.  So there is quite a lot of people in the market talking 
10 
essentially about the same thing.  So if I changed my behaviour by 
switching off the light when I leave the room can – the question is then 
can I attribute that directly to an advert I saw in the New Age?  And the 
answer to that question, no. – is no.  It is virtually impossible to do that 
unless you speak with every single person which would be the cost 
would just be prohibitive for us in doing that.  So what Laiza is – Ms 
Zikalala is specifically saying here is that it is impossible for her – for 
them to do research on this. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you.  Can we then go to page 671?  This is I 
understand it is – is a draft response to the parliamentary question?  
20 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And as I see it Points 3 and 4 effectively reflect what 
the advice that Ms Zikalala gave you?  
MR PRETORIUS:  That is correct yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  But can you then turn to page 675?  This is the final 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 114 of 170 
 
response submitted to the Department of Public Enterprises by Eskom.  
And if we go to paragraph 3 on page 676 – it is following page – it 
says: 
“When the New Age was initially launched we could 
not do an analysis on the paper as it was not 
measured by the ABC or by Amps.  Since then the 
newspaper has been measured by Amps.”  
Now that corresponds with Ms Zikalala’s advice.  But it then says:  
“The findings 
confirm 
that 
the paper reached 
Eskom’s intended target market.”  
10 
Where did that come from?  
MR PRETORIUS:  My apologies.  I have no idea.  So the process for 
parliamentary questions was at the time that parliamentary question is 
received, a response is prepared and the response is discussed by 
EXCO and they make the final decision on what needs to be done.  Or 
what gets written down. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  But do you have a view on the accuracy of that 
statement? 
MR PRETORIUS:  On the fact that they – they – the 39 000 is our 
intended target market, no.  I – it is – I have a view on that that no it is 
20 
not. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you.  Mr Pretorius can we then turn to the 
Public Protector’s investigation.  Before we - we get into the - the 
questions 
that 
the 
Public 
Protector 
asked 
another 
aspect 
of 
Mr Gigaba’s affidavit which he submitted in response to Mr  Pretorius’ 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 115 of 170 
 
Rule 3.3 Notice was that he was engaged by the Public Protector and 
that he sought information from the SOEs in order to respond to the 
Public Protector.  That appears from paragraph 12 of Mr  Gigaba’s 
affidavit.  Do you have any comment on that?  
MR PRETORIUS:  A slightly different version of that Chair is that the 
Public Protector wrote to the Minister.  The Minister wrote to - to Eskom 
and to Transnet and saying you need to - to reply to this but you reply 
directly to the Public Protector not to via my office.  In his statement he 
says that he did not want to have any undue influence by his 
department.  If I read it correctly.  
10 
So the - the Public Protector ’s que stions bearing in mind that 
I was against this.  I did not want to do this.  So I gave a response to - 
to the Public Protector of what I could with a clear mind give honestly 
to - to the Public Protector and I sent this to Willie  Du Plessis who was 
the Head of Legal at Eskom at the time reporting to Mohamed  Adam 
who was the Senior General Manager for Legal and Compliance within 
Eskom and a few days later I received an email from - no.  Sorry. 
I received a call from Willie saying that we need to expand on 
this.  This is not merely sufficient.  Taking into consideration that the 
letter that the minister wrote to the Chairman said that we would have 
20 
as a State Owned Entity all the necessary documentation and all of that 
in place which we most probably have and we have seen it in - in 
evidence here. 
So I sent to Willie I cannot in all good conscience as a 
marketing person write something that is not true and he said okay.  I 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 116 of 170 
 
will speak to Mohamed.  The end of that was that Mohamed …  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Sorry.  When you refer to Mohamed …  
MR PRETORIUS:  Sorry. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Is that Mr Adam? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Mr Adam.  Sorry.  My apologies.  Mr  Adam then 
phoned me directly and said to me that we need to conclude this 
because there was a deadline on this and it must be writte n as if Eskom 
benefitted from this and it was a good thing to do.  Hence the 
comments in the Public Protector’s response from Eskom is not merely 
the reality. 
10 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Okay.  Let us - let us just unpack that piece by piece.  
The - the Public Protector  letter can we - can we go to that?  That is at 
page 727 in Annexure 1B - MM1B. 
MR PRETORIUS:  700 and? 
ADV MBIKIWA:  27. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is MM1B?  
ADV MBIKIWA:  MM1B. 
CHAIRPERSON:  7-1-7? 
ADV MBIKIWA:  7-2-7. 
CHAIRPERSON:  7-2-7. 
20 
ADV MBIKIWA:  This is the letter from the - the Public Protector where 
she informs the DG of Public Enterprises that she is investigating this 
matter and over the page at 7 -2-8 paragraph 3 she sets out the 
allegations against the aforementioned public enterprises that is 
Transnet, Telkom, Eskom and the SABC and sets them out from 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 117 of 170 
 
paragraphs 3.1 to 3.5. 
The exertion of undue influence improperly sponsoring public 
enterprises for the hosting of business breakfasts.  A total amount of 
R36.7 million paid for those breakfasts by that stage.  That the 
sponsorship was ostensibly to advance various dubious public interests 
via the business breakfast briefing sessions and that the said 
sponsorship was approved despite the alleged fact that TNA is not a 
member of the ABC and that its true c irculation figures cannot be 
verified which consequently makes no business sense for public 
enterprises to spend public funds for exposure.  
10 
The - the Public Protector then makes a request of - of DPE 
in paragraph 4 and it asks for a range of - of documents, policy 
documents, sponsorships, agreements and the like.  If we can then turn 
to page 7-3-1.  This as I understand it is what Mr  Gigaba refers to in 
his affidavit.  Is that he then sends a letter to the Board of - of - the 
Chair of the Eskom Board Mr  Zola Tsotsi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr - Mr Mbikiwa.  What happened to my 
copy of Mr Gigaba’s affidavit?  It is not here.  It was here.  Have you 
got a spare copy by any chance Mr  Mbikiwa? 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Chair, I … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you do not have it is fine .  We can - we can do - we 
can make do in the meantime.  Let us continue.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  I can give you my copy.  If - if you go to page 7-3-1 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 118 of 170 
 
ADV MBIKIWA:  That is the letter from Mr  Gigaba to Mr Tsotsi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And essentially that letter simply says:  
“Please provide all documents necessary and 
please copy me on any correspondence that goes to 
the Public Protector.”  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Now - now Mr Pretorius your - your evidence is that 
you are then requested to help prepare the response to the Public 
Protector? 
10 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Who asks you to do that?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Mr Adam. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Mr Adam and what is Mr Adam’s position? 
MR PRETORIUS:  He was then the Senior General Manager for Legal 
and Compliance. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And you prepared a response?  
MR PRETORIUS:  I did.  Yes, which he found inadequate.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Which he found inadequate. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Ja. 
20 
ADV MBIKIWA:  We - we have not been able to obtain a copy of that 
response.  What - what was - what did he find adequate about it?  
MR PRETORIUS:  It was insufficient information and I - I have a copy 
on my computer.  So I am sorry.  There must have been 
miscommunication that.  I - I do have my response that I wrote, but he 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 119 of 170 
 
said that there is insufficient information.  It is not what the Public 
Protector wants to know and basically that we had to write this in order 
to ensure that Eskom had made the right decision.  
CHAIRPERSON:  In order to ensure …  
ADV MBIKIWA:  We definitely would …  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In order to ensure that Eskom?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Had made the right decision to go with the business 
breakfasts. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  And this was Mr Adam saying that? 
MR PRETORIUS:  He said that to me telephonically.  Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Mr Pretorius we certainly will be in touch with you 
afterwards to get that response from you.  So - so Mr Adam instructs 
you that the - the response you have prepared is inad equate.  You then 
together with Mr Du Plessis prepare a response?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes.  So Mr Du Plessis phoned me one afternoon and 
we spent the afternoon and the best part of the evening preparing the 
documentation and I was writing the response to the Pu blic Protector in 
20 
such a way that it - ja.  Looks a little bit better than my original 
response. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What was your understanding of Mr  Adam’s statement 
that your - the response you had prepared was inadequate?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Chair, I - at that point I - when I saw the letter that 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 120 of 170 
 
came from the Public Protector and the Minister ’s letter I spoke to my 
lawyer and asked her what would be the implications if I was to - to lie 
and she said to me you would be in serious trouble because if the 
Public Protector decides to - to have proper hearings around this and 
you have lied you will be in serious trouble and that is why I did not 
want to be part of this. 
I did not want to write the response.  I gave them the 
information which I will provide to the - to the Advocates after this 
meeting, but I did not want to be involved in writing that response 
because writing that response is - is - it is unethical in my opinion and 
10 
that - it - it really bothered me that I had to do that.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Would it - is my understanding correct that your 
understanding was that although he was saying your response was 
inadequate he actually meant that it did not convey what he wanted to 
be conveyed on behalf of Eskom?  He regarded it as not the right 
response. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And he - your understanding that - was that he 
wanted the right response to be provided?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes Chair.  I only provided the - the facts …  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  In - in a one page document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  So the facts of the - of the various contracts …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 121 of 170 
 
MR PRETORIUS:  And the benefits that we derived or that we allegedly 
derived from - from these breakfasts and that was it and Mr  Adam was 
not happy with … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  With the facts.  He wanted a storyline.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  And I said I cannot write the storyline …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Because that goes against every principle that I have 
and … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  I am a member of a number of professional 
organisations …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS: 
 
Which 
propagates 
ethical 
behaviour 
in 
communication and marketing in South Africa.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  So I cannot do this … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR PRETORIUS:  And in the end I was forced to do it which made me 
20 
very unhappy.  Hence when the third contract came I distanced myself 
from this because I knew this thing was coming back to bite us.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, hm.  Well I think - I think you understood fro m 
my questions that when I referred to the right response and the wrong 
response.  I was using those words in inverted commas.  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 122 of 170 
 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you Chair.  Mr  Pretorius can we then turn to the 
final response that is submitted to the Public Protector.  That is at page 
749.  Now you will see that there is a - in bold - there is a - it says 
“Draft” but that is in fact the final version because if you turn over to 
751 it is signed not only by Mr  Du Plessis but in acknowledgement of 
receipt but the Public Protector ’s Office.  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am looking for “Draft”. 
10 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Sorry Chair.  It is on 749. 
CHAIRPERSON:  749? 
ADV MBIKIWA:  749. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  I was looking at a wrong thing.  I was looking at 
649.  Yes.  I (intervenes). 
ADV MBIKIWA:  So you will - you will see Chair that it says - it says 
“Draft” on it but in fact it is the final version because if you turn to 751 
it is - it is signed both by Mr  Du Plessis and in ack nowledgement of 
receipt on the other side. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you. 
20 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Mr Pretorius if we can then turn to 751.  That is the - 
the aspect of the response I would like to …  
MR PRETORIUS:  To? 
ADV MBIKIWA:  751. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So did you say Mr Pretorius the person with whom 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 123 of 170 
 
you ended up working on the “right response” was Mr  Du Plessis? 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes.  Mr Du Plessis and I … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Spent the evening to draft this …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Document, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And can we pick it up from under the table. Not the 
first paragraph but the second paragraph where you say:  
“The primary benefits were brand awareness for 
10 
49M and the opportunity to highlight the need to 
save 
electricity. 
 
The 
sponsorships 
provided 
significant 
exposure 
through 
the 
print 
and 
broadcast media and to engage more businesses in 
the private sector.”  
Is - is that an accurate statement?  
MR PRETORIUS:  No.  It is not. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  If we move on to the - to the next paragraph. 
“Recent research undertaken with regard to 49M 
indicated 
that 
opportunities 
such 
as 
the 
20 
sponsorship of the business briefings contributed to 
a 73 percent awareness by the public of the 49M 
Campaign.” 
Is that a true statement?  
MR PRETORIUS:  No.  It is not.  A 73 percent awareness is true but 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 124 of 170 
 
that is across all media in South Africa.  It was a national study.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  And - and is that 73 percent in anyway attributable to 
the 49M Campaign? 
MR PRETORIUS:  It is - sorry.  It is awareness of the 49M Campaign …  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Sorry. 
MR PRETORIUS:  But is not attributed to The New Age.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Is - what I meant to ask was is that 73 percent in 
anyway attributable to the business breakfasts?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Not in my opinion. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you Mr Pretorius.  Chair the - the last few 
10 
questions I would like to ask Mr  Pretorius pertain to an annexure - a - a 
document in the Proposed Bundle of Mr  Zola Tsotsi who will be 
appearing later in the week.  Could we be permitted to - to refer to that 
- to that document? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  To go there? 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine, ja. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Mr Pretorius it is the document that is labelled 
currently MM6. 
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
20 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Have you got it? 
MR PRETORIUS:  It is there. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Ja.  Could you take it out?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Can I take it out? 
ADV MBIKIWA:  And if you go right to the back of that file at page 364.  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 125 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  That file already here?  Is it already here?  
REGISTRAR:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Yes Chair.  It is here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Well maybe if it is already here we may as well 
then; I am just wondering whether we should not - let us just - what 
page is it on? 
ADV MBIKIWA:  It is page 364 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  364.  Maybe what we shou ld have done is to - 3-6-4 - 
to include in his bundle this document.  So that we - it could just be 
10 
part of his bundle. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  We - we can do that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  May - may - maybe actually you can ask on it but we 
maybe must place on record th at we are making - we are adding it to - 
is it MM1B?  
ADV MBIKIWA:  MM1B Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Let - let us put it - what will be - what is the last 
page on MM1B?  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Chair as I have it the last page is 8 …  
CHAIRPERSON:  So I will - I will not mark this one because it is in 
20 
Mr Tsotsi’s bundle, but somebody can make a note and a copy can be 
made and put into that one. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Indeed Chair.  We will do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Chair the - the last page of MM1B currently is 835.  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 126 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No so … 
ADV MBIKIWA:  So that will begin at 836. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At 836, ja.  Okay, but you can just refer to it now as 
the 
Public 
Protector ’s 
letter 
addressed 
to 
Mr  Tsotsi 
dated 
29 October 2014. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  29 October 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Indeed Chair.  Mr Pretorius are you familiar with this 
letter? 
MR PRETORIUS:  It is the first time that I see this letter.  
10 
ADV MBIKIWA:  First time you have seen it?  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  This - this is a letter that is sent by the Public 
Protector as a follow up to the prior letter that was - that - that she 
sent and to which she received a response.  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Essentially the - the letter says that it has come to the 
Public Protector ’s attention th at notwithstanding her investigation the 
third contract was then entered into the value of R43 million.  
MR PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
20 
ADV MBIKIWA:  But you - you knew nothing about this at - at the time 
in October 2014? 
MR PRETORIUS:  This - this particular letter w as not shared with me at 
all.  No. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Chair those conclude my questions for Mr  Pretorius. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 127 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  You - you did not indicate or did you the material part 
of the letter that you wanted …  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Apologies Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To highlight. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Chair the - the question to Mr Pretorius was whether 
he had ever seen it …  
CHAIRPERSON:  You - you … 
ADV MBIKIWA:  But - but the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  The material parts really are from paragraph 2 where - 
10 
where the …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  The Public Protector indicates that she - it has come 
to her attention through the media that notwithstanding the fact that 
she had begun an investigation into the conclusion of the first two 
contracts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Eskom had then entered into the third contract and she 
goes on to say that - that it is alleged that this has happened contrary 
to legal advice and the like. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe - maybe you should just read paragraph 2.  
Just the relevant part into  the record or the witness could do that.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Certainly Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Paragraph … 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 128 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that his answer can be understood in the context.  
ADV MBIKIWA:  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Paragraph 2 reads: 
“It has since come to my attention through the 
media 
that 
notwithstanding 
my 
ongoing 
investigation of the above matter Eskom’s former 
interim Chief Executive Officer Mr  Colin Matjila has 
subsequently entered into a new and similar 
breakfast sponsors hip deal worth R43 million with 
10 
The New Age Newspaper.”  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV MBIKIWA:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much Mr  Pretorius for coming to give 
evidence.  Should a need arise we will ask you to come back, but thank 
you very much.  For now you are excused.  
MR PRETORIUS:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Ms Hofmeyr. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  We next have Mr Choeu who will be giving evidence.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I wonder if it is convenient to take a five minute 
adjournment so we can move and get …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 129 of 170 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Mr Choeu ready.  Would that be suitable?  
CHAIRPERSON:  That would be fine.  Is five minutes enough or should 
we make it …?  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Possibly 10 would be better. 
CHAIRPERSON:  10 would be - ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Let us - let us take a 10 - 10 minute break.  
We will resume at 10 past three.  We adjourn.  
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   We are indeed, and we next have the evidence of Mr 
Choeu, if I could ask that he be sworn in.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Please administer the oath or affirmation.  
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record.  
MR CHOEU:   Chose Andrew Kenilworth Choeu. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objections to taking the prescribed 
oath? 
20 
MR CHOEU:   No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on your 
conscience? 
MR CHOEU:   Yes. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give will be the 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 130 of 170 
 
truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth?  
MR CHOEU:   That is so. 
REGISTRAR:   If so please raise your right hand and say so help me 
God. 
MR CHOSE ANDREW KENILWORTH CHOEU:   (duly sworn, states) 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you may proceed. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you Chair.  Mr Choeu you will see in front of 
you, think the file open in front of you is the file containing your 
affidavit is that correct?  
MR CHOEU:   Yes. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair for the purposes of the record we propose that 
Mr Choeu’s affidavit and additional documents be entered as Exhibit 
MN2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the lever arch file containing the statement 
affidavit by Mr Choeu will be marked Exhibit MM2, it contains his 
statement and Annexures. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you Chair.  Mr Choeu if we can then 
commence at page one in that Bundle MN2, what…[intervenes].  
MR CHOEU:   The numbers are the ones on top?  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed. 
20 
MR CHOEU:   Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So throughout the day when I make reference to 
page numbers you’ll look for the red number at the top.  
MR CHOEU:   Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And Mr Choeu there will be occasions in the 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 131 of 170 
 
evidence where we may need to refer you to another bundle, but those 
have been placed next to you  there and I’ll guide you to which file we 
may want to take you to. 
MR CHOEU:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   But we’ll concentrate predominantly in your Exhibit 
MN2 which contains a document at page one, what is that document?   
MR CHOEU:   It’s my affidavit this one yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you and if you go over to the end of the 
affidavit which you’ll find at page 12, can you tell us when that affidavit 
was deposed to? 
10 
MR CHOEU:   Page 12? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes. 
MR CHOEU:   In January I thin – 28/12/2018. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, that date is relevant only insofar if you 
go back to page one of your affidavit is concerned because at 
paragraph 1.2 on page one, you state there that, in the second 
sentence, 
 
“I’m employed by Eskom as Divisional Executive Corporate 
 
Affairs”, 
 
Mr Choeu was that the position on the 28 t h of December of 
20 
2018? 
MR CHOEU:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Is it currently the position?  
MR CHOEU:   No I’m on retirement. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And when did you take retirement?  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 132 of 170 
 
MR CHOEU:   Starting from the 1 s t of January 2019. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right let’s then start just at your time while you were 
at Eskom, for how long were you employed at Eskom and in what 
positions? 
MR CHOEU:   From the 1 s t of June 2010 until, as I said the end of last 
year December, 31 s t. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And in what positions were you employed in Eskom 
during that period? 
MR CHOEU:   When we started my contract we were still then called 
Managing Directors but later I’m not sure of the date we were referred 
10 
to as Divisional Executives. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And what Division were you the Executive of?  
MR CHOEU:   Corporate Affairs. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And was that for the duration from June 
2010…[intervenes]. 
MR CHOEU:   From the beginning up until the end that was my 
responsibility. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, and in terms of your qualifications, what 
qualifications do you hold?  
MR CHOEU:   I have a BA Honours Masters Degree from the University 
20 
of Denver in the US and a Masters Degree from the University of Port 
Elizabeth and its Nelson Mandela, I think, now.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, Mr Choeu just in terms of your previous 
engagements in some of the processes that I alerted the Chair to this 
morning that have preceded the evidence before the Commission today, 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 133 of 170 
 
my first question is, did you make submissions or appear before the 
Portfolio Committee of Public Enterprises?   
MR CHOEU:   No. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And did you engage with SNG who were Eskom’s 
auditors? 
MR CHOEU:   Yes I did. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You did, and that was when they were investigating 
the third contract is that correct? 
MR CHOEU:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, we’ll come to that in due course.  I’d like 
10 
to then pick up your affidavit if I may, at paragraph 2.1 on page one 
because there in an introductory session you begin to describe the 
relationship between Eskom and TNA.  Can you explain to us what is 
stated at 2.1 and in what Division of Eskom that relationship was 
managed? 
MR CHOEU:   Corporate Affairs, it was in my Division, Corporate 
Affairs. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And can we take it that you hold the position of  Head 
of that Division? 
MR CHOEU:   Yes I did. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And at the relevant times when the three contracts 
with TNA were concluded?  
MR CHOEU:   When the third contract I reported to – where am 
I…[intervenes]. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Erica Johnson? 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 134 of 170 
 
MR CHOEU:   Erica Johnson. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So what was your position when you were reporting 
to her were you still the Head of the…[intervenes].  
MR CHOEU:   Yes what they did is they took – I may forget the others 
but Mohammed Adam that we spoke about reported to her and then 
Freddy Ndou strategy reported to her and the guy then who was 
responsible for IT should be Sando [indistinct] So it was a number of us 
reporting to her so what they simply did they took Exco and the CEO 
felt Exco was just too big and then we reduc ed it by taking other Exco 
members to report to other Exco members.  
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And prior to that change in the organisational 
structure, to whom was your reporting line?  
MR CHOEU:   Directly to the Chief Executive Officer.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   And in 20…[intervenes]. 
MR CHOEU:   I was a member of Exco. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And in 2011 and 2012 who was that Chief Executive?  
MR CHOEU:   Brian Adam. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Brian Dames, I think you may want to correct, is that 
correct? 
MR CHOEU:   Brian Dames. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Mr Adam is Mohammed Adam who headed up the 
legal department is that correct?  
MR CHOEU:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, now at the end of paragraph 2.1 you talk 
about the areas over which – what you refer to as CAD that’s the 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 135 of 170 
 
Corporate Affairs Division had r esponsibility, can you take us through 
those? 
MR CHOEU:   Can I take them from 2.3 because that’s where 
I…[intervenes]. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed. 
MR CHOEU:   First of all we had Strategic Marketing which was under 
Kheepe Moremi and Peter Pretorius reported to  Kheepe Moremi and 
then we had Corporate Communication which was under Ra’eesah 
Waja.  Corporate Communication, earlier on we did talk about Strategic 
Marketing what it does but Corporate Communication was responsible 
10 
for the spokesperson and everything re lated to Eskom’s issues in the 
media, including the subscription of newspapers and related issues and 
then stake coagulation. Stake coagulation is important that – at Eskom 
and Mr Pretorius did allude to it, one of the things that was our 
responsibility was that every contact from outside Eskom came via our 
Division.  What it means is if international visitors want to visit Eskom 
they don’t know how to talk to they either write to the Chief Executive 
Officer and the Chief Executive Officer would refer that letter to us to 
prepare.  Journalists, when they wanted to ask questions and they have 
no relationship yet, maybe with the spokesperson they would come to 
20 
us and we would refer them to the media desk.  So each and every 
stakeholder and Lusanda Gia was resp onsible for that Division.  Then 
we have the Eskom Development Foundation that deals with Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility, 
everything 
to 
do 
with 
Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility.  Then of course my office of the Divisional Executive 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 136 of 170 
 
and those were the divisions that fell under me. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, if you go back up to paragraph 2.1 you’ll 
see in the list that you provide there, you also list Eskom’s 
sponsorships as falling within the Corporate Affairs Division.  
MR CHOEU:   Where? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   If you go to paragraph 2.1 on page one, the second 
sentence there reads, 
 
 
“CAD 
– 
Corporate 
Affairs 
Division 
is 
responsible 
for 
 
Corporate Communication…[intervenes]”.  
MR CHOEU:   Yes responsibility, here I was talking to the divisions but 
10 
sponsorship would fall under Strategic Marketing. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right so it’s a sub-division in a sense? 
MR CHOEU:   It’s a sub-division yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And all of the contracts that…[intervenes].  
MR CHOEU:   And I don’t know what I did – you see for example, here I 
mention Heritage Unit, it was directly under my division office of the 
Chief Executive Officer. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I understand, that’s helpful. So insofar as the three 
contracts with TNA involved business breakfasts, am I to understand 
that, that fell under the Eskom’s sponsorships aspect which fell under 
20 
the Corporate Affairs Division?  
MR CHOEU:   Strategic Marketing yes, Corporate Affairs Division, 
Strategic Marketing. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right and they were Eskom sponsorships which 
would then go principally to Mr Pr etorius feeding up to Mr Moremi and 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 137 of 170 
 
then up to you is that correct?  
MR CHOEU:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, if we then go over to page two, Mr Choeu 
we’ve already heard from Mr Pretorius today, in his evidence, the 
background to the Eskom sponsorship policy, you also detail that to 
some extent.  I don’t want to traverse all its features but I’d like to pick 
up on one or two with you if I may. You, at 3.2 at page two of your 
affidavit, talk about the sponsorship policy objectives, do you see that?  
MR CHOEU:   Mmm. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Can you take us through what those objectives are?  
10 
MR CHOEU:   One aligned with Eskom’s Strategic business objectives, 
contribute to increases in Eskom brand equity as a company and/or that 
it’s other brands such as 49M…[intervenes ]. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Could we stop there, we did have a moment of 
evidence from Mr Pretorius about 49M but just for the uninitiated can 
you explain to us what 49M was?  
MR CHOEU:   You would recall that one of the challenges that we faced 
there at Eskom was load shedding, we were load shedding especially 
after 2010 because in 2010 one of the things that happened was, that 
because of the world cup, the type of, you know, normal maintenance 
20 
that we’d do, most of the things were delayed and it caught up with us 
and as it caught up with us we also had a delay now with Medupi and 
Kusile.  So there was a lot of pressure from all over about the fact that 
we must find a way to either supply more electricity or find a way to 
convince South Africans to reduce electricity.   So we must come up with 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 138 of 170 
 
a campaign, so Kheepe Moremi and Peter Pretorius, and I’m told really 
that this idea of 49M did not start in 2010, the idea has always been 
there after the 2006/2007 load shedding.  So it became my 
responsibility which I  passed o ver to my experts to say let’s put 
together this campaign of communicating and the question was, you 
must communicate to each and every South African and that is why, at 
that time the population of South Africa was 49million and that is why 
after discussions – a number of names were looked at, those that did 
not like 49M said maybe next year it will be 51 and that but ultimately 
after all these discussions people stated, let’s say with 49M and find a 
10 
way in which you’re going to look for platforms and these  platforms you 
must use effectively to communicate to all South Africans.  Earlier on 
Peter alluded to the LSM’s that you must find…[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   You are referring to Mr Pretorius?  
MR CHOEU:   Yes, Mr Pretorius referred to LSM’s and that is that 
whatever we do we should find a way to communicate to all South 
Africans because one of the issues 1) reduce electricity, 2) educate 
South Africans and if – I don’t have the 49M strategy here but if you 
need it I’m sure Eskom will provide it, I’m no l onger at Eskom but 
Eskom will provide a strategy it touched everybody and all the 
20 
platforms that we wanted to use.  For example, at one point we were 
only using South African broadcasting corporation to do the – you know 
at 7 o’clock in the evening you wou ld get the – what is this called, a 
warning to South Africans that please use electricity sparingly and we’d 
have some graphs and pictures that would show you what is happening 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 139 of 170 
 
in South Africa and South Africans would respond and we were 
requested that use all platforms and that is why we even moved over to 
– away, not away in addition we used other TV stations, like e -tv and 
what are the others,  I think at that time it was only e -tv that we could 
use but I mean we were using all platforms, cinemas, we wen t into 
cinemas so we wanted to target each and every South African, that is 
what 49M was both to reduce electricity but also to educate South 
Africans about the importance of electricity because if you look at – 
Peter was talking about the top LSM, what we  are experiencing 
under…[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Choeu…[intervenes]. 
MR CHOEU:   Pretorius I must…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but he also referred to some of the people in the 
first name but let’s try and keep it to…[intervenes].  
MR CHOEU:   Mr Pretorius …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And everybody the surname. 
MR CHOEU:   We had to touch everybody, Eskom’s problem even today, 
even at that time, in the townships people were not paying for 
electricity up until today I saw a number, I can’t confirm  it but I saw in 
the newspapers they’re talking about 25billion that local Municipalities 
20 
are owing Eskom and therefore we also had to ensure that we – is that 
enough? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   That is indeed thank you, it wasn’t an affiliation that 
Eskom had with a radio station, 49M?  
MR CHOEU:   It was, if you look at even the strategy it used each and 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 140 of 170 
 
every platform that is why, in fact, the Minister still, not through me 
through the Chief Executive Officer decided – I was not there, they 
decided [indistinct] a national campaign on 49M on his own role.  So 
Peters division…[intervenes]. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Mr Pretorius. 
MR CHOEU:   Oh my God you are going to beat me up.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   No it’s fine it’s just useful for the record purposes.  
 
MR CHOEU:   Mr Pretorius’ team – I mean they had to spend a lot of – 
including the Chief Executive Officer, we would, on Saturday go 
10 
townships, you know go to stadiums and would bring all people into the 
stadiums it would be music, artists, a lot of people and it was 49M so 
there was that insistence but continually there was [indistinct] 
communicating effectively with South Africans.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, if we can then go to the third bullet on 
page two at the bottom, you indicate there…[intervenes].  
MR CHOEU:   Is that 3.2? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   At 3.2 yes, the third bullet says,  
 
“The next policy objective of the sponsorship was to yield a 
 
tangible return on investment, 
20 
 
Do you see that? 
MR CHOEU:   “Tangible return on investment through air -time on” – 
yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And you say, 
 
“The TNA sponsorship yielded tangible return on investment 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 141 of 170 
 
 
through air-time on SABC2 in other words owning two and a 
 
half hours on SABC2 would have cost Eskom a substantial 
 
amount of money and this was included in the proposal from 
 
TNA”, 
 
Do you see that? 
MR CHOEU:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Mr Choeu why do you say two and a half hours on  
MR CHOEU:   In fact it was not two and half hours, I think it was three 
hours because it was from 6 o’clock to 9 o’clock…[intervenes].  
ADV HOFMEYR:   I think it was 57 minutes in fact, if I may just take 
10 
you to why I say that if you go to page 26.  
MR CHOEU:   My 26? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Your 26 yes well at the top of the page in red.  
MR CHOEU:   Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You’ll see that, that is an Annexure to the first 
contract that was concluded with TNA.  Chair just for the reference the 
contract begins at page 21 it is a contract that we’ve already looked at 
with Mr Pretorius this morning and page 26 we also looked at but you’ll 
see Mr Choeu the reason why I say it’s 57 minutes and not  in the order 
of two and a half hours or three hours is because in the first block on 
20 
the left-hand side of the page under SABC2 live coverage, halfway 
down it says, 
 
“Average air-time coverage for this event is 57 minutes”,  
 
Do you see that? 
MR CHOEU:   Yes I see that. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 142 of 170 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So is that a correction you need to make?  
MR CHOEU:   It is a correction I need to make but however, why I had 
said three hours I was talking here to the duration of the – because we 
called them 49M breakfast, you see it’s the  whole breakfast because 
you have your live coverage which is not all the time, you see and apart 
from live coverage you have your normal people that are sitting here 
that have bought tables to come and listen here and all your banners 
and what have you that is – we call them 49M breakfasts. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I understand but the only part that the SABC2 was 
broadcasting was 57 minutes of that breakfast, is that not so?  
10 
MR CHOEU:  Now I see that I can make that correction yes.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, you say that…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I’m sorry but even that 57 minutes was it on 
Eskom, the whole of it?  
MR CHOEU:   Not always, not all of the time and if you had asked me 
what was some of the challenges and weaknesses we had with this and 
that we will address later. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no what I want to find out as at this stage is 
whether when we – when you say 57 minutes, that was 57 minutes of 
air-time for Eskom on what Eskom wanted to – the world to hear about 
20 
Eskom? 
MR CHOEU:   No not all of the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So how much actual air-time would be given to 
Eskom, for Eskom to convey to the world what it wanted to convey?  
MR CHOEU:   Okay, let me just explain how this breakfast were the – 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 143 of 170 
 
first of all Eskom would be given time in a breakfast to  speak and that 
won’t be online you see and then the announcers will talk to people, 
Eskom was talking about this on this issue but it wouldn’t be on TV.  
Number two and most importantly the 57 minute would be taken where, 
depending on the topic of the Min ister and at times the Ministers never 
focus only on Eskom, they will start at the beginning in the introduction 
then they’ll focus on what that department is and then from there the 
MC – may I call them MC for the purpose of today, the announcer or 
whatever you call it, would then take questions from the public.  So the 
public would then send questions through and they will say we have 
10 
received this question from Chose Choeu in Bloemfontein, this is the 
question.  At times this question would relate to Esk om at times this 
question would relate to somebody else.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well what you have just told me suggests to me that 
there is no basis for saying that Eskom got a lot of air -time to say – to 
convey whatever message it wanted to convey, am I correct?  
MR CHOEU:   No you may be correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And if I may just follow up on that, thank you Chair, 
this bullet point at the end of page two is entitled, yield a tangible 
20 
return on investment, right that tends to suggest to me that some sort 
of cost benefit analysis is being done between how much it costs to get 
this air-time and the benefit accrued to Eskom, is that correct?  
MR CHOEU:   We never did that because that was supposed to happen 
post the event and that would be the r ole of mass marketing after 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 144 of 170 
 
Eskom got a time to evaluate using a number including that, it was 
never done. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, it was never done? 
MR CHOEU:   It was never done. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So whey then do you say that TNA sponsorship 
yielded tangible return on investment, if that analysis was never done?  
MR CHOEU:   I made that assumption because I could – I can’t quantify 
it but I wouldn’t say totally there was no return on our investment.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   No Mr Choeu the proposition is as follows, if no 
analysis had ever been done on that link between investment and 
10 
benefit how can the positive statement be that there was a return on 
investment through the TNA sponsorship?  
MR CHOEU:   Well this might not have been put to you but my intention 
was to say it couldn’t be that there was totally no form of investment 
that Eskom got out of this breakfast at all, you can’t say they got zero 
but you are correct ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You can’t say it got anything more than zero either.  
MR CHOEU:   No, no I wouldn’t say  – I’m not saying that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well Mr Choeu that sentence there, read in context 
seems to seek to tell the reader that actually Eskom did get a 
20 
meaningful return on its investment, what do you say to that?  
MR CHOEU:   I wouldn’t say…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It’s not put in there to say Eskom got a negligible 
return on investment, it’s not put there for that purpose?  
MR CHOEU:   That’s the word that I would have used.  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 145 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   You agree with that? 
MR CHOEU:   Yes, that I would have used, I wouldn’t say zero. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so if it is not intended to say Eskom got 
negligible – a negligible return then it must be put in there to convey to 
the reader that whatever return that Eskom got must have been 
meaningful or was meaningful otherwis e, I think, if the intention was 
different I thought that it would be put differently to say, well Eskom got 
some insignificant return or a return that’s not really worth mentioning.  
Otherwise when I read this sentence in this context it seems to convey 
to me to say, you know what Eskom did get some meaningful return.  
10 
MR CHOEU:   No I hear you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you would accept that?  
MR CHOEU:   I hear you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay but you wanted to say something about that 
meaning of it, as you sit th ere you – that’s not what you would say, as 
you sit there today? 
MR CHOEU:   As I sit here today, what I would I would say – you see 
what I would not say – I like the word negligible to a certain extent 
because even the little studies that marketing did, d id talk about 28% 
there and that type of thing, so there has been some…[intervenes].  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course if you get something like 28% bearing in 
mind what Eskom had put in, that wouldn’t justify – would it justify the 
investment? 
MR CHOEU:   No Chair it was saying it’s 28% for the top class and 78% 
for the lower class so…[intervenes].  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 146 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay but what was it saying, was it saying that 
those are the percentages of the people reached or…[intervenes].  
MR CHOEU:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That was the point. 
MR CHOEU:   Ja and also the difficulty Chair, I think is the fact that, 
when you are working with a new company, a new newspaper, a new 
everything you can only make your assessment after about a year 
minimum.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR CHOEU:  You see.  During the year you can only take people from 
10 
their wording. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  We are doing this and we think you are selling so much.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, hm. 
MR CHOEU:  You see. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  But to do an independent - first of all you take word of 
mouth. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  It is a salesperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  Sales people will only give you - this car will give you this 
(indistinct). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  After driving it for some time …  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 147 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  Is then that you will be able to come back and say …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  But your figures …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  Do not tally with …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  My figures. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  I guess that is - that would be in part the 
rationale behind what Mr Pretorius said. 
10 
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 Namely 
that 
Eskom 
does 
not 
neglect 
small 
newcomers, but it has something but something that is commensurate 
with the risks involved and with their size.   
MR CHOEU:  And … 
CHAIRPERSON:  In other words in terms of advertising.  You - you give 
them but something that is not too much and you bear in mind the risks 
involved that …  
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That - the - the risks that are attached to them.  
20 
MR CHOEU:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Choeu if we can then go on to 
the next page. 
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 148 of 170 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Page 3. 
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You talk at paragraph 3.4 … 
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  About potential sponsorship that meet Eskom’s 
sponsorship criteria …  
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Are presented to the Sponsorship Committee for final 
approval. 
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Mr Choeu in that respect your evidence is consistent 
with the evidence of Mr  Pretorius this morning. 
MR CHOEU:  Yes, yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Is that correct? 
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You were in attendance for his evidence.  Is that 
correct? 
MR CHOEU:  Yes, yes.  Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  So you can confirm that at least insofar 
as that aspect is concerned …  
20 
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Would it be fair to say it is - it is policy that the 
Sponsorship Committee weigh on all sponsorship proposals?  
MR CHOEU:  That? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  That they weigh in.  That they take a decision on 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 149 of 170 
 
sponsorship proposals. 
MR CHOEU:  Most definitely. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  You then go on at paragraph 3.5 to say:  
“TNA’s request for an Eskom sponsorship for the 
business breakfasts was never presented to the 
Sponsorship Committee and was not assessed to 
determine which of the five objectives of the 
Sponsorship Policy were met.”  
Do you see that? 
MR CHOEU:  Go again. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  At paragraph 3.5. 
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You make there that TNA’s request for an Eskom 
sponsorship was never presented to the Sponsorship Committee …  
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Nor was it ever assessed to determine which of the 
five objectives of the Sponsorship Policy were met.  
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Do you see that? 
MR CHOEU:  (No audible reply). 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Is that unusual? 
MR CHOEU:  Yes.  It is very, very unusual but I think the committee - I 
- I was not part of that decision that it should go here.  I think the - the 
marketing - the marketing team when they made this decision and I that 
time I support that decision was that this is a combo.  They are talking 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 150 of 170 
 
about newspapers, media and what do you call it?  
Media and stakeholder engagement and all these things 
together.  That they thought it - and it - as it came out also in 
Mr Pretorius that that was the conundrum  that we faced that this comes 
as a combo and that is what he thought the possible way to go through 
this was to go to MediaShop. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Well could we just break that down a bit?  I am happy 
to understand you to say that there was an advertising com ponent … 
MR CHOEU:  Huh-uh. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  In the first contract and a sponsorship component.  
10 
MR CHOEU:  Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Is that correct? 
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  For the moment …  
MR CHOEU:  And the broadcasting component. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Well the broadcasting is bound up in the sponsorship.  
MR CHOEU:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Is it not? 
MR CHOEU:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Because the sponsorship was of the business 
20 
breakfast …  
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And it was the business breakfast that were going to 
be broadcast.  Correct? 
MR CHOEU:  Ja.  No, but we did not break it that way though we call it 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 151 of 170 
 
sponsorship.  To ask all those things - you see if you look at the - the - 
what do you call it?  The sponsorship contract all of it is that sponsor 
the breakfast and in the breakfast you have this sub element.  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
MR CHOEU:  It was not sponsor this sub element and a breakfast.  
ADV HOFMEYR:  No, no. 
MR CHOEU:  So they took it as a combo. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I do not think we are at cross purposes.  
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  There is advertising in the newspaper …  
10 
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Of TNA. 
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Correct and there is sponsorship of the business 
breakfast. 
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Correct?  Those are two distinct parts …  
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Of the first contract. 
MR CHOEU:  Of the contract. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Correct. 
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  At the moment we are talking about the sponsorship 
part. 
MR CHOEU:  Okay. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 152 of 170 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  The part that deals with the busin ess breakfasts … 
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And as I understand your and Mr  Pretorius’ evidence 
it is that any sponsorships that come to Eskom must go to the 
Sponsorship Committee for approval.  
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Correct? 
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  The TNA’s sponsorship proposal did not go to the 
committee.  Correct? 
10 
MR CHOEU:  Did not.  They took the whole thing as it is.  
ADV HOFMEYR:  And - no.  Let us not go the whole thing.  I am just 
interested now in the sponsorship part.  
MR CHOEU:  Yes.  It did not. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  It did not? 
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And then my question was is that unusual that a 
sponsorship proposal that comes to Eskom did not go to the 
Sponsorship Committee? 
MR CHOEU:  It is unusual but I think also they were d ealing with an 
20 
unusual combo of a request. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And when we get to the third Eskom contract that 
dealt with only sponsorships …  
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You will accept that there was not that overlap issue 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 153 of 170 
 
at all? 
MR CHOEU:  Can we park it and talk about because it was a special - 
yes it total did not deal with that.  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  If we then go over to page 4.  
CHAIRPERSON:  So I am sorry Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So as far as the sponsorship - the TNA sponsorship 
… 
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Proposal is concerned by virtue of the fact that it did 
10 
not go to the committee concerned.  It was in breach of the policy - 
Sponsorship Policy of Eskom?  
MR CHOEU:  It was, but even all the (indistinct) never ever said it w as 
in breach because like Mr  Pretorius announced that when we deal with 
media because they do things at short notice.  That is why we had 
MediaShop …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  To deal with everything that we do with media.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  In - in retrospect … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
MR CHOEU:  We should have taken - subtracted that …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  And taken the sponsorship …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 154 of 170 
 
MR CHOEU:  To the Sponsorship Committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  It was irregular. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Mr Choeu you did in fact try and take the second 
contract - well you did take the second contract to the Sponsorship 
Committee for approval, but it was turned down.  Was it not?  
MR CHOEU:  Ja.  Maybe - now it is going to cleanse this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you.  Oh.  I thought you - you were meaning she 
might be confusing you. 
10 
MR CHOEU:  Ja.  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With going to two contracts. 
MR CHOEU:  That you are conferring the two contracts.  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
MR CHOEU:  As we were working with TNA issues including taking our - 
what do you call it?  Our supplier to court - I mean not to court.  To the 
lawyers and all.  The relationship was not - we really …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Became strained? 
MR CHOEU:  Became strained and Parliamentary questions started 
appearing at the same time, but parallel to that Chair Pieter  Pretorius 
20 
had already gone to Eskom Subcommittee of Exco called the IFC to go 
and tell them we do not money for these breakfasts.  At conception 
when we start working with these people we thought they are small 
company that are coming in and then it will be over very soon.  
Now they want multiple contracts.  We are not going to use 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 155 of 170 
 
our money.  We want you - IFC - which is made up of Exco members to 
give us money.  So they gave us money.  Parallel to that I decided 
because of these Parliamentary questions that we went through and the 
reputational risk that now let us take this to the sponsorship part to - 
and that is why …  
CHAIRPERSON:  The committee? 
MR CHOEU:  That is why it - actually it was even around (indistinct) 
rushing to say let us say and the committee declined that and I said 
that we - with Exco that the committee declined that the decision had 
already been made that we are going to sponsor these breakfasts.  It 
10 
was my attempt to regularise this type of thing.  
Similar to what Mr Pretorius did mention later that we even 
went to our own MANCO and - how do we regularise these requests 
that are now multiplying.  The guys that originally came as asking for 
advert which we thought it was right.  It is a new newspaper and in fact 
Chair, may I mention MediaShop itself between 2010, December when 
the newspaper was …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Launched. 
MR CHOEU:  Launched …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR CHOEU:  In March because our finances in - end up in March.  
They had already spent on their own without our own direction R300 
million.  I do not know - not 300 million - 350 …  
CHAIRPERSON:  300 000? 
MR CHOEU:  Thousand - quarter but plus a little bit over a quarter of a 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 156 of 170 
 
million.  On their own a nd then we think they themselves were 
persuaded with the fact that it is a new newspaper.  Every newspaper 
that we have here has been a new newspaper.  
CHAIRPERSON:  They had spent that amount on The New Age?  
MR CHOEU:  On The New Age advert. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR CHOEU:  In three months.  I do not - I - I do not see the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I saw a reference to 300  000 in Mr Pretorius bundle 
… 
MR CHOEU:  I think it was 340 but …  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I do not know if - if it was related - it is related to 
The New Age or not. 
MR CHOEU:  Ja.  It was …  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Mr Choeu will you help us with that because the 
300 000 that I am aware of in Mr  Pretorius’ affidavit … 
MR CHOEU:  Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Relates to the cost of supporting a Male & Guardian 
breakfast. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes.  I (intervenes). 
ADV HOFMEYR:  He was trying to draw a comparison  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Between Mail & Guardian and the 1.2 million …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Per breakfast that was charged by TNA, but I am 
interested in your point about between the end of 2010 and March …  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 157 of 170 
 
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  2011 … 
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And some spend by the MediaShop with TNA …  
MR CHOEU:  Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Because you will have heard from Mr  Pretorius’ 
evidence …  
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  That the view of the MediaShop at the time that the 
first contract was entered into was that it did not make business sense 
10 
… 
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  For Eskom to enter into that contract.  So you are 
aware of that? 
MR CHOEU:  Yes.  I am - I am very much aware of that.  In fact 
everybody and all the questions from the Public Protector and from 
Parliament all of them were saying the same.  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
MR CHOEU:  For our reputation it was not good at all even …  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Well … 
20 
MR CHOEU:  Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Let us just start with …  
CHAIRPERSON:  But I am sorry Ms Hofmeyr.  I think Ms  Hofmeyr is 
specifically asking whether you were aware at the time that …  
MR CHOEU:  No, no.  It was not shared with me at all.  
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 158 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  That … 
MR CHOEU:  No.  It was a communication between themselves.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Hang on, hang on, hang on.  Let us not speak 
at the same time. 
MR CHOEU:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  She is asking whether you were aware at the time 
that MediaShop had spent that kind  of money on The New Age. 
MR CHOEU:  No Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  It is something you got to know later?  
MR CHOEU:  In fact only when I was putting together - I do not know 
10 
where is - I do not have the annexure here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  In preparation for y our evidence here? 
MR CHOEU:  Yes.  I do not know where I saw - saw it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Mr Choeu I would like assistance with that and it is 
almost inevitable that we will not complete Mr  Choeu’s evidence today 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So maybe it is something he can just look for 
overnight. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You can look it - look it up overnight … 
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then tomorrow when you come back.  
MR CHOEU:  I am - I - I hope I will be able to …  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Because can I tell you why I am particularly 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 159 of 170 
 
interested in receiving that Mr  Choeu because it seems to be 
diametrically opposed to what the MediaShop reported to Mr  Pretorius 
when the responses to the Parliamentary questions came through in 
2012. 
MR CHOEU:  Huh-uh. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You might recall that there was an email that we 
looked at earlier today from Ms  Zikalala of the MediaShop to 
Mr Pretorius. 
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Where she indicated to him she had made contact 
10 
with Mr Depoko who was there at the time of the origination of this 
contract and he had instructed that advertising in the paper given the 
amount of money would not be in Eskom’s interests.  Do you recall that 
evidence? 
MR CHOEU:  Yes and she was telling Mr Pretorius giving Mr Pretorius 
this information after the fact to.  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes, but was Mr Depoko’s …  
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Attitude at the time that the first contract was being 
entered into.  That it did not make commercial sense for Eskom to enter 
20 
into that contract. 
MR CHOEU:  Ja.  That is - stay on - that is what was for me - yes.  I - I 
saw that that and it was interesting that it was not shared with 
Mr Pretorius when Mr Pretorius started the first contract.  He is only 
told when Parliamentary questions are presented and I was never told 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 160 of 170 
 
about it because this is service provider that we appointed in order to 
make us conscience of those type of things.  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  I - I will take you to Mr  Pretorius’ 
affidavit and what he indicates he did relay to  you after the first 
interactions with TNA, but if we may get there in a moment, because I 
would like sequentially to deal with each contract if we may and at this 
stage we actually in the introductory section of your affidavit.  
So let us maybe continue at the introductory level and then 
we go to the details of each contract.  Mr  Choeu if we can pick it up at 
page 4 of your affidavit and particularly at paragraph 3.7.  
10 
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You say at paragraph 3.7: 
“In order for Eskom to consider a s ponsorship 
request the following criteria would have been 
applied.” 
And then you give a primary weighting criteria under A and a 
secondary weighting criteria under B.  Do you see that?  
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I would like to pick up on one or two aspe cts of the 
primary selection criteria.  The fourth bullet point down.  
20 
MR CHOEU:  One, two, three, four - the last one? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  The - the second from last. 
MR CHOEU:  Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  It says: 
“Partners must be able to deliver.  They must have 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 161 of 170 
 
resources and experience and a track record of 
success.” 
Do you see that? 
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  How as that evaluated for TNA?  
MR CHOEU:  No, because (indistinct). 
ADV HOFMEYR:  If you could just turn on your …  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Ja, turn on your … 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But also I thought you said page 4.  
10 
MR CHOEU:  Ja.  It is page 4. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes.  Of the affidavit.  Page 4 …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And paragraph 3.7 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  It is the fourth bullet down. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  Ja.  Thank you. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Certainly.  I was asking whether the track record was 
capable of being assessed with TNA.  
20 
MR CHOEU:  No.  If you look at 3.8 - I am sorry.  There is a mistake 
there. 
“The above sponsorship criteria was not applied to 
the TNA Sponsorship request.  This criteria was 
applied - so not applied.  It is supposed to be - 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 162 of 170 
 
sorry.  Not applied there - because Eskom had a 
media buying agency - the MediaShop and was 
resolved that we would support through the existing 
relationship with the media buying agency.”  
So the - the short of it all we did not apply these - because 
we did not go to the Sponsorship Committee.  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
MR CHOEU: 
 
Ja 
and 
in 
fact 
let 
me 
just 
expl ain 
because 
Mr Pieter Pretorius did not explain.  Normally even before the 
sponsorship goes to the committee there was a team that reports to 
10 
Mr Pretorius.  Then they would look at the sponsorship.  So that by the 
time they go to the - you would know almost where they have - because 
they have this criteria and the team - MANCO meeting does not have 
the time to go through each and every criteria.  
So they will go through each and every criteria and they had 
a weighting that they use for everything and it did not go through that. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Let us move to page 5 then and just go systematically 
through the genesis of each of these contracts …  
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  If we may because I would like to track …  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am - I am sorry Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am not - not sure whether I understood Mr Choeu’s 
answer.  You - you made reference to - you said something that 
suggested to me that you were saying you did not - the TNA 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 163 of 170 
 
Sponsorship did not go to the committee because  you used the 
MediaShop. 
MR CHOEU:  This is - ja.  That - we took it to the MediaShop. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR CHOEU:  Instead of taking it to the committee.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Is - is the suggestion that if it is dealt with by the 
MediaShop then it did not have to go the committee? 
MR CHOEU:  This is what we thought so because we are looking at it 
from our point of view …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
MR CHOEU:  As a combo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  That we have received a - a request from media and this 
decision was with a (indistinct) that came from the - the marketing 
team. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  That we are dealing with the media - what do they call it?  
With a media house. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  The way we deal with all media houses.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  We go through.  I am not even aware whether because I 
was not at Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  When we dealt with - the dates are not here.  When we 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 164 of 170 
 
dealt with - what do you call it?  Male & Guardian as was mentioned.  
Whether did we go straigh t to MediaShop or did we go to the …  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Well Mr Choeu if it was a sponsorship there would 
have been no reason to go to MediaShop (intervenes).  
MR CHOEU:  No.  I do not know whether - where it went. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You - you see I was trying to understand.  
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where the MediaShop fits in insofar as the question 
of - the question whether you should have or should not have been 
10 
taken to the committee. 
MR CHOEU:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I was trying to - to understand whether you are 
saying because it went to the MediaShop or because it had to be taken 
to the MediaShop … 
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There was no obligation to take it to the committee.  
MR CHOEU:  No.  No, no, not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or what exactly are you saying?  
MR CHOEU:  No.  I am not saying that. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR CHOEU:  I am saying the team …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  Apparently decided to take it straight to MediaShop …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 165 of 170 
 
MR CHOEU:  Because the whole combo …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  It was not one thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  It was MediaShop saying would you sponsor …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  And then we have these little things v…  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR CHOEU:  Advertising and this and this and this  and sponsor the 
breakfast …  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  And … 
MR CHOEU:  And took it as it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And they taking it there had nothing …  
MR CHOEU:  It … 
CHAIRPERSON:  To do with not taking it to - to the committee. 
MR CHOEU:  No.  I - in my mind …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Those are two separate things. 
MR CHOEU:  It was a mistake.  They should have taken - we should 
have taken out. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
20 
MR CHOEU:  They did …  
CHAIRPERSON:  The sponsorship? 
MR CHOEU:  Out of the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of a combo - as you call it? 
MR CHOEU:  Out of the combo. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 166 of 170 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed.  So if we go back to 3.8 then Mr  Choeu I 
suggest to you that there does not need to be a further revision to your 
affidavit …  
MR CHOEU:  Oh no. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Because you say there at paragraph 3.8 on page 4 
that: 
“The above sponsorship criteria was not applied to 
the TNA sponsorship requests.”  
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And you say: 
“This criteria was not applied because Eskom had a 
media buying agent - the MediaShop - and we 
resolved that we would support TNA through the 
existing relationship with the media buying agent.”  
MR CHOEU:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  What I understand you to have clarified for us now is 
that insofar as there was a sponsorship component of the first contract 
with TNA … 
MR CHOEU:  Hm. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  That ought to have gone to the Sponsorship 
Committee.  Correct? 
MR CHOEU:  Hm.  That ought to have gone there.  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Is that correct? 
MR CHOEU:  Ja, but this is what I realised after the fact when all these 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 167 of 170 
 
questions … 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I understand. 
MR CHOEU:  Are being asked. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Just so that we can be clear.  Indeed.  
MR CHOEU:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Let us go then over if we may to page 5.  
Chair we are a few minutes before the end and I am go ing to now start 
the topic of the detail of each contract.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I am happy to continue for a few minutes or to take 
10 
the adjournment now and pick it up tomorrow morning.  
CHAIRPERSON:  What is your assessment of our chances of fin ishing 
reasonably on time on Friday?  We might have to - to add some time 
during the week … 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To make sure that on Friday we finish …  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or that at least we do not finish too late.  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair my sense at the moment is that we have hit 
crunched time yet for want of a better description.  The reason for that 
20 
is that we have Mr Choeu returning tomorrow and one other witness 
tomorrow and I am fairly confident we will complete both of th em in the 
course of today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  The third witness is scheduled to join us from 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 168 of 170 
 
Thursday …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And it may be that from Thursday we may want to 
start a bit earlier or extend later to be sure …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  To complete by Friday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  If that suits you, but at the moment I - I do not see a 
need to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  To - to add more. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Extend today. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Then maybe we should stop so that tomorrow 
you can then start on the new …  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The features of the details …  
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But maybe depending on how long your last witness 
is maybe - it maybe that we should consider early on Thursday …  
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or finishing late.  So that we will be assured of 
finishing on Friday. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  We would be indebted for that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 169 of 170 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  If I may Chair with your leave suggest that we already 
contact the Thursday witness for an earlier start.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Yes, yes, yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Just because that will … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  I think so. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Put us ahead of the schedule. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay.  So …  
ADV HOFMEYR:  What time would be convenient for Thursday Chair?  
CHAIRPERSON:  Depending again on how long you think each one of 
the last witnesses …  
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Will be.  There is a possibility of starting at nine or 
09:30.  There is a possibility of going to five or - or even half past five. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed.  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know.  So that there are those possibilities.  So 
… 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not know what your - what your sense is. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  If I may just take a moment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair my learned friend Mr  Mbikiwa has got a better 
sense of timing than I do suggests we start at nine on Thursday …  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And then take it from there if we may. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  No.  That is fine.  Then we do that on 
29 OCTOBER 2019 – DAY 184 
 
Page 170 of 170 
 
Thursday. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  But 10 o’ clock tomorrow Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  10 o’ clock tomorrow.  Mr  Choeu we are going to 
adjourn for the day and we will resume at 10 o’ clock tomo rrow morning 
at which stage you will then continue with your evidence.  
MR CHOEU:  Okay Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you. 
MR CHOEU:  I thought you were going to finish.  
CHAIRPERSON:  We - we adjourn for the day.  We adjourn.  
10 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 30 OCTOBER 2019 
 
