 
 
 
 
 
STATE CAPTURE INQUIRY 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 20 SEPTEMBER 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DAY 15, 20 September 2018 
 
 
Page 2 of 18 
 
Session 1 
CHAIRPERSON: Good morning Mr Pretorius, good morning everybody.  
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC: Good morning Chair. Chair you have before you an 
application brought on behalf of Ms Lynne Brown. It will be dealt with by Advocate 
Mokwena.  
CHAIRPERSON: Yes, Mr Labala? 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON: Well we did deal with this application for a certain time last time, but I 
didn’t think we had finished. And then a few days ago I was told that there would be no 
further papers filed in it and that I could decide the matter. That was strange to me 
10 
because I thought argument had not been finalised. I don’t know whether you have the 
same impression, or whether you thought argument had been finalised. ’And then I said, 
okay, let’s deal with it today. 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Chairperson, we take the liberty to thank you for inviting us 
back, and we know that you are exercising your undoubted fairness instincts and we are 
beholden to you and the evidence leaders. We want to stress the following, Chairperson, 
that we do not regard Ms Brown’s application to cross-examine Mr Jonas as being 
imperious and superior to any other, but we can’t be impervious to the issues that the 
words mentioned and the name of her being associated with those words tend to signify, 
the sound bite it created, but more significantly, the context, Chairperson, the context. 
20 
Now in debating this issue with you, can we just set out the clause and themes on how 
we will deal with it? In actual fact Chair, I wish ideally I could go to the conclusion, but I 
have to navigate- 
 
 
 
DAY 15, 20 September 2018 
 
 
Page 3 of 18 
 
CHAIRPERSON: You are free to do so. 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: I wish to navigate some aspects actually. I intend timing 
myself. I was saying this to my colleague Mr Lusenga that I would like to be done in 15 
minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON: Well it’s not far from what I think it should take to deal with this matter. 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Thank you Chairperson and we assure you that probably just 
to condescend and patronise you, if we are allowed to cross-examine Mr Jonas, it will be 
on a specific point. We may not even ask him two questions, ironically, and be advised 
Chair, that as we are sitting here, myself and my colleague Mr Lusenga, we hustled and 
bustled and asked ourselves the question, do we have to do it? And we took instructions 
10 
and lo and behold, listen to what our client says. I don’t want this attention at this stage, 
it’s not necessary. And we assure you, as we assured her, that this is not the idea. But 
permit us just to give you the clause and you will appreciate why we are here, 
Chairperson, and the theme on how we want to deal with this issue. 
We are going to refer you to the written statement and the transcript and we are going to 
refer you to context, context, context Chair. And then we will bring the little dung that we 
have already put before the Commission to fertilise the debate on cross-examination, just 
one or two principles and then we will conclude. That might be eleven minutes or so 
Chair. 
Chair, let’s start with the written statement of Mr Jonas. And just to expedite our 
20 
submissions, I am going to refer to the relevant part. Unfortunately I do not know whether 
this has been indexed or paginated, but it’s part of the documentation that are standing 
before the Commission. And with your permission, I would like to read certain portions of 
his written statement. 
 
 
 
DAY 15, 20 September 2018 
 
 
Page 4 of 18 
 
I would like to take you to Page 2 of the written statement, starting at Paragraph 3 
thereof. And the theme helped there is just to lay a foundation for context Chair that we 
will be debating with you. Paragraph 3, if I take the liberty to read to you, says the 
following 
“On approximately 27th and 28th of August 2015, 
when I was in Luanda, at an African caucus of 
finance ministers, I recall being contacted by Mr 
Fana Hlongwane whom I knew relatively well, 
telling me that Mr Duduzane Zuma would like to 
speak to me, to invite me- 
10 
CHAIRPERSON: I’m sorry, whose evidence is that now, Mr Jonas? 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Chairperson, we have mentioned that this is a written 
statement of Mr Jonas. 
CHAIRPERSON: Yes okay, maybe to just go straight to the real issue in this matter, 
shouldn’t we look at the affidavit of your client Ms Brown? As I see the statement, I have 
just had a quick look now, there are two bases on which she says she wants to be 
granted leave to cross-examine Mr Jonas. The one is what Mr Jonas said Mr Ajay Gupta 
said about your client, namely that there are people that they worked with, and then she 
also says Mr Jonas is expected to come back with names at some stage of who in the 
cabinet may have been hostile to Treasury or to the Ministry of Finance in regard to 
20 
certain matters. So I think we must just deal with those and the first one really is what is 
going to be the purpose of cross-examining Mr Jonas in regard to the first one? He is not 
the one who says the Guptas worked with, among others, Ms Brown? He is simply 
 
 
 
DAY 15, 20 September 2018 
 
 
Page 5 of 18 
 
saying, Mr Ajay Gupta, that is what Mr Ajay Gupta said. So what are you going to ask 
him?  
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Chairperson, you have asked me several questions, but let 
me be specific with what I sense is your concern. Perhaps before I even do that, the 
reason why we wanted to start where we started, we wanted to lay a foundation to 
demonstrate to you that what was said was said. The words are not the issue. There are 
several names that have been mentioned, but let me give you an example. If the name of 
the security guard at the Guptas’ compound was mentioned, it is neither here nor there,=. 
That’s not the issue. We wanted to start where we started to show you context. What is 
pertinent is context. It’s not only the mere mention of the word, but just to respond to your 
10 
specific question- 
CHAIRPERSON: Yes that last one. 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: The test is not whether it is true or not. The test is not 
whether it’s hearsay or not. This Commission, in discharging its very important function, 
will have to accept hearsay. The witnesses that you listen to Chair are not the clients of 
this Commission, they are also our witnesses. We have to join issue with them to fulfil this 
important test of assisting the Commission to discharge its important function. Is it in the 
interest of the Commission for us to cross-examine Mr Jonas on a very specific point and 
we will demonstrate to you how. 
CHAIRPERSON: But am I right to say this is the point? 
20 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: It is. 
CHAIRPERSON: Yes, so my question is, what are you going to say to him? Are you 
going to say, well do you confirm that you said Mr Ajay Gupta said he worked with, 
among others, my client? And let me assume he says yes, I confirm. And then you are 
 
 
 
DAY 15, 20 September 2018 
 
 
Page 6 of 18 
 
not going to ask him whether what Ajay Gupta told him is true? Isn’t your remedy this, 
that to the extent that your client might not want to leave this kind of evidence 
unchallenged, or maybe unchallenged is the wrong word, would it not be enough simply 
that it be told and it goes on record and it is said publically, simply that, to Mr Jonas, that 
your client, if that is her version, your client says I have never worked with Mr Ajay Gupta 
or any of the Gupta people. So if that’s what he said, that is not true and what I would like 
to do is to get an opportunity, at some stage, to take the witness stand and tell the 
Commission that if that is what was told to him, it is not true and that’s all. It might be 
different if we were to have Mr Ajay Gupta here in the witness stand and he says yes, we 
worked with Ms Brown on these things, then that’s different. But Mr Jonas might just say, 
10 
that is what I was told, I don’t know if it’s true or it’s not true and actually it doesn’t really 
mean anything, I was just saying what I was told. If you say you didn’t work with him, I am 
not in a position to dispute or admit that, I am just saying that is what I was told, that’s all. 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Chairperson I wish it was as easy as that. In actual fact the 
principles of cross-examination unfortunately ridicule that approach. And we will 
demonstrate, we will be brief on that point, we can’t ignore- 
CHAIRPERSON: What is your client’s version on this allegation? Because I don’t seem 
to find it in the affidavit. I may have missed it. 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Chairperson, if the Commission says we should disclose that 
which we want to ask Mr Jonas, it’s one thing. But if the Commission says that assist us 
20 
to discharge our function in the context, Chairperson, not the words, in the context in 
which Mr Jonas said Mr Gupta said that they work with Ms Brown, then we will assist the 
CommissionCommission, and we- 
 
 
 
DAY 15, 20 September 2018 
 
 
Page 7 of 18 
 
CHAIRPERSON: We may come to that, we may come to that. Remember that one of the 
requirements, if you apply for leave to cross-examine, is that you must put up your 
version., What is your client’s version to the allegation that she wants to cross-examine 
about? 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Let’s go to her statement Chairperson. Chairperson, ideally I 
would have wished to arrive at this point having demonstrated context to you and I kept 
saying I wish- 
CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let me give you time to give me the context. You did say you 
won’t take long, maybe 15 minutes, so it won’t take long. So give me the context and then 
give me your submissions as you wish to give them. 
10 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: I am not trying to act like a bulldog, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON: No I want to give you a fair hearing. You know exactly what issues are 
in my mind. 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Chairperson, permit us to start with, and I am going to gloss 
through the written statement just to give you the themes of the context. In the written 
statement, the build-up was- 
CHAIRPERSON: The portions you want to read in the written statement, are they 
covered in your client’s affidavit applying for leave to cross-examine? Do they fall within 
that? Are they covered? 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Indeed, they come by reflection. She reflects on that. I will 
20 
demonstrate that, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: Well tell me first where they are covered before you go to them so that I 
can see if they are covered. 
 
 
 
DAY 15, 20 September 2018 
 
 
Page 8 of 18 
 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Chairperson I am looking for a file that contains the statement 
of Ms Brown. Chairperson if you look at the indexed papers in as far as Ms Brown’s 
statement is concerned, I would like to draw your attention to Page 165 of the paginated 
papers, headed Motivation, Paragraph 10 thereof, And may I take the liberty to read it to 
you? 
CHAIRPERSON: Yes thank you. 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Now for you to appreciate the context, already in Paragraph 8 
and 9 she lays the foundation that she has not been served with the notice in terms of 
Rule 3. She mentions in Paragraph 8, that- 
CHAIRPERSON: As you read, you may just take it that while we were here, I have read 
10 
that portion twice, and I can’t find where Ms Brown tells us what her version is in regard 
to the allegation allegedly made by Mr Ajay Gupta that they protected certain people, 
including her, or they worked with them. I can’t see where she puts up her version. 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Chairperson, context. And permit us just to take you through 
this aspect and  we will respond to your concern. 
CHAIRPERSON: Okay. 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: If you look at Paragraph 9, which lays a foundation to 
Paragraph 10, I would like to read from Line Number 5 and may I read it to you? 
“I have not received any notification advising me 
that I was going to be implicated by Mr Jonas or 
20 
any other witness’ testimony. Mr Jonas further 
testified that Mr Gupta allegedly told him that I 
and Brian Molefe are protected by them and 
 
 
 
DAY 15, 20 September 2018 
 
 
Page 9 of 18 
 
nothing would happen to him if he agreed to 
accept appointment as Minister of Finance in the 
place of Mr Nhlanhla Nene, should I agree to work 
with them subsequent to my appointment.” 
Let’s go to Motivation, Paragraph 10 
“As it turned out, the evidence of Mr Jonas on the 
24th [and this is wrong, because we know it’s the 
23rd of October 2015] mentioned my name.” 
Let’s start with that journey there Chair and hence we keep on saying we will go to 
context. Let’s go to Page 166 of her statement, Paragraph 11. He testified that during the 
10 
alleged meeting of the 23rd of October 2015 at Saxonworld in the presence of Duduzane 
Zuma and Fana Hlongwane, Mr Gupta exalted to him that presumably the Guptas and 
cohorts are people they work with and Lynne Brown, listen to what she says in Paragraph 
12, the utterances implicate me. At face value, they come across as innocuous hearsay 
utterances by a third party. Let’s pause there to remind you Chair that it doesn’t matter 
whether it’s true or false, it doesn’t matter whether it’s hearsay, hence we say, Chair, if 
you appreciate context- 
CHAIRPERSON: Where is her version? You see, if you can’t answer that question, 
whatever you say is not really going to help. If anybody wants leave to cross-examine, 
the least they must do is put up their version in regard to those allegations. So you can 
20 
say whatever context you want to say, if that requirement is not there, you are going to 
have serious problems getting me to grant you your client leave to cross-examine. 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Chairperson, please find by way of deduction and appreciate 
in context the version of Ms Brown starting in the following paragraphs- 
 
 
 
DAY 15, 20 September 2018 
 
 
Page 10 of 18 
 
CHAIRPERSON: But before there is a context, there must be a response to the 
allegation. How is there going to be a context to her version when there is no version? 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Chairperson, if you read Paragraph 13, then we will deal with 
your concern. 
CHAIRPERSON: Let’s say, for argument’s sake, let us say that I am with you that she is 
implicated, okay. But the question still stands, where is her version? 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Chairperson may I read Paragraph 13?  
CHAIRPERSON: Will Paragraph 13 give me her version? 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Actually it gives you her basis of her version. 
CHAIRPERSON: Okay. 
10 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC:  
“I however  opine differently. This, for me, may be 
the seminar seat upon which further insinuations 
and allegations against me may be built. This 
anxiety is amplified by the fact that Mr Jonas has 
further testified that Cabinet was hostile to 
Treasury. Consequent upon that, the chairperson 
has asked him to reflect on this and return with 
the fuller details, which I presume will include 
individuals’ names, possibly including my name 
20 
as well.” 
Let’s go to Paragraph 14, Chairperson. 
 
 
 
DAY 15, 20 September 2018 
 
 
Page 11 of 18 
 
CHAIRPERSON: Well, let’s start with 13. You said 13 would give her version. What is her 
version to the allegation that Mr Jonas said Mr Ajay Gupta made, that they worked with 
her and protected her? Does she admit that they worked with her? Does she deny that? 
Does she admit that she was protected by them? Does she deny that?  
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Chairperson, if the basis of the request for the version was for 
Ms Brown to say the following, I will cross-examine Mr Jonas on the following points to 
demonstrate- 
CHAIRPERSON: No. No, the requirement is that if you want to… If, in a statement or in 
evidence, a witness makes allegations that implicate you, you want to cross-examine that 
witness on those allegations that implicate you. If that’s what you want, you must up your 
10 
version, because I am not going to allow you to cross-examine if you actually admit the 
allegations. Now, you are standing there on her behalf asking that she be granted leave 
to cross-examine and she is not telling me in the affidavit and you are not telling me 
whether she admits or denies the allegation. Why must I grant her leave to cross-
examine if she admits the allegation? 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Chairperson here is your response. If you are going to 
appreciate the context and the position of Ms Brown, and may I- 
CHAIRPERSON: No Mr Labala, I give you now only 5 minutes to show me if, in her 
affidavit, she has put up a version to these allegations. And if she hasn’t, as far as I am 
concerned I am ready to decide the matter. 
20 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Chairperson, nowhere in specific terms does Ms Brown say 
the following, I deny what Mr Jonas said. Nowhere in specific terms, Ms Brown says the 
following, I will demonstrate that what Mr Jonas said the Guptas said cannot be true. But 
we say the following, and this is an argument that we wanted to build on, hence we want 
 
 
 
DAY 15, 20 September 2018 
 
 
Page 12 of 18 
 
to go to the context, Chairperson, and we are halted in our foot-tracks because we can’t 
go past you. 
CHAIRPERSON: I won’t allow you now to give me the context, now that you have given 
me the answer to this question. 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: But permit us to say the following Chair. Perhaps we do not 
even have to tribulate about this aspect, we need to pack it. It will come out in the wash 
as the proceedings go on. But permit us to conclude by saying the following 
Chairperson.Perhaps your remedy assists us and we need not bother, because of the 
following. If she is not implicated, let it be so, but in the ultimate answer, Chairperson, I 
am not even looking at the evidence leaders, the capable team of the evidence leaders. 
10 
I’m looking at any other interested party who would come and say the following. A version 
was put before the Commission saying Mr Ajay Gupta mentioned to Mr Jonas that they 
worked with Ms Brown. It was not contested now. We take this remedy and welcome it 
because it simply means any other person, when you go to the closing submissions, 
wants to raise this issue, this Commission will assist us to say it can’t be. And here is the 
difficulty Chair. The difficulty is just here and may I just refer to one aspect where I want 
to be the sidekick of Mr Hellens- 
CHAIRPERSON: Well I don’t know what difficulty you want to refer to Mr Labala. The 
simple point is if you want to cross-examine, you want leave to cross-examine a witness, 
because the witness has made allegations or has given evidence that implicates you, you 
20 
must, in your application to me, put up your version. And she hasn’t put up her version, 
and I see no reason why, therefore, her application should not fail. 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Chair, before you even go that route, please bear the 
following on your mind, and there is a point that I wanted to approach the Commission on 
 
 
 
DAY 15, 20 September 2018 
 
 
Page 13 of 18 
 
about the difficulty. We contend that Ms Brown is not the be all and end all of this 
Commission; she is not even superior to any other witness. But please bear the following 
about what makes her unique. In line with her affidavit, she simply says: Some of the 
terms of reference, if you look at what is mentioned in her statement, some of the terms 
of reference refer me as the member of the national executives, some of the terms of 
reference mention the SOE’s that was under my auspices as a minister. That point alone 
wanted to bring the context in which we wanted to persuade you Chair, that you cannot 
elbow her out. Now if you appreciate what we are saying Chair, then your fairness 
instincts would say you should permit her to cross-examine Mr Jonas; to explain that 
important term of reference which was a part of this session. Where it is not mentioned in 
10 
her statement Chairperson about her version, do not dilute that aspect. Already, 
Chairperson, context has already brought her before this Commission. Now we wanted to 
demonstrate to you that we may have not mentioned the following in her statement. She 
will deny that what Mr Jonas said about Mr Gupta is not true., We don’t mention that she 
will demonstrate that it cannot be that she worked with the Guptas. Simply put, and we 
kept on harping and feeding on this issue, even in our earlier submissions, that Chair, 
look at her holistically, she is standing before you Chair if you look at all the terms of 
reference. 
CHAIRPERSON: I am going to give you two minutes to round off your submissions. 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Chairperson these two minutes I would like to address you 
20 
with the difficulties that we face because of this. And this may come out at a later stage 
when we have to make closing submissions. And please, Chairperson, appreciate this 
submission in this context. Mr Jonas is not only the witness of the evidence leaders, he is 
also our witness. We wanted to assist this Commission by cross-examining him and 
permit me just to read these following principles, Chair. 
 
 
 
DAY 15, 20 September 2018 
 
 
Page 14 of 18 
 
CHAIRPERSON: What would be very helpful is for her to give us her version. That is 
what would be helpful if she wants to assist us. 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Chairperson let me take you into our confidence openly. Ms 
Brown’s functions are set out in Section 85 of the Constitution; to initiate legislation, to 
direct policy, to guide executive functions. If it is- 
CHAIRPERSON: Yes Mr Labala, but how is that relevant here? 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Here is the relevance, Chairperson. If someone says that the 
Guptas mentioned that they worked with her and it becomes a free floating statement, no 
context given to it, nowhere is it said that the following, the following is mentioned: The 
Guptas work with her when she discharges her executive functions; the Guptas work with 
10 
her when she initiates legislation;;the Guptas work with her when she gave directions to 
the SOE’s. 
CHAIRPERSON: She may be able to give that if she says, I want to be given a chance to 
give evidence and deal with this. 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: That’s on record, Chairperson But here comes the difficulty 
Chairperson, and I wanted to take you through that. Here is the real difficulty that the 
Commission is going to face. If a party, Chairperson, wishes to lead evidence to 
contradict, let’s say Ms Brown comes before the Commission, here is the difficulty- 
CHAIRPERSON: You are left with one minute. 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: May be I just exhaust this one minute Chairperson by 
20 
referring you to this authority? If a party wishes to lead evidence to contradict an 
opposing witness, take the position of Ms Brown, he or she should first cross-examine the 
witness upon the facts which he or she intends to prove in contradiction. Take away the 
 
 
 
DAY 15, 20 September 2018 
 
 
Page 15 of 18 
 
fact that she may not have specified her version in affidavit; take away the fact that she 
does not say, I deny. But we wanted to demonstrate to you that by reflection, this is what 
she says, given the terms of reference. But may I conclude by referring you to this 
authority Chairperson, which is in our submission. It is grossly unfair to let a witness’s 
evidence go unchallenged in cross-examination and afterwards argue that he must be 
disbelieved. This is going to happen if, and we are forced to give if, Chairperson. If Ms 
Brown comes before this Commission and she wants to cross-examine or she wants to 
give her version, and in that version she says that which you say she ought to have put in 
her statement to apply to cross-examine Mr Jonas, this is what might happen 
Chairperson and these are the basic principles of cross-examination, the leading of 
10 
evidence.  
Now in closing Chairperson, that is where our difficulty is. All that we wanted to say to you 
Chairperson, is if you had appreciated the context, Chairperson, may I just exhaust these 
few seconds to say the following. 
CHAIRPERSON: If you have a few seconds, yes, what’s the last point you want to make? 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: If you had appreciated the context, the build-up, Chairperson, 
towards what was said, that Mr Jonas said that Mr Gupta mentioned that they work with 
her, appreciating the terms of reference, appreciating what she said in her statement to 
cross-examine Mr Jonas, the answer would have been there Chairperson. This has been 
subtracted by the fact that- 
20 
CHAIRPERSON: Your time is up. 
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Ms Lynne Brown’s application is dismissed. She has not 
put up her version and I am not, at this stage, prepared to grant her leave to cross-
 
 
 
DAY 15, 20 September 2018 
 
 
Page 16 of 18 
 
examine. She is free to later on renew the application if she meets the requirements, she 
is able to meet the requirements. So the final decision is her application at this stage is 
dismissed. Obviously I did need to hear Mr Mokwena, thank you.  
ADV SIMMY LABALA SC: Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON: Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC: Thank you Chair. It was envisaged yesterday that we 
would put before you a programme for the next few weeks and give some explanation of 
why we are in the position that we are today. There are no hearings planned for 
tomorrow, so we will not be sitting, by your leave, tomorrow Chair. The Commission will 
be requested by the legal team to hear an application, we don’t deem it appropriate to 
10 
give details at this stage, on Thursday the 27th and Friday the 28th of September. Minister 
Nene will testify on the 3rd of October, Minister Gordhan on the 10th of October and 
Barbara Hogan on the 15th of October, by your leave.  
The difficulty that the legal team has had in planning for witnesses to testify this week and 
next week is that both Mr Jonas and Ms Mentor are out of the country and that has given 
some difficulties in programming in relation to their availability. But as soon as their 
availability has been secured, they will give evidence on intervening days, but we cannot 
determine those days at this stage. 
Mr Chair, Phase One that was mentioned in the opening statement, is nearing 
completion, but certain matters relevant to Phase One and the terms of reference 
20 
included in Phase One, have been held over, pending further investigations and 
cooperating with the investigators. Dependent upon their work and their assistance to the 
legal team, we will call further evidence in Phase One. But we are unable to determine 
fixed dates at this stage and it is perhaps not appropriate at this stage to name witnesses. 
 
 
 
DAY 15, 20 September 2018 
 
 
Page 17 of 18 
 
In relation to term of reference 1.8, you will recall that is the term of reference that deals 
with the appointment of advisors in the Ministry of Treasury in relation to the appointment 
in December 2015 of Minister Des van Rooyen. That matter is almost ready. Certain 
investigations need completion, statements are ready and the relevant witnesses will be 
called in the concluding parts of Phase One. Certain other witnesses Chair have 
expressed a willingness to testify sooner rather than later, and again, those with the 
assistance of the investigators and the legal team, statements will be prepared and put 
before you also in the latter stages of Phase One. So there is a lot of work still to be done 
before we move to Phase Two. 
Phase Two, Chair, as you will understand, involves intensive work on the part of the 
10 
investigation team assisted by the legal team and as soon as we have clarity on the 
products of that investigation, which at this stage we don’t have, we will put forward a 
further programme for Phase Two beginning later in the year. 
CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much Mr Pretorius. Just to confirm then, the 
Commission will not be sitting tomorrow. And next week, it will only resume sitting on 
Thursday. And on Thursday it will hear a certain application, details of which it is not 
considered appropriate to disclose to the public at this stage and that might take 
Thursday and Friday next week. Minister Nene, the Minister of Finance will give his 
evidence on the 3rd of October and Minister Gordhan will give his evidence on the 10th of 
October and former Minister Barbara Hogan will give her evidence on the 15th of October. 
20 
And in the meantime, in between, there might be other witnesses that you might bring in, 
I understand the position relating to Phase One, either in between or much later.  
 
 
 
DAY 15, 20 September 2018 
 
 
Page 18 of 18 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC: In the intervening dates, perhaps on short notice, there 
may be other witnesses who become available, given international travels and other 
considerations. 
CHAIRPERSON: Yes, and that includes the issues of cross-examination or not really? 
When Mr Jonas would give his evidence, and then will finalise and then be available for 
cross-examination. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC: Yes similarly Ms Mentor and then arrangements will be 
made with the legal team as well. 
CHAIRPERSON: Yes and so far, other than applicants whose application for leave to 
cross-examine have been refused, no one has applied for leave to cross-examine Mr 
10 
Maseko? 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC: Yes no one has applied. 
CHAIRPERSON: Okay thank you very much, we will then stop at this stage. The 
proceedings are therefore adjourned until Thursday next week. 
 
 
 
