 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
24 JULY 2020 
 
 
DAY 237 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757 
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 74 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
24 JULY 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 3 of 74 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 24 JULY 2020 
CHAIRPERSON: Good morning Mr Soni, good morning 
everybody.  Yes are we ready?  Well I must just say that we 
starting late because I arrived here in time but I had 
forgotten my mask and I had to go back to fetch one so that 
is why we are starting a little late.  Yes.  Yes.  Please put on 
your microphone.  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson we had reserved today for the 
evidence of Judge Makhubele as you will know Chairperson 
there are three witnesses who have already testified about 
10 
complaints relating to the way she dealt with the matter. 
 
I understand that she is now appointed Legal 
Representatives and they which to move an application.  I 
have indicated they have – informed me about it yesterday 
DCJ an application for a postponement.  I indicated that I 
would oppose it on behalf of the commission.  But before I 
set out the basis of the opposition perhaps my learned 
friend Mr Shakoane who is her Counsel should address you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let him come forward and then 
somebody can sanitise or is it going to be more – okay I 
20 
think let him come forward or whoever is going to move the 
application on behalf of Judge Makhubele.  If we hear you 
with the mask on it is going to be fine to speak with it on 
but we might struggle in which case you might wish to move 
it – shift it a bit or take it off for the time being. 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 4 of 74 
 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Thank you Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Please just give me – just place yourself 
on record properly first. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  My initial is G, my surname is 
Shakoane, S-h-a-k-o-a-n-e. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, I think the mask is interfering. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Your initial is G? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Initial is G, surname Shakoane, S-h-
a 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:    S-h-a 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  K-o 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ah ha. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  A-n-e. 
CHAIRPERSON:  A-n-e. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes Senior Counsel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Yes Mr Shakoane. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes.  I am with Advocate M 
Mathaphuna. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is his – just give me the name 
20 
again. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Initial is M. 
CHAIRPERSON:  M. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  The surname is Mathaphuna, M-a 
CHAIRPERSON:  M-a. 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 5 of 74 
 
JUDGE MAKHUBELE:  T-h-u sorry t-h-a 
CHAIRPERSON:  T-h-a 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  P-h-u-n-a 
CHAIRPERSON:  M-a-t-h-a 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  P-h-u 
CHAIRPERSON:  P-h-u? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes.  N-a. 
CHAIRPERSON:  N-a. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
10 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Chair I stand here to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you will just have to raise your voice I 
think you have a soft voice. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Eish yes I will. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV 
SHAKOANE 
SC: 
 
I 
stand 
here 
to 
ask 
for 
a 
postponement of the hearing of the evidence of Judge 
Makhubele.  The reasons we already set out in a letter 
which my learned friend Mr Soni had been favoured with.  If 
I may beg leave to hand it up to you Mr Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Then I can address it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes no that is fine. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  The position Mr Chair is that 
basically the Judge was informed of the need for her to give 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 6 of 74 
 
evidence in terms of initially it was a communication after 
the first. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You will have to really raise your voice.  
You – I cannot hear you properly. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  I must raise my voice.  I will try to 
raise the voice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  The first two witnesses who testified 
who was Dingiswayo and Ms Ngoye and she was informed 
of the fact that she would have to testify or give affidavit.  
10 
Then on the 23 r d of last month there was a written 
communication where she indicated she would be attending 
to give evidence.  But there had not been any consultation 
or meeting between her as yet and the evidence team.  So… 
CHAIRPERSON:  One second.  Where is the file with the 
rules and regulations?  Yes continue. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes.  Now on the 25 t h of last month 
there was then a telephone communication between her and 
the evidence leader where she was asked to come to a 
meeting for a consultation on the 9 t h of this month.  And 
20 
then on – on the 9 t h the meeting did take place but before 
then 
I 
should 
mention 
that 
there 
was 
a 
further 
communication on Saturday the 27 June where she was 
informed that there would be a further witness, Advocate 
Botes SC who was to testify and she had requested that she 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 7 of 74 
 
be notified and be present to – when that evidence is 
tendered so that she could have the opportunity to listen to 
the evidence and cross-examine to the extent that it would 
be necessary. 
 
However, on the 29 t h she – she then – sorry she did 
not – was informed that – not on the 29 t h.  In fact, the 
communication if I may put it to you it is in paragraph 6.  
The communication was that on the 27 t h with the evidence 
leader where she was informed that when checking the 
schedules for the 29 t h of last month it was realised that 
10 
Advocate Botes SC would be testifying as a witness.   
 
But then she requested the notice that she be 
present when he testified.  Unfortunately, that was not done 
and she learnt later that Advocate Botes SC came on the 1 s t 
of this month and testified.  She could not be there to listen 
or challenge his evidence. 
 
So then on the – sorry – on the 29 t h an email was 
sent advising that she would then require to change the – 
opposition as she communicated on the 23 of June in view 
of the developments that took place. 
20 
 
Now she needed to be able to address the evidence 
involved and she had been of the mind that she might need 
to have her own legal representatives. 
 
And then she did not get a response.  The evidence 
of the 1 July went through by Advocates Botes and then on 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 8 of 74 
 
the 6 of July she received the Notice of Set Down for the 
24 t h and which was three days before the date on which she 
had consult with the evidence team. 
 
Then on the 9 July this month the meeting with the 
evidence team took place.  During that meeting and owing 
to the discussions that took place and the approach I 
believe to her evidence she formed the view conclusively 
that she would need her own legal representative to prepare 
for her evidence and presentation which she communicated 
to the evidence team. 
10 
 
Now on the – subsequent to that she had then 
approached the attorneys on record now to be her legal 
representatives.  A consultation took place on the 15 t h of 
this month and after that consultation she was then advised 
by the attorneys that she would need to secure the services 
of counsel.   
 
We were then contacted on the 20 t h in the afternoon 
and on being informed on the dates that it is an urgent 
matter the indication to them was that our available date to 
consult would have been today.  But obviously during the 
20 
telephone call we were not aware that it is a matter about 
this commission.  But later when the instructions were 
delivered in terms of brief – a brief on the 22 n d in the 
afternoon we then fully got to know that the matter is for 
appearance at this commission and that already a date of 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 9 of 74 
 
set down for today has been communicated which meant 
then that the consultation would not take place we had to 
prepare for this appearance today. 
 
I am aware of the fact that in the rules the – the 
requirement is that if there is a substantive application that 
sought to be made it has to be done seven days before.  
But in these circumstances, it could not be feasible because 
of the state of affairs as I explained. 
 
Then when we got to know as I mentioned the first 
initiative 
that 
was 
suggested 
was 
that 
we 
have 
10 
communication with the evidence leader to see if we could 
probably find each other or there could be some way of 
accommodating the Judge.  But the indication when I spoke 
to my learned friend Mr Soni was that he would not be in a 
position to agree at that point and that we would then have 
to make a request before the – before you Mr Chair. 
 
At the same time the leader of the evidence team 
Advocate Pretorius SC was also made aware of the 
situation who then suggested that probably if there could be 
further discussions with my learned friend Mr Soni they 
20 
could continue but at the same time we needed to notify the 
Secretariat as well.  Which was done through this letter to 
indicate the predicament and initially on the 21 s t as you may 
see Mr Chair on the paragraph 13 there was communication 
to the Secretariat by email from the attorneys’ office 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 10 of 74 
 
indicating 
that 
the 
Judge 
would 
be 
requesting 
the 
postponement.   
 
But then it was not agreed to at that time.  That was 
made known by a reply from the Secretariat on the 22 n d 
indicating that it is not agreed to.  Then – which led to the 
events of yesterday in paragraph 14 there and 15. 
 
Now in these circumstances Mr Chair the situation 
as I observe it from this fact is that effectively up until the 
9 t h of this month there had not been preparations as yet 
insofar as the presentation of the Judge’s evidence is 
10 
concerned. 
 
They met on the 9 t h and before then she could not 
come to any firm conclusion whether indeed it would be 
necessary for her to have legal representation or not.  And 
it only happened on the 9 t h when the meeting took place 
which there and then she made it known and she indicated 
the notice that had been given would be short notice. 
 
But for reasons that have not been clear to me to 
this stage is whether there were any reasons or what the 
discussions actually there were which led to that request 
20 
not being addressed at that point.   To say if you say it is 
short notice then what is the suggestion, how much more 
time could be allowed for you to prepare?  That all seems to 
have been missed. 
 
Then secondly the observation I make also is that 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 11 of 74 
 
when one looking at that from the time when she obtained 
the services of the attorneys of record to the 15 t h there 
would be no more than five days after that meeting of the 9 
July and having consulted on the 15 t h and then made the 
decision that she would have to acquire the services of 
counsel one had only the week of the 13 t h – I am sorry the 
week of the 20 t h which is last week and the communication 
was made first with Counsel on the 20 t h and which then led 
to the indications.  Because one could not be available 
immediately even to prior arrangement which had been 
10 
ensuing. 
 
So in these circumstances Mr Chair I am aware that 
in terms Rule 11 good cause has to be shown if a 
postponement had to be allowed. 
 
Now on the facts and on the observations as I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Shakoane. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is the real reason why your client 
wants a postponement? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  She needs to have a consultation 
20 
with the legal team Mr Chair and then be able to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why has she not had a full and proper 
consultation with her legal team from the time she at least 
knew that the matter would be coming up today?  Your – the 
letter you have handed up says she received the notice of 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 12 of 74 
 
set down as it were on the 6 July 2020. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  That was – yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And we do know that three days later on 
the 9 July she had a consultation with Mr Soni the legal 
team which was at her request.  She had requested that she 
at a consultation with the evidence leaders.  She indicated 
in correspondence that she was making herself available. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And why – why was a consultation with 
her legal team not held within five days after the 6 July or 
10 
within five days after the 9 July after she decided she – that 
she would need her own lawyer? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Basically, it will be the 9 July Mr 
Chair and as I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  And remember we are – we are not talking 
here about a lay person. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes true. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are now not even talking about an 
attorney or advocate we are talking about a Judge. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes true.  True.  But  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So when – when were the attorneys 
instructed?  What was the date when the attorneys were 
instructed? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  It is not specified here in the letter 
but I can… 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 13 of 74 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is not clear here. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  I can establish.  If I may just have a 
moment Mr Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  But you see I am surprised even by 
the fact that this basic information is not at hand because 
when you apply for a postponement one of things you have 
to satisfy the forum with is that you have acted diligently to 
try and avoid a postponement. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So this is information that should have 
10 
been 
ready. 
 
So 
when 
– 
when 
were 
the 
attorneys 
instructed? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  I am informed it is on the 15 t h when 
the – when the consultation actually also took place.  Now 
which – which reasonably will be within the range of more 
or less the five days. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Now I – the letter I think it is the 
same letter that you have handed up here. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was made available to me this morning 
20 
through the commission and I asked my Registrar to ask the 
acting Secretary of the commission to phone the lawyers or 
Judge Makhubele and to pass on the message to her that 
any application for a postponement must be made at the 
hearing and that she must be present at the hearing so that 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 14 of 74 
 
if the application is refused we can go on.  I was informed 
that that message was passed on to her lawyers and they 
indicated that they would talk to her and talk to Counsel.  I 
assume it was the attorney who was phoned and I was 
subsequently given a report back that the lawyers – her 
lawyers said  
1. They were going to be at the hearing but she would 
not be at the hearing.   
Will you confirm that that is so? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes let me just confirm that?  Mr 
10 
Chair I was telephoned as well in – this morning more or 
less the same time that the evidence – the Secretariat will 
have contacted them.  I just wanted to confirm certain 
things because when I was contacted the question, I asked 
was whether she is available because yesterday I got the 
understanding that she was not around. 
 
Now the – I was then informed the following which is 
what I just have to convey now.  That she had been at 
Mokopane and when she was travelling through to – to 
come to Pretoria he had a – a puncture – a tyre puncture 
20 
and the vehicle lost control.  But she is not injured it is just 
trauma.  And they had to ask family members to go – come 
fetch where she was and they only travelling down to 
Pretoria with her this morning. 
 
So that was what was also when I discussed with the 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 15 of 74 
 
attorney conveyed to the Secretariat. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me understand that.  She had a tyre 
puncture some time yesterday. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes, that is – I think it was yesterday 
– it must have been in the late afternoon. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Later afternoon. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  When they were supposed to come 
down to this thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was she on her way from Polokwane to 
Pretoria? 
10 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  From Mokopane. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  From Mokopane. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And – and then what happened?  Is that – 
is that connected with her not being here or what is the 
position? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  I – I – when I asked if she could be 
available to come – when they informed me that that 
20 
happened and the trauma that she might have suffered and 
the fact that she is only arriving in Pretoria this morning the 
sense I gained is that she probably would need to consult a 
doctor or so because that is usually what happens. But I did 
not get the full details in respect of that Mr Chair. 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 16 of 74 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before we proceed. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am going to ask you to contact your 
client. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that we – we know what the position 
is. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  I will – I will Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  For – I wanted her to be here because we 
do not know what the outcome of the application for a 
10 
postponement is going to be. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that if it is refused, she is available 
and we can proceed.  I know that she is not working today. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because I did speak to the Judge 
President to her Judge President some weeks back once we 
knew the date to say to the Judge President this is the date 
that has been set aside for your Judge to appear before the 
commission so please do not give her any work on that day. 
20 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the Judge President told me that 
today falls within the court recess.  So – but he also said he 
would make sure that he did not give her any recess duty to 
clash with today.  He even said he could... he would keep 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 17 of 74 
 
her out of duty for Monday just in case we do not finish 
today and we need her, which I appreciate.  So I know that 
she is certainly not on duty. 
 
And up to now, the basis for the application for a 
postponement is not that she is sick.  So I would like you to 
make contact with her.   
 
Firstly, because I may need her to explain some of the 
things in regard to the application for a postponement under 
oath.   
 
There are certain gabs in the letter, you know.  You.. 
10 
there is no affidavit in support of her application for a 
postponement and there are things that may need to be 
clarified. 
 
And it may well be that I would need her to take the 
witness stand for purposes of answering, giving clarification 
of 
certain 
issues 
relating 
to 
her 
application 
for 
a 
postponement. 
 
But also apart from that.  In case the application is 
refused, to be able to be available.  But let us... I think we 
need to take an adjournment to enable you to be in touch 
20 
with her and then we can resume and then I can... we can 
take it from there. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So we are going to adjourn for 
fifteen minutes.  On my watch, that will take us to five to 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 18 of 74 
 
eleven. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  So is the Chair... if...  
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m?  Yes? 
ADV SHAKOANE:  I just want to clarify ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  ...if there are any specific matters, I must 
establish from her? 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, not apart from just finding out... well, I 
10 
want you to find out her situation about coming here. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Whether she can come here because one, 
I would like her to be here so that whatever I might need to 
have clarified under oath, she would be available to support 
her application for the postponement. 
 
But also, if her application is refused, I would like to be 
able to proceed.  So find out what her position is.  But that is 
what I would like to do. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Thank you, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS:   
INQUIRY RESUMES:   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, just switch on your mic. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Thank you, Mr Chair.  I... sorry.  I have 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 19 of 74 
 
made contact with Judge Makhubele and on the first 
question, she informs me the accident occurred at about 
19:30 in the evening.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So was it an accident or the tyre... the 
accident she refers to is the tyre puncture? 
ADV SHAKOANE:  To me it... I have been shown the 
pictures. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja? 
ADV SHAKOANE:  To me it looks like it resulted in an 
accident because of the damage that I see. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  Okay.  H’m. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  But the attorney says he could forward to 
the secretariat the pictures ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  ...if necessary. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think that should be done. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes.  Now, then the puncture Mr Chair, is 
that arising from this incident, she is not emotionally in a 
state to be able to attend or to testify as of today as we sit 
here. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So... but just to get the facts right.  In 
terms of what she told you ...[intervenes]  
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes? 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...there was a tyre puncture.   She had a 
tyre puncture ...[intervenes]  
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 20 of 74 
 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...around half-past seven last evening.  Is 
that right? 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes, I think the... probably the best way, 
it would be a tyre burst, probably. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry? 
ADV SHAKOANE:  I am saying as I think and looking at the 
pictures, the proper wording would be a tyre burst. 
CHAIRPERSON:  A tyre burst? 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And from what she told you - I am leaving 
out the pictures - from what she told you, did the car get out 
of the road or anything like that as a result of that? 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes, it sounds so because she says even 
the suspension collapsed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And there are pictures available of the 
20 
car? 
ADV SHAKOANE:  There are pictures. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are they in a position to be handed up or 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 21 of 74 
 
not? 
ADV SHAKOANE:  He says he can forward them.  I am sure 
he can show them on the phone as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, they can send to Mr Soni because he 
must see them first and then maybe arrangements can be 
made to immediately print while we continue. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Thank you, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, I think her lawyers must be in touch 
with Ms Rangata who can give them the information as to 
what number to send the pictures to and then she will try and 
10 
see, while we continue, whether she can have them print and 
then they can be handed up to me in printed form. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Thank you, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright.  So she says as a result of 
what happened yesterday when there was a tyre puncture or 
a tyre burst, she is not emotionally in a position to be here? 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Today? 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But does she indicate when she feels she 
20 
might be emotionally fine to appear? 
ADV SHAKOANE:  I did not ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  You did not  ...[intervenes]  
ADV SHAKOANE:  ...ask her specifically ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No, that is fine. 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 22 of 74 
 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did she indicate whether she did have to 
go to a doctor or not? 
ADV 
SHAKOANE: 
 
I 
did 
not 
ask 
that 
question 
but 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  ...if I understand the position.  I can only 
guess ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  ...that as a person, and for that matter, a 
10 
lady that gets involved in such an accident in the evening, 
even if they may not have gone to a doctor, it traumatised 
them enough for them not be in a state. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja-no, what I wanted.  I just wanted to get 
the facts right, whether she felt so traumatised that she did 
go to a doctor or she might not have gone to a doctor.  But 
nevertheless, she feels traumatised. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  From what you have been told, nothing has 
been said about going to the doctor? 
20 
ADV SHAKOANE:  No, I do not think as yet she has been to 
a doctor. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  Let us talk about this matter.  
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 23 of 74 
 
You see - I am going to leave out the issue of what 
happened yesterday, because the application was not based 
on that but that has now come to ...[intervenes]  
ADV SHAKOANE:  It is intervening. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...our attention. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is just that one would have expected that 
she would have informed her lawyers as soon as possible 
that:  “I know you are going to move an application for the 
postponement of my hearing but apart from or in addition to 
10 
whatever reasons you have given here to as what has 
happened, emotionally I would not be able to come”.  So that 
it could have been one of the reasons given ...[intervenes]  
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...right from the start. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Indeed, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja.  Now you see, and I will hear what 
Mr Soni has to say.  I think Judge Makhubele has known that 
the Commission would want her to come and give evidence 
for at least a number of months.  Ms Martha Ngoye from 
20 
PRASA gave evidence, I think early in March.  It might have 
been the first week. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am not sure but early in March. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  I understand so. 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 24 of 74 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sometime before that, in terms of the 
rules, she... Judge Makhubele would have been served with 
a notice in terms of Rule 3(3) of the Rules of the 
Commission ...[intervenes]  
ADV SHAKOANE:  H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...which would have given her Ms Ngoye’s 
affidavit or the portions that relate to her ...[intervenes]  
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...to implicate her ...[intervenes]  
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...to say, “Here is a witness who implicates 
you in some wrongdoing”.  And in terms of Rule 3(3), that 
notice would have explained her rights to Judge Makhubele.   
 
And those rights include that if she wanted to dispute 
the evidence of Ms Ngoye, she could apply for leave to 
adduce evidence. 
 
Also, if she wanted to cross-examine Ms Ngoye, she had 
a right to apply for leave to cross-examine her and that 
notice would have told her that she was required to do those 
things within 14-days. 
20 
ADV SHAKOANE:  H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As far as I know, she did not elect to make 
any such application in terms of the rules.  She was in 
correspondence with the Commission but as far as I know 
she certainly did not apply for leave to cross-examine Ms 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 25 of 74 
 
Ngoye or to adduce evidence in order to challenge her 
evidence.  [coughing]  Excuse me. 
 
The same procedure would have happened with regard 
to the affidavit of Mr Dingiswayo from PRASA.  And it may 
well be that miss... Judge Makhubele was given those 
affidavits of Ms Ngoye and Mr Dingiswayo at the same time.  
I do not know, but certainly she would have been served with 
that affidavit as well. 
 
And that would have been also in February or latest 
early March and she would have also report the same 
10 
submission about her rights. 
 
And then, I think, she would have received the same 
kind of notice in regard to Mr Achmat who has not testified 
but his affidavit was submitted.  It was intended that he 
would testify at a certain stage. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it may well be that he might still testify 
but... and of course, there was the affidavit of Advocate 
Botes SC and there was the affidavit of Mr Mogashoa. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Mr Mogashoa, yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  The attorney.  And all of those affidavits 
were served to her.  And I believe that - and Mr Soni can 
help you – I believe that at some stage, maybe in February 
or maybe in March or even after, there was communication 
from the legal team to her, asking her to furnish the 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 26 of 74 
 
Commission 
with 
an 
affidavit, 
responding 
to 
these 
allegations, these affidavits. 
 
And as far as I remember, subject to one qualification, I 
do not think that she has furnished any affidavit in response 
to such a request. 
 
Now, I am saying subject to one qualification because I 
think at some stage, early... or at some stage in June or 
early July, she did correspond with the Commission and 
there was an affidavit, I think if I am not mistaken, which 
dealt with certain issues.   
10 
 
One of which was what Mr Botes had said about her but 
I think she mentions... she made mention... she maybe 
mentioning certain other things relating to Ms Ngoye and Mr 
Dingiswayo in that affidavit. 
 
So she must have heard... she has known that it was 
likely that she would be asked to come and give evidence.  It 
was a question of when.   
ADV SHAKOANE:  H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:  She has known what they would... in 
what... she has known which the witnesses are who seem to 
20 
implicate her in some things.  She has heard their affidavits 
and if she wanted to even see the transcript of the evidence, 
she would have been given that. 
 
Now, according to this letter that you have handed up, 
she became aware on the 6t h of July that the date that had 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 27 of 74 
 
been determined for her to appear is today. 
 
Now, she had a consultation on the 9t h of July with the 
Commission’s legal team.  She never brought any application 
until today for the postponement of the date of her hearing 
and it seems to me or that if she only...  
 
If she instructed her attorneys on the 15t h of July, she 
allowed a whole week to lapse after she had become aware 
of the date and she knew that the date was not far. 
 
And then from the 15t h of July to, I think before the 
21s t of July, there was no indication that there would be an 
10 
application for a postponement. 
 
If I am not mistaken, your letter makes some indication.  
It is either the 21 s t of the 22n d when...[intervenes]  
ADV SHAKOANE:  It is the 21s t. 
CHAIRPERSON:  21s t? 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, the first letter was indicated.  One 
would have thought that the time would have been used even 
to put the application as a substantive application on 
affidavit, which has not happened. 
20 
 
And of course, as I said earlier on, we are not dealing 
here with just a lay person.  We are not dealing with a 
president or an advocate.  We are dealing with a high court 
judge.   
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 28 of 74 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  She knows how important it is to act 
quickly if you are expected to appear in court or in a 
tribunal, in a forum.  How important it is to act quickly if you 
are not going to be able to appear.  If you are seeking a 
postponement application. 
 
She also knows also the importance of looking for 
counsel who is available on that day.  She knows of the 
importance of getting counsel early, you know? 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And getting counsel who is available, you 
10 
know.  And not getting counsel who is not available.  I will 
hear what Mr Soni says, but I want to make this remarks to 
you so that you can address them if you wish to because 
they 
cause 
me 
serious 
concern 
about 
her 
and 
her 
application. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That when she has had as much time as 
she has had, several months, she comes at the last minute 
and ask to postpone the hearing of her evidence.  Ask for a 
postponement of the hearing of her evidence and therefore... 
20 
which would therefore mean that this Commission... or for 
this Commission this whole day is wasted. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We do not have a lot of time and I think 
about everybody in the country knows that.  We are 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 29 of 74 
 
operating under a court order that says we must finish our 
work within a certain time.   
 
And as I say, she has known from probably February, 
early March that the Commission is likely to want her to 
come here at some stage. 
 
She has been furnished with all the affidavits, as far as I 
understand the position.  And she has had the opportunity to 
respond to those affidavits and put her side of the story. 
 
And subject to the one qualification I said about this 
other affidavit, she has not dealt with the affidavits in the 
10 
manner that one would have expected despite having all the 
time. 
 
And as I understand the position.  She has been in 
recess because it has been court recess for a number of 
weeks.  I think the court recess is coming to an end.  Maybe 
on Monday.  Maybe they are resuming on Monday. 
 
And if I still recall correctly, the court recess in the high 
court in winter is about a month or maybe three weeks.  I am 
not sure. 
 
So she has had a lot of time, you know.  It is concerning.  
20 
That is what I want to say but you may wish to address any 
of these concerns I am raising before I allow Mr Soni. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes.  Obviously, Mr Chair with the 
limitations under which we came in to assist, one is entered  
in addressing this. 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 30 of 74 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  But to start with.  From the little that I 
gained, especially through a telephone consult yesterday, is 
that there had been counsel and attorneys who had been 
assisting before and the current attorneys had not been 
involved at that stage. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, I am under the impression that they 
were involved unless there are ...[intervenes]  
ADV SHAKOANE:  They ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  ...two law firms with the same name. 
10 
ADV SHAKOANE:  That is the next words which I wanted to 
mention.  They got...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  ...they got terminated at some point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, it was terminated at some point. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  So there were attorney who were then 
involved with counsel, Lebala SC, but then it came to path 
that he was said to be conflicted because he is also counsel 
20 
for PRASA.  So he then had to withdraw.   
 
And the attempts to find alternative counsel were not 
successful because one counsel was found in Pretoria who 
later decided should not be able to continue with the 
mandate.   
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 31 of 74 
 
 
Hence, the fall back to the current attorneys.  And I am 
told some communication initially happened around the 7 t h.  
It would have been telephonic or so with one of the attorneys 
but then they had to say, “We are available for a proper 
consultation with you on the 15 t h so that we can really have 
a picture what is happening and what had happened at the 
Commission where you were consulted with the Evidence 
Team and then we can make out whether we can straight 
away assist or we need to engage counsel”. 
 
That meeting then occurred on the 15t h and that is where 
10 
the advice was given to say, “We would need to engage 
counsel in this matter”. 
 
But of the counsel that they were contacting, there was 
not one readily available to come onboard as between... from 
between the 15t h and the time when they contacted us which 
is understandable under the circumstances where everybody 
is under lockdown virtually and then people are working from 
home and so on. 
 
But the long and short of it is that they were not able to 
obtain alternative counsel until the time when they contacted 
20 
us and we said we could be available to consult there but we 
need to find out.  It is actually the hearing date. 
 
Then the other point I made mention there.  I... it is so 
that the other incident are of April or March, but there is the 
added element of the... Advocate Botes having come on the 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 32 of 74 
 
1s t. 
 
Obviously, that would have been addressed in between 
had the counsel not... I mean, had the legal representatives 
not withdrawn.  One believes they would have addressed it 
in between. 
 
So the question is, to what extent she could be to blame 
under those circumstances?  I appreciate the fact that she is 
a judge in a high court and one cannot look at her like any 
other ordinary. 
 
But Mr Chair, at the same time, one would, with respect, 
10 
remember the principle or the same by plateau that it is best 
for one to have legal representation than themselves them 
presenting their own case. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No ...[intervenes]  
ADV SHAKOANE:  So in these circumstances...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m? 
ADV SHAKOANE:  ...I would say it is my submission that on 
the face of what is there, some steps almost proactively 
appeared to have been taken except for the limitations of the 
availability of those that she went to for assistance. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, what certainly appears to be the case 
is that to the extent that she might not have had enough time 
with her lawyers, with her counsel to prepare for today is 
because she decided to instruct them late.   
ADV SHAKOANE:  H’m. 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 33 of 74 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that was her decision. 
ADV SHAKOANE:  Well, we could say late if we... under 
these circumstances we had the precise date when they 
withdrew, the other attorneys and the counsel indicated the 
conflict. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I mean she knew for quite some time 
she would be required to appear here.  She could have 
ensured that her lawyers were fully briefed and ready and 
waiting for the date.  If she did not do that before knowing 
the date, as soon as she knew the date, she could do that. 
10 
 
Well, she might have decided that she no longer needed 
to be represented by her own lawyers, because I think that is 
the suggestion in her correspondence prior to the 9t h of July 
and she was happy to consult with the evidence leaders of 
the Commission. 
 
A consultation was arranged and it took place on the 
9 t h of July but she did not seem... she does not seem to 
thereafter act with urgency when the next time she instructs 
attorneys is on the 15t h when the matter is quite urgent.  The 
date is not far. 
20 
 
And then of course, about six days thereafter lapsed 
before the Commission is informed of any difficulties that 
may be there to her appearing and as things stand there 
does not appear to be any proper explanation from her for 
why she did not act with diligence in regard to – between 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 34 of 74 
 
the 6 t h or at least the 9 t h up to 21 s t when the first letter 
was sent.  
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   Yes, but …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It may be that there is much not much 
you can say other than what you have already said. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   Save to point out the following that 
on the contents of the letter she had already indicated as 
the 27 t h, 28 t h, when she was contacted to say that Adv 
Botes will be testifying, that then the notice she has been 
given would be short notice.  But also, the fact that she did 
10 
not indicate to the team as in paragraph 8 that she would 
have wanted to be given a Rule 3(3) notice in respect of 
Adv Botes evidence and if she had had that notice then 
one understands that probably that part of Adv Botes 
evidence would have been addressed at the time when he 
testified and …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, she would have been given Adv 
Botes’ affidavit. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ahead of the date of the hearing and 
20 
that notice would have told her that she could attend the 
hearing when Mr Botes gives evidence but if she was not 
available, one, the affidavit, she would be having it 
already.  Two, if she wanted a transcript of Mr Botes’ 
evidence she knew she could ask for it, she is a judge, she 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 35 of 74 
 
knows these things, evidence gets transcribed, she could 
have got that. It does not seem to prejudice her in any way 
as long as in the end she can see the evidence that was 
given and she can given and she can decide if she wants 
to cross-examine him in which case she must make an 
application for leave to do that but that has time limits 
within which it must be done and – ja, so – and the rules 
make provision that if you were not given a notice 
timeously for – about a witness who is going to implicate 
you, you can make an application to the Chairperson for an 
10 
appropriate order.  So most people, since the Commission 
started, do not seem – do not take it as a problem because 
they know they can still get the transcript, they can still 
apply for leave to cross-examine the witness and if they 
are granted leave, then they will challenge and cross-
examine the witness.  Okay?   
 
I think I have heard what you have had to say, I 
need to hear Mr Soni.  Is there some last minute 
instruction that you have just got? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   Yes, I am trying to communicate 
20 
something to…  I am made to understand from this, Mr 
Chair, that there was a – I am sure it arose from what the 
consultations she has had with the evidence team.  There 
was a supplementary affidavit of Botes SC which was 
promised to be supplied to her but has still not been 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 36 of 74 
 
provided to her which, in my understanding, would probably 
be forming part of the entire evidence that was given Botes 
SC to which she must comment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, well I will hear what Mr Soni has to 
say about that but I am sure it is probably something very 
minor and she has known about what Mr Botes’ version is 
about her for quite some time because she lodged a 
complaint with the Bar Council against him, there was an 
exchange of affidavits, as I understand the position, but let 
me hear what Mr Soni has to say.  I will decide the 
10 
application in due course but while Mr Soni is addressing 
me, if possible it would be good if somebody from your 
team would find out from the judge whether if we postpone 
today, 
subject 
to 
the 
Commission’s 
legal 
team’s 
availability, 
whether 
she 
would 
be 
available 
to 
give 
evidence tomorrow, on Saturday.  We have sat on a 
Saturday before, where we sit on Saturday, if necessary.  I 
can indicate that next week will be problematic.  I saw that 
there was a request for a month.  I can tell you 
immediately, I am not going to – if I grant a postponement, 
20 
it is not going to be for a month.  That I can tell you.  I 
have spoken to her Judge President this morning and I 
asked him whether, should I be persuaded to grant a 
postponement, if I grant a postponement to a date that is 
close but which happens to be a day when she is supposed 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 37 of 74 
 
to be in court, would he be able to release her and the 
Judge President said he would be able to make a plan at 
least as long as he gets something like two days notice he 
would be able to make a plan if I postpone the hearing 
today to another date that happens to be a court date.  So 
alright, so let me hear what Mr Soni has to say, but maybe 
somebody in your team could in the meantime try and get 
that information from her. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni, I think they might need to 
10 
sanitise before you take the stand.  And 
then the 
Commission staff can check in the meantime from the 
municipality whether if we were to sit tomorrow there would 
be any problem with the venue or not.  Maybe let me start 
with that, Mr Soni.  Should I grant the postponement?  How 
is your availability tomorrow. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   We are available tomorrow and 
Sunday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And Sunday? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   Yes, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:   Chairperson, I do not wish to traverse 
factual disputes, and there are factual disputes.  My 
learned friend handed you today a letter explaining or 
purporting to explain the sequence of events.  Now, 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 38 of 74 
 
Chairperson, there are two letters that I would beg leave to 
hand up to you and they were both sent to Judge 
Makhubele relating to how things were to progress.  The 
first is the 13 July which is after the consultation with her 
and then, Chairperson, on the 22 July to the attorneys 
when 
they 
placed 
themselves 
on 
record. 
 
And 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before you proceed let me say that it 
may be necessary for the record for you to go through the 
history of what has happened since – particularly in regard 
10 
to when were Rule 3(3) notices sent to Judge Makhubele 
relating to Ms Ngoye and Mr Dingiswayo and the other 
witnesses so that we get all of that on record. 
ADV SONI SC:   As you please Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   If you need to read certain things onto 
the record you may do so. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes.  Chairperson, we normally at the 
Commission have a tracking record of all the 3(3) notices 
and that has never been in dispute.  I will hand this up but 
I will tell what it says, Chairperson.  In regard to Ms 
20 
Ngoye’s affidavit, this was served on Judge Makhubele on 
the 21 February 2020.  Mr Dingiswayo’s affidavit was also 
served on the 21 February.   
Then there are three other affidavits, Chairperson,  
the affidavit of Mr Zackie Achmat was served on the 20 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 39 of 74 
 
February 2020.  Mr Mogashoa’s affidavit was served on the 
26 May 2020 and Mr Botes’ affidavit was served on the 26 
May as well.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So Ms Ngoye’s affidavit was served on 
Judge Makhubele on 21 February 2020.  Mr Dingiswayo’s 
affidavit was served on her on the same date. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Achmat’s affidavit was served on the 
20 February.  Mr Mogashoa’s affidavit was served on the 
26 May.  Mr Botes’ affidavit was served on the 26 May. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:      That is so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So in regard to Ms Ngoye’s affidavit and 
Mr Dingiswayo’s affidavit, Judge Makhubele has had those 
as well as Mr Achmat’s affidavit from 21 February.  She 
has had those affidavits for about six months. 
ADV SONI SC:   Six months, yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   During which she has not filed any 
affidavit responding to them. 
ADV SONI SC:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   With regard to Mr Mogashoa’s affidavit, 
20 
that was served on her on the 26 May 2020 and Mr Botes’ 
affidavit was served on her on the same date and with 
regard to those two affidavits, she has had about two 
months. 
ADV SONI SC:   That is… 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 40 of 74 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And apart from the affidavit that she 
filed sometime – was it early July? 
ADV SONI SC:   1 July. 
CHAIRPERSON:   1 July, which dealt, to a large extent, 
with Mr Botes.  Apart from that, there is no other affidavit 
that she has filed.  Ja.  Yes and then talk about the 
supplementary affidavit that Mr Shakoane talked about. 
ADV SONI SC:   Chairperson, at the consultation of the 9 
July, Judge Makhubele said that she was ready only to 
discuss Mr Botes’ affidavit and I recorded in the letter of 
10 
the 13 July what happened at that consultation.  She has 
never responded to say what I recorded was incorrect but 
to answer the question, Chairperson, I then indicated to 
her that I was more than happy to do a supplementary 
affidavit because she said she had not covered certain 
aspects in particular messages exchanged between her 
and Mr Botes.  I then sent that affidavit to her on the 13 t h 
and I heard my learned friend say that that had not been 
done.  It in fact has been done and I will submit to you, 
Chairperson, a letter – I mean, an SMS from Ms Ratanga to 
20 
Judge Makhubele attaching the affidavit in question. 
 
On that issue, Chairperson, and I do not wish – 
because I place on record now that I will raise some of 
these matters with Judge Makhubele whenever she comes 
to testify, Chairperson, and the reason I do that is, after I 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 41 of 74 
 
submitted the affidavit to her I phoned her.  She did not 
answer the phone, her daughter answered the phone and I 
said to her daughter please ask her to phone me.  That 
was on the 13 July.  I have not heard a response since. 
 
I took the trouble over that weekend to go through 
all the correspondence and assist in that process and now 
to be accused of not doing what I had indicated is, we 
submit, quite cheeky, Chairperson, to say the least.  But 
those are in fact the facts.    But there is something that 
my learned friend has tried to explain …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you might wish to highlight certain 
things in the letter that you sent or that was sent. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that there is a clear picture of where 
the legal team of the Commission stands with regard to 
some of these – I leave it to you what to place on record. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Whether to read any part into the record. 
ADV SONI SC:   Chairperson, in the letter of the 13 July 
the first three paragraphs indicate the past history, as it 
20 
were. 
 
From 
the 
outset, 
after 
the 
time 
that 
Judge 
Makhubele received the affidavits of Ms Ngoye and Mr 
Dingiswayo 
and 
Mr 
Achmat, 
she 
adopted 
legalistic 
approach about she had not been advised about this, that 
and 
the 
other 
and 
there 
was 
an 
exchange 
of 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 42 of 74 
 
correspondence but for present purposes one need not 
deal with that because then she wrote to Commission and 
say I have changed my mind, I am not having independent 
lawyers, I would like to consult and it is as a result of that, 
that 
the 
consultation 
of 
the 
9 
July 
was 
arranged, 
Chairperson, and it was arranged for the 9 July because 
we were hearing the evidence of the witnesses in the week 
before and it was from the 29 June to the 2 July we heard 
the evidence of Ms Ngoye and Mr Dingiswayo and Mr Botes 
in relation to Judge Makhubele.  So that is why one could 
10 
not consult. 
 
What I want to say, Chairperson, is she at no stage 
indicated that she was unhappy with the hearing, I had 
many telephonic communications with her and in fairness 
to Judge Makhubele, the conversations were always cordial 
and very respectful on both sides.  And it is in that context 
that the consultation on the 9 July came about and Judge 
Makhubele, to the best of my knowledge must have been 
aware because the purpose was so that she could have an 
affidavit which reflects her version in answer to the five 
20 
affidavits.   
 
To our surprise, at the consultation – and it was a 
five hour consultation, Chairperson, she said she was 
prepared only to deal with the affidavit of Mr Botes.  And 
the importance of that, Chairperson, is twofold.  One is, 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 43 of 74 
 
she had had the previous affidavits, as you rightly point 
out, by that time, six months previous – five months 
previous.   
 
With Mr Mogashoa she made it clear to me because 
– and this is in most of the affidavits, a lot of it is 
correspondence that is attached, reports that were there.  
So it is not as if there was a dispute of fact, it is simply 
what does this mean, why did you respond this way?  It is 
not the type of consultation that you need hours and hours 
for.  Did you receive this, did you say this?  And that is 
10 
why we thought, just to spend five hours only on Mr Botes 
and then we do not even have the supplementary affidavit 
back is really …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   What it means is that you had made 
yourself available for, I mean, five hours, like the whole 
working day to consult with her on all matters on which she 
was going to have to testify. 
ADV SONI SC:   That is so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But she was the one who said she was 
only prepared to consult on Mr Botes’ evidence. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, so the emphasis was she had come 
prepared only to consult. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, she had come prepared only in 
regard to Mr Botes. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 44 of 74 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   She had not come prepared to deal with 
all the witnesses. 
ADV SONI SC:   Because during that consultation I put to 
her certain things, for example, that Ms Ngoye had said in 
her affidavit or Mr Dingiswayo and it is at that stage she 
says no, I had not come prepared for… 
CHAIRPERSON:   And prior to when the arrangement was 
made for that appointment was there any discussion that 
the consultation would be – that she needed to prepare 
herself only in regard to Mr Botes? 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   Not at all, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   We would never have done that because 
the – we had already by that stage on the 1 July had her 
affidavit on Botes.  So we would have – in fact I had not 
even thought that Mr Botes’ affidavit would be an issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   But she then raised that there were 
certain messages that she would like to be attached. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  So she had had Ms Ngoye’s 
20 
affidavit and Mr Dingiswayo’s affidavit at that time for 
maybe about five months. 
ADV SONI SC:   That is so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She asked for a consultation with the 
legal team of the Commission, she was granted one. 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 45 of 74 
 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which was an opportunity for – to 
canvass all the evidence and for her to deal with all the 
affidavits of all these witnesses but she said she had 
prepared herself only for Mr Botes. 
ADV SONI SC:   That is so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you were there, you were available 
to deal with all of them. 
ADV SONI SC:   With all of them and, in fact, I had 
prepared for the consultation on that basis. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   And saying to her well, look, you perhaps 
need to answer this, you need to answer this, do you agree 
that this was said, is at that stage that she indicated that 
she would rather not …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did she give any reason why she had 
not prepared to deal with all of them? 
ADV SONI SC:   She said she felt that she only needed to 
deal with Mr Botes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   Now, Mr Chairperson, in view of the fact 
that I will be cross-examining here, it would not be unfair 
for me to impute things to her. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   But what I do want to say is that once she 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 46 of 74 
 
indicated a reluctance, I did not want to create the 
impression that she is forced to do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   And she, being a judge, I indicated it to 
her well, will you prepare the affidavit?  At that stage, 
Chairperson, I need to indicate she did not say to us that 
she would need legal assistance, she only indicated that to 
Ms Ratanga in the lift when they were going down. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   And on the following day I phoned her and 
10 
I 
said 
look, 
I 
understand 
you 
may 
want 
legal 
representation.  This is the 10 t h, that is exactly two weeks 
ago, Chairperson, and she said yes, I am thinking about it.  
And I said well, please ensure that we have the affidavit in 
time.  And this was her response, Chairperson, I am driving 
with people, I am not in a position to talk and I say well, if 
you want, we can talk over the weekend and she says I am 
going to busy all weekend. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay.  No, that is fine. 
ADV SONI SC:   Chairperson, can I then go to this – I have 
20 
been informed, Chairperson, that the venue is available 
over the weekend. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:   All of these facts are recorded in this 
letter and if one has regard to paragraph 6, Chairperson, 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 47 of 74 
 
we say exactly what happened at the consultation and then 
that she had told Ms Ratanga that she – at paragraph 7 
that she wanted her own lawyer and then on the 10 t h I 
phoned her.  So all of that is recorded and for no other 
reason but just to make sure that a dispute like this does 
not arise, we ensured that it was sent to her.  We have not 
had a response to this saying that there was anything 
amiss with what had been recorded there. 
 
Then, Mr Chairperson, we received a letter from 
Bokwa Attorneys on the 21 July – when I say we, the 
10 
Commission, and what they say is: 
“We have taken notice because we, on the 21 s t sent 
a reminder notice of today’s hearing.” 
And the response was from the attorneys, so: 
“We confirm we have been reinstructed by Judge 
Makhubele to act on her behalf in the proceedings 
before the State Capture Commission.  We will be 
furnishing yourself with a letter stating our client’s 
position before the end of business tomorrow.” 
So this notion that we were told there was going to – on 
20 
the 21 s t that there was going to be an application for a 
postponement simply does not exist.  Not on what we have 
received. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So as at the 21 July, from what one can 
– you can see in that letter, the attorneys were saying they 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 48 of 74 
 
were still going to write to the Commission. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To indicate what their client’s position 
was. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:   Then, Mr Chairperson, in anticipation that 
they needed to know what our position was, I have given 
you a letter, Chairperson, of the 26 July which we sent to 
Bokwa Attorneys and we copied …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say 26? 
ADV SONI SC:   22 July, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   22 n d, oh.  Yes? 
ADV SONI SC:   And we copied Judge Makhubele on that 
letter and we copied Judge President Mlambo and the 
reason Chairperson is because Judge Makhubele has 
insisted right from the outset that in any matter relating to 
her appearance at the Commission ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The Judge President be informed. 
ADV SONI SC:   ...Judge President Mlambo needs to be 
20 
informed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   And on – in that letter Chairperson we 
indicated again our position setting out more or less what 
had been set out in the letter of the 13 t h of July and 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 49 of 74 
 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you must read into the record that 
letter, ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please.   What on behalf of the 
Legal Team the following was placed on record, this is in 
paragraph 2 Chairperson. 
“On the 6 t h of July a notice of set-down was served 
on Judge Makhubele confirming that she will be 
testifying before the Commission on the 24 t h of July.  
Judge Makhubele indicated that the date suited her 
10 
as it fell during Court recess.” 
And Chairperson I may make that point that that is exactly 
what she told us when the date was set. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that is 2.2? 
ADV SONI SC:   When the date was set? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that is 2.2? 
ADV SONI SC:   2.2 Chairperson.  Then at 2.3 we recorded 
Judge Makhubele’s request that consultation was held with 
her on the 9 t h of July with the view to preparing an affidavit 
in which Judge Makhubele would respond to the allegations 
20 
made in the affidavit of Mr Dingiswayo, Ms Ngoye, Mr 
Botes and Mr Mogashoa.   
 
It is recorded that the first three persons have 
already testified.  Then 2.4: 
“That 
affidavit 
could 
not 
be 
prepared 
as 
Ms 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 50 of 74 
 
Makhubele’s said she had prepared to deal only 
with the allegations made by Mr Botes.   Judge 
Makhubele later informed the legal team that she 
would be engaging an attorney to prepare an 
affidavit in response to the allegations that had 
been made in the affidavits reports witnesses.   She 
was informed of the need to do so, the need for this 
to be submitted long before the 24 t h so that it, the 
affidavit, 
could 
be 
served 
on 
the 
deponents 
timeously.   In a subsequent letter Judge Makhubele 
10 
was informed that the Commission’s position was as 
follows; Judge Makhubele is required to appear at 
the Commission on the 24 t h of July ...” 
And Chairperson I keep emphasizing, she is required to 
attend, because she has received a notice and it does not 
lie in anybody’s hands to defy that sort of notice unless a 
prior application is made, and none has been done. 
 
As indicated in that notice she will be required to 
deal with the allegations by all the deponents and Judge 
Makhubele is expected to file timeously the affidavit or 
20 
sworn statement dealing with the allegations against her 
and Chairperson I want to emphasize this, in paragraph 2.8 
what was also said on behalf of the legal team is what is 
set out above is still the Commission’s position with this 
rider, whether or not an affidavit is submitted timeously or 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 51 of 74 
 
at all at her appearance on the 24 t h of July Judge 
Makhubele will be questioned on the allegations made 
against her. 
 
We were making it quite clear Chairperson that it 
was the answers that she is going to give to the 
Commission and she could not avoid her appearance here 
by not submitting an affidavit. 
 
Then Mr Chairperson from my perspective the next 
issue that arose is my learned friend for Judge Makhubele, 
phoned me yesterday at quarter past one and asked me if I 
10 
– and I say that because he has said something about what 
transpired.  I said to him Chairperson that it was not in my 
hands but I want to formally place on record the two letters 
or what had been recorded in the two letters and that I 
would strongly oppose any application or a postponement 
to that, but of course that application could be brought 
because Chairperson it is not my decision, it is with 
respect your decision Chairperson, but I made my position 
quite clear. 
 
As I understand it from this letter, and it was never 
20 
communicated to me, my learned friend then spoke to the 
legal – the leader of the Commission’s legal team’s Mr 
Paul Pretorius, to try and arrange for postponement.  I do 
not know what transpired in that, but I only heard about it 
in that letter. 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 52 of 74 
 
 
We then got a letter, this letter Chairperson that 
has been handed to you by my learned friend, to say that 
an application for a postponement would be made. 
 
So that’s the first I became aware that Judge 
Makhubele – well that she would – that an application for a 
postponement would be made. 
 
At midnight I called Ms Ratanga and I said to her 
she must indicate to the – Ms Makhubele’s legal members, 
and the reason I didn’t respond Chairperson is the letter 
was not directed at me, you will see it is directed at Ms 
10 
Ratanga for her attention to say that this application would 
be made and keeping that protocol I said to her Ms – 
Judge Makhubele must be told that there would be this 
opposition and that she is required to be here. 
 
So that Chairperson are the facts, and I place them 
on record because in a sense what is recorded in the letter 
that was sent does not accord with what has been we 
submit the agreed facts as up to yesterday and which are 
borne out by all the exchanges between us, so to the 
extent that what is contained in the letter is in – the letter 
20 
by Judge Makhubele’s attorneys is at variance with what 
we have put up Chairperson we would ask that what we 
have set out be regarded as the correct set of facts on 
which the application should be adjudicated.   
 
Chairperson for me this really is the issue, the 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 53 of 74 
 
dispute, and all the disputes relating to this matter, are 
contained  in documents, it does not require days and days 
of consultations to work out what the disputes are.  I give 
one example Chairperson, there is a report that is given by 
Mr Mogashoa ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well Mr Soni I don’t even think you need 
to give examples.   Judge Makhubele has had – the main 
affidavits are those of Ms Ngoye and Mr Dingiswayo.  She 
has had them for six months. 
ADV SONI SC:   Absolutely.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   She has not prepared any affidavit 
during that six months to respond to those affidavits.  As 
far as Mr Achmad is concerned, she has also had six 
months to prepare an affidavit to respond to.  As far as 
Mogashoa and Botes, but take Mogashoa she has had 
about two months, and she has not done anything. 
ADV SONI SC:   Indeed, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In terms of the rules everybody is given 
two weeks, or ten days, she has had more than enough, 
she has done absolutely nothing to deal with those 
20 
allegations by way of affidavit.  She has had ample 
opportunity.  No explanation seems to be given why over 
these six months she could not have prepared those 
affidavits, I got counsel to prepare those affidavits for her 
to respond to this, and with regard to Mr Botes she has 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 54 of 74 
 
known Mr Botes version about the – about what he has to 
say about here I think for quite a long time because of the 
complaint that she lodged with the Bar Council, so there is 
no doubt that she has had more than ample time. 
ADV SONI SC:   That is so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To prepare affidavits.  Yes, so what – is 
there anything else you want to say? 
ADV SONI SC:   Chairperson there is one further matter. 
The 
approach 
adopted 
by 
Judge 
Makhubele, 
notwithstanding the fact that we tried to consult – well we 
10 
consulted with her and urged her to file the affidavit has 
made preparation for her appearance are a major task and 
I’m not complaining about that but what the purpose of this 
is, to say, I accept the following set of facts, you need only 
question me on the following but the preparation now has 
been to check with every fact because there isn’t that 
affidavit and it just, in a sense, Chairperson, makes me the 
leading of the evidence a very untidy affair as it were 
because you need to go through the allegation first and 
then have response to it and Judge Makhubele must know 
20 
that, that is not how disputes in a Commission like this are 
resolved.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay is there anything else you want to 
say? 
ADV SONI SC:   Chairperson I know I should formerly say 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 55 of 74 
 
what our position is with regard to the respondent, the 
difficulty is that there is this non-appearance and I’d rather 
not comment on it but I’d rather challenge whatever Judge 
Makhubele says when she comes to give evidence on that 
but I would just say this, Chairperson, prime facie it is 
highly disrespectful of the Commission and even more 
highly disrespectful of you, Chairperson.  Given the fact 
that you’re the Chairperson of the Commission also given 
the fact, Chairperson, with respect you are the Deputy 
Chief Justice of the country and when a notice is served in 
10 
your name, virtually, to appear and to adopt this cavalier 
attitude is something that must be found. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you, Mr Shakoane?  Do you 
accept, Mr Shakoane, that no explanation has been 
presented to me as to why Judge Makhubele has not, over 
this long period, since February prepared affidavits that 
respond to the allegations made against her by Ms Ngoye, 
Mr Dingiswayo and Mr Achmat and also why over the past 
two 
months 
or 
so 
she 
hasn’t 
prepared 
an 
affidavit 
responding to Mr Mogashoa’s affidavit, do you accept that, 
20 
there is nothing that – that has been placed before me that 
gives me an explanation for that? 
ADV 
SHAKOANE 
SC: 
 
 
Sorry 
Chair, 
you 
say 
no 
explanation, I…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You may draw my attention to an 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 56 of 74 
 
explanation if you say there is? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   I’m not sure if the letter of 23 June 
by 
her 
is 
before 
you 
Mr 
Chair, 
it 
seems 
to 
be 
correspondence she explained – or the…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you have to raise your voice again 
Mr Shakoane, I think the mask is preventing you from being 
heard. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   I was saying the letter of 23 June 
which she wrote to the evidence team is …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It’s not before me right now isn’t it?  You 
10 
didn’t place that before me did you? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   Well it’s in the…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you talking about the letter from the 
Commission’s legal team to her? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   No, the letter from her, 23 June 
2020. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you didn’t hand up such a letter. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   I’m not sure if there’s an extra copy 
that I can hand up. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What does it say, does it provide an 
20 
explanation? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   It says, amongst other things, she 
says there that she is going to be dealing with the 
evidence of …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I can’t hear you Mr Shakoane. 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 57 of 74 
 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   Sorry the evidence – may I perhaps 
read it, read the letter? 
CHAIRPERSON:   But does it – are you submitting that it 
does provide an explanation or not?  I don’t want to take 
time to read it if it doesn’t have. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   What I can submit, Mr Chair, is 
that, in there she is informing the evidence team what she 
would be able to deal with at the meeting and then she 
says, also, that she is ready to provide a sworn statement 
or 
affidavit 
in 
respect 
of 
the 
previous 
Rule 
33 
10 
Notices…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Where are you reading from, what 
paragraph? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   The first part starts from paragraph 
One to four but what I was reading now is in paragraph six. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  From one to four that’s where she 
mentions that – for example in paragraph …[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well in paragraph six she says, and I 
read, 
20 
“I therefore advise, further, that I’m ready to 
provide  a sworn statement/affidavit in respect of 
the various Rule 33 Notices issued in relation to the 
evidence of a) Mr Mfanimpela Moses Dingiswayo, b) 
Ms Onica Martha Ngoye and c) Mr Abdulrazak Zakir 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 58 of 74 
 
Achmat and then seven kindly advise the legal team 
and forensic investigators to get in touch with me 
as soon as possible”. 
 
So she was saying – this was 23 June, she was 
saying she was ready to provide a sworn statement or 
affidavit 
in 
relation 
to 
the 
evidence 
of 
these 
three 
witnesses whose affidavits she received in February last 
year but according to Mr Soni and the correspondence that 
she addressed to – that he addressed to her, subsequent 
to the 9 t h of July – on the 9 t h of July when she came to 
10 
consult with him, with the legal team of the Commission, 
she said she was – she had only prepared to deal with the 
affidavit of Mr Botes, contrary to what she had said in this 
letter, 
that 
she 
was 
ready 
to 
provide 
a 
sworn 
statement/affidavit in regard to all of them and there’s 
nothing that has been placed before me to say why it is 
that if she was ready about a month ago, 23 June 2020 to 
provide an affidavit or sworn statement in regard to these 
witnesses, why as we speak today, there is no affidavit that 
she has provided and again, this is not a lay person who 
20 
might not know how to prepare an affidavit.  Even without a 
lawyer, she can prepare the affidavits herself. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   Well that is so M’Lord – sorry as 
mentioned earlier the preferable position would be that one 
is represented…[intervenes]. 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 59 of 74 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that we accept and you put it 
correctly, 
to 
say, 
preferable, 
maybe 
it’s 
more 
than 
preferable but there’s a limit – there’s a limit, you are a 
Judge, you are experienced, you know these matter, 
there’s nothing complex about this, these matters don’t 
involve any complex legal issues and you know you want to 
provide an affidavit, you say you are ready to provide and 
affidavit to answers these allegations of three witnesses 
and you come to a consultation that has been arranged at 
your request, you say you are only prepared to deal with 
10 
one and up to know we don’t know why she was not 
prepared to deal with the others and you come to apply for 
a postponement application, you are not even able to say, 
in the meantime I have completed the affidavits, here they 
are. 
ADV 
SHAKOANE 
SC: 
 
 
Yes, 
but 
perhaps 
Mr 
Chair…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That can’t be acceptable from a Judge. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   Whereas, Mr Chair, before that kind 
of conclusion could be reached or one firms that criticism 
20 
against her, the best approach, perhaps, in my – perhaps 
in my respectful suggestion to the Chair is, maybe what 
you mentioned earlier in the beginning of – or in the course 
of my address could be the approach that is adopted i.e. 
where you said that you offer her an opportunity to explain 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 60 of 74 
 
those gaps even if it’s by way of an affidavit under oath.  I 
submit that would be the – most probably the fair way of 
dealing 
with 
it 
so 
that 
she 
can 
– 
because 
what 
…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I mean you’re talking about an affidavit 
to explain what? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  When I earlier addressed you, Mr 
Chair, and you raised the question, one, that I should 
telephone her to find out about what happened in the 
accident.  The second part of that, was when you said that 
10 
you might want her to explain under oath. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  By way of an affidavit…[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well I didn’t say affidavit I said I 
wanted her here on the witness stand. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   Oh, under oath? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   Yes, I …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To support her own application for a 
postponement. 
20 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   Yes, I would probably say, that 
would have been the – given the circumstances and my 
limited 
position, 
having 
been 
instructed 
under 
these 
circumstances, the best way would be for her to be given 
that opportunity…[intervenes]. 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 61 of 74 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I kind of sympathise with you Mr 
Shakoane, 
all 
of 
us 
who 
have 
practiced 
know 
that 
sometimes you get put in a difficult position by a client 
where you are instructed late and it becomes difficult 
because you can’t deal with certain things, you know, 
because you simply haven’t been given enough time 
but…[intervenes]. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   But in this instance, perhaps, Mr 
Chair, I was actually taking advantage of that suggestion 
that came from you to say – because it arose in the course 
10 
of addressing what is stated in the letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you see, you see part of the problem 
is, you have already moved the application. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Those are matters that should have been 
addressed even in an application and an affidavit before 
we are here now and I was hoping that when we took a 
break earlier she would be able to say yes I can be there 
in an hour ’s time and I’ve made myself available to be 
questioned by the Chairperson about my application for a 
20 
postponement and we would stand down she would come, 
she would take the stand and I could ask some of the 
questions to see if her answers would satisfy me that I 
should grant her the postponement.  As things stand, I’m 
disinclined to do so and I was thinking that she would be – 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 62 of 74 
 
she would come here and maybe her explanation would 
persuade me otherwise.  So I’m still going to hear what you 
say but my inclination is that the application has got no 
merit but I want to hear because you are still responding to 
Mr Soni, in case there is something that persuades me 
otherwise. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   But perhaps that could be, Mr 
Chair, where you do not have an intervening impossibility 
10 
as of the sort that we have.  If it was only the scenario as 
painted by my learned friend, Mr Soni, I would say the 
comment right now, from the Chair, to say with all that’s 
there the Chair will be disinclined to allow that opportunity 
but now you have an intervening impossibility which is not 
of the making of her own and in…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you see, as things stand, the thing 
about – I haven’t seen the pictures I hope they’re available 
now I should see them as soon as possible.  Except for 
that issue, because you said you saw the pictures of the 
20 
car which gave you the impression that this was an 
accident, I think that’s what you said, except for that part, 
my inclination, my prime facie view is that there is no merit 
in this application for a postponement and if she was here I 
would be inclined to dismiss it and say, let’s start but there 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 63 of 74 
 
is a reality that she is not here now and it may be that 
when I see the pictures of the car, also, I may take the 
view that, well maybe, what happened may have caused 
her some emotional trauma.  So – but maybe I think the 
next thing that we should talk about is, have you received 
instructions whether, if we were to postpone to tomorrow 
she would make herself available? 
ADV 
SHAKOANE 
SC: 
 
 
I 
just 
wanted 
to 
get 
the 
clear…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The response. 
10 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   The clear response from the 
attorney. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   Maybe if I’m given a minute. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no that’s fine.  Do you need us to 
adjourn for five minutes, it looks like you may – you are 
given very detailed instructions or are you about to be 
ready? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:   Yes maybe, five minutes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, we’ll take a short adjournment, I’ll 
20 
give you about nine minutes we’ll resume at a quarter to 
one. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 64 of 74 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...that is sought to be made.  I see a side 
of a car.  It appears that the tyre is flat and just above the 
tyre it looks like the car may have scratched something and 
then – and the other picture it is also shows the tyre that 
shows parts thereof that are torn and there is – it looks like 
the car may have scratched some surface or something.  And 
then the third picture I do not know what it shows.  I see 
somebody’s finger or thumb but I do not know – I am not 
sure what it shows.  What do you say the point is about the 
pictures?  What do they show? 
10 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  It just shows the – from there it 
shows the tyre that had suffered the – that has been affected 
by the bursting and the extent of it.  And then there is the – 
what Mr Chair you describe as a scratch – a scratched part 
of the vehicle on the side. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  But the third picture. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  I am not able to really make out what 
it is. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  From that picture. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  But would it be correct to say you 
have not been told that she was injured? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  No. 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 65 of 74 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes.  That is – that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And obviously if she was injured, she 
would have told you. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  That is correct – yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  She would have said that ja.  What you 
have been told is that as a result of what happened she does 
not feel emotionally fine to appear. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  I think you may have used – I do not 
10 
know if you used traumatised earlier on? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes that – I also used that term ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Is that the term that came from her or 
that was your understanding? 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  No from me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You understanding ja 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay but she said she emotionally she 
does not feel. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good enough to appear.  And she says she 
does not feel that tomorrow she would still be – she would 
be fine. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  She would have recovered. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To appear. 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 66 of 74 
 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  From that yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You – well I do not know if there is 
anything further you are going to say. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Just to 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Sorry – sorry Mr Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I was saying I do not know if you have 
anything further to say.  I think I must give you a chance to 
say whatever else you wanted to say. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  In respect of … 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  The – what I wanted to say Mr Chair 
is also the following.  The – the information I have is that the 
statement that on the 13 July she did not answer nor 
respond to a call from my learned friend Mr Soni is incorrect.  
She – when that call came my understanding is that she was 
at court and she had actually returned the call.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  And secondly which is what she – she 
would deal with in the event if she had had the opportunity to 
20 
do the affidavit.  Secondly it is the – the matter relating to 
the consultation of nine [indistinct] she says it is not correct 
that it went well and she would have had to explain also 
what made it not to go well and to fail with her having to go 
the route she opted. 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 67 of 74 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your voice goes down from time to time. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Shakoane and then I cannot hear you. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes she says it is not correct that that 
consultation went well and she would be – she would had to 
explain what made it not to go well.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  But as a final submission on my part 
and on her behalf Mr Chair I want to believe that the – if the 
communication – this is the first part.  If the communication 
10 
had on 27 of June in respect of the – Mr Botes and then he 
testifies on the 1s t it is only reasonable that she would have 
had to make the request she did and in my submission if one 
looks at what is contained for example at paragraph 6 it 
could not have been that he has not responded to under 
those circumstances which would have afforded her the 
opportunity that she – that he sought in order to deal with 
the matter at the time. 
 
Secondly and lastly it – under these circumstances 
you may not Mr Chair in the interest of fairness ignore the 
20 
fact of this intervening incident of last night. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One that as I said earlier on one would 
have thought that if it was an important factor for the 
postponement would have been given to you either last night 
or early this morning to say something else has happened 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 68 of 74 
 
which is not – you are not going to rely on to move the 
application.  This is what has happened irrespective of what 
the grounds that may have been there for a postponement 
application here is what has happened that makes it 
impossible for me to appear.  And of course, I – I have no 
doubt that in all probability when you stood up to address me 
you would have wanted to raise that quite up front.  To say 
whatever happens here is the situation that has happened.  
But I had to ask why is she not here because I said she 
should be told that I want her to be here so that if her 
10 
application for a postponement is not successful, we can 
proceed.  It was only then that I was told by you and I do not 
know whether you were hearing for the first time or you had 
heard it but I was told about this incident of yesterday.  So I 
am simply saying there is that concern. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Mr Chair the – perhaps I should start 
here and it is what I sometimes even say in – in a court 
address.  The – and I may say this.  When I addressed you 
in response to that I did indicate that at the time when this 
call came from the Secretariat that day to say she should 
20 
also be present I was informed and my question was, is she 
in a position to be available?  And I was then informed of 
that accident.  In the plan of which is what I preface by 
saying I normally say it even in court address.  In the line-up 
of my address to you the last part would have been to 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 69 of 74 
 
mention that aspect because I had to still verify certain 
aspects of the attorney. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  Okay. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  So it was still going to be mentioned. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  But it so happens that in court the – 
from the bench there is intervention. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Then it pre-empts something that you 
still going to deal with it. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, no that is fine.  I take it you are 
done now. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Yes.  So what she would also request 
in the face of this would be that you could have her affidavit 
filed by the end of next week which is 31 July 2020 if you 
can meet Mr Chair that [indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Okay. 
 
Okay 
alright 
thank 
you 
Mr 
Shakoane. 
ADV SHAKOANE SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am going – I am not going to give 
20 
detailed reasons but if they are required, they can be given 
in due course.  Save for the issue of what may have 
happened to her yesterday, last evening about which there is 
not much information placed before me in terms of a tyre 
burst or tyre puncture everything that – the application that 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 70 of 74 
 
Judge Makhubele has brought for the postponement of the 
hearing of her evidence does not reveal any good cause for 
a postponement and actually everything else on which the 
letters – the letters that were put up reading of those letters 
reveals that the grounds of the application as reflected in 
those letters have no merit whatsoever.   
 
With regard to the issue of the – how she may have 
been affected by the incident when as I understand the 
position, she had a tyre puncture last night not enough 
information is placed before me to reach a firm conclusion 
10 
but the fact of the matter is that she is not here now. 
 
It may or may not be that in due course when all the 
facts are placed before me in regard to that incident, I may 
form the view that indeed that was a good ground.  That 
maybe I would come to the conclusion that it was no good 
ground for a postponement.  But faced with the situation that 
we are faced with I have to postpone the hearing because 
she is not here and I am told that as a result of the incident 
yesterday she is not in an emotional state that would allow 
her to be here to give evidence. 
20 
 
This 
has 
caused 
the 
commission 
a 
lot 
of 
inconvenience.  This date was set aside for her to give 
evidence. 
 
As 
Mr 
Soni 
indicated 
according 
to 
correspondence, she had indicated that she was available 
for today.  Of course, she would not have known what was 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 71 of 74 
 
going 
to 
happen 
yesterday 
but 
the 
application 
for 
a 
postponement had been decided upon before the incident of 
yesterday. 
 
So 
she 
had 
intended 
to 
apply 
for 
the 
postponement of the hearing of her evidence and as I say all 
the grounds that she relied on in the correspondence which 
are the grounds that preceded the incident of yesterday do 
not reveal any merit whatsoever. 
 
This commission is working under very serious time 
constraints.  It has got to finish its work within a certain time 
that has been laid down by the court and it cannot afford to 
10 
have postponements which can be avoided.  
 
But as I have said I will postpone the hearing of 
Judge Makhubele’s evidence because of the reality that the 
commission is faced with.  I am going to postpone it to a 
specific 
date. 
 
There 
was 
an 
indication 
in 
the 
correspondence from her lawyers that she was asking for a 
month – a postponement of about a month.  I am not going to 
postpone the hearing of her evidence for a month.  I am 
going to postpone it for a week.   
 
She has had ample time to do what needs to be done.  
20 
Her Counsel has said she has offered to file her affidavits by 
end of next week.  I am going to direct that she should file 
her affidavits by close of business on Wednesday next week 
and I am going to postpone the hearing of her evidence to 
Monday the 3 August 2020 at ten o’clock. 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 72 of 74 
 
 
Now in order to do that the commission will have to 
move – change its plans for that Monday because there was 
other evidence that I was going to hear on that Monday.  So 
the commission will have to move that evidence to the 
following day and this will cause some inconvenience to 
other people. 
 
But I am determined that we must hear – I must hear 
her evidence and it must not take long before I hear her 
evidence. 
 
Furthermore, unfortunately I am – I find it necessary 
10 
that I issue a directive that she must appear before this 
commission on that day.  I would not normally do that 
against a Judge because if as Chairman of the commission I 
request that a Judge appears before the commission I expect 
that that would be enough.  It has been enough in regard to 
many other people who are not judges.  When they get a 
request from the commission that I would like them to file 
affidavits or to appear they have willingly agreed to appear 
and to file affidavits without having to be compelled. 
 
And with regard to the filing of the affidavits by Judge 
20 
Makhubele I am also going to make a directive. 
 
The directive that I issue is a directive provided for in 
Regulation 10(6) of the Regulations of this commission. 
 
That sub regulation reads as follows and I quote: 
“For the purposes of conducting an investigation the 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 73 of 74 
 
Chairperson may direct any person to submit an 
affidavit or affirm declaration or to appear before the 
commission to give evidence or to produce any 
document in his or her possession or under his or her 
control which has a bearing on the matter being 
investigated and may examine such person.” 
 
Therefore, this is the order/directive: 
1. The hearing of the evidence of Judge Makhubele is 
postponed to Monday the 3 August 2020 in this venue. 
2. In terms of Regulation 10(6) of the Regulations of this 
10 
commission I direct Judge Makhubele to deliver to the 
commission on or before Wednesday – what is the date 
on Wednesday?  29.  On Wednesday – is it 29?  Ja.  
On or before Wednesday 29 July 2020 an affidavit or 
affirmed 
declaration 
or 
affidavits 
or 
affirmed 
declarations responding to the affidavits of Ms Ngoye, 
Martha Ngoye, Mr Dingiswayo, Mr Mogashoa, Mr 
Achmat and Mr Botes insofar as each one of those 
affidavits may relate to her or implicate her or mention 
or have some allegation about her.   
20 
3. Judge Makhubele is directed in terms of Regulation 
10(6) of the Regulations of this commission to appear 
in person before this commission at ten o’clock on 
Monday the 3 August 2020 for the purpose of giving 
evidence and to be questioned with regard to various 
24 JULY 2020 – DAY 237 
 
Page 74 of 74 
 
allegations made in the affidavits of the persons to 
whom I have referred in this directive. 
That is the directive.  We will then now adjourn.  The 
proceedings 
are 
then 
adjourned 
and 
on 
Monday 
the 
commission will hear evidence from the former Minister of 
Police Mr Nkosi Nathi Nhleko and during the week other 
witnesses also in the Law Enforcement sector.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 27 JULY 2020 
 
10 
 
 
