 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 
 
 
 
DAY 192 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 2 of 194 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 25 NOVEMBER 2019 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Moyane had acted maliciously.  It was not clear to 
me whether Mr Gordhan intended to allege or alleged in his affidavit 
that Mr Moyane had acted maliciously in laying those charges against 
him. 
 
I stated in that judgment that in due course I would issue 
directions on the way forward.  The Chairperson’s directions.   
 
Subsequent to the delivery of my judgment I issued directions 
with regard to the outstanding issue.  The relevant parts of the 
directions read and I quote. 
10 
1. Mr Gordhan must deliver to the commission and serve on Mr 
Monyane on or before Wednesday 15 May 2019 a short 
clarificatory affidavit in which he clarifies whether in stating in 
his statement of 11 October 2018 that Mr Monyane acted 
malicious in laying charges against him and others. He meant – 
he meant that: 
a. In laying charges against Mr Gordhan and others Mr Moyane 
was motivated wholly or in part by or he sought to advance 
the objectives of state capture or he was abusing a legal 
process for his own personal goals that had either nothing or 
20 
little to do with a legitimate complaint relating to an alleged 
crime. 
2. To the extent that 1a above may not correctly reflect what Mr 
Gordhan meant.  He must succinctly state what he meant when 
he stated that Mr Moyane had acted maliciously in laying the 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 3 of 194 
 
charges against him and others.” 
Mr Gordhan’s clarificatory affidavit.  In due course Mr Gordhan 
delivered a clarificatory affidavit.  In that affidavit he among other 
things said: 
a. He had never said that Mr Moyane had acted maliciously when he 
laid charges against him. 
b. It was Mr Moyane who had said in his affidavit that Mr Gordhan 
had implied that he had acted maliciously in laying the criminal 
complaint against him. 
c. He did not know Mr Moyane’s state of mind when Mr Moyane laid 
10 
the criminal complaint against him. 
d. Mr Moyane’s motive in laying the charges against him was 
irrelevant. 
e. He disagreed with Mr Moyane’s explanation that in laying the 
criminal complaint against him Mr Moyane had acted as any 
reasonable commission of SARS in his position would have 
acted. 
f. He personally believed that Mr Moyane - I am sorry I am going to 
repeat that.  He personally believed that: “Mr Moyane did abuse 
legal processes for reasons already explained in his evidence.”  
20 
“In my evidence.” 
g. His belief that Mr Moyane had abused legal processes was and I 
quote:  “Based on my experience of his defiant attitude and 
vilification of me following my reappointment as Minister of 
Finance which was aimed at forcing me to resign from that 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 4 of 194 
 
position so that the capture of National Treasury could proceed 
under a different Minister.” 
h. “To use the words of the Chairperson’s directions I therefore do 
mean that Mr Moyane: ‘was motivated wholly or in part by or he 
sought to advance the objectives of state capture’ and that ‘he 
was abusing a legal process for his own personal goals that had 
either nothing or little to do with a legitimate complaint relating 
to an alleged crime.” 
This statement by Mr Gordhan appears to be linked to that part of the 
directions which required him to say whether he meant that in laying 
10 
the charges against him Mr Moyane “was motived wholly or in part by or 
he sought to advance the objectives of state capture.” 
I “he believes that Mr Gordhan that Mr Moyane’s personal goals while 
he was SARS Commissioner included the advancement of the state 
capture project.”   
j. His belief that Mr Moyane’s personal goals ‘while he was 
Commissioner of SARS “included the advancement of the state 
capture project” is founded on what “is founded on what we all 
now know about how ‘the failure of integrity and governance at 
SARS soundly evidenced by the change over four years has 
20 
certainly compromised the performance of its core function of 
collecting tax to the detriment of the country at large’ as found 
by Justice Nugent in the Commission of Inquiry into tax 
administration and governance by SARS [The Nugent Inquiry 
page 477 paragraph 19 of The Final Report of the Nugent 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 5 of 194 
 
Inquiry]’” 
Did Mr Gordhan ever allege malice on Mr Moyane’s part? 
 
5. The directions of 6 May 2019 were issued on the basis that 
Mr Gordhan had alleged in his statement of 11 October 2018 to this 
commission that Mr Moyane had acted maliciously in laying the charges 
that he had laid against him.  In his clarificatory affidavit Mr Gordhan 
says he never made such an allegation. 
Here is why it was stated in the directions that Mr Gordhan had alleged 
that Mr Moyane had acted maliciously in laying the charges that he had 
laid against him. 
10 
a. In the sentence – in the last sentence of paragraph 104 of Mr 
Gordhan’s statement of 11 October 2018 Mr Gorhan said and I 
quote: “Charges against me relating to that unit had been filed by 
Mr Moyane on 15 May 2015 [SAPS Brooklyn Case Number 
427/05/15]”. 
b. In paragraph 113 off the same statement Mr Gordhan states and I 
quote: “This set of events combined with what is set out below 
was the beginning of what appeared to be a campaign to force 
me to resign as Minister of Finance and continue the efforts to 
capture the National Treasury thereafter.”  The set of events 
20 
referred to at the beginning of paragraph 113 seems to include 
the event of filing – of the filing of the charges by Mr Moyane 
against Mr Gordhan mentioned in paragraph 104 of Mr Gordhan’s 
statement. 
c. In paragraph 130 of his October 2018 statement Mr Gordhan said 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 6 of 194 
 
that “the orchestrated campaign against me and other leaders of 
National Treasury raged within cabinet, the institutions of state 
and on certain media and social media platforms.”  He then says 
that that campaign “shifted to yet another front later in the year 
when I became the target of malicious and seemingly politically 
motivated criminal charges.”  The charges which Mr Gordhan 
describes in this quotation as “malicious and politically motivated 
criminal charges” are the charges “that he says I paragraph 104 
of his statement were filed by Mr Moyane against him.”   
I think it is what Mr Gordhan says in paragraphs 104, 113 and 130 of 
10 
his statement and possibly elsewhere as well that suggests that Mr 
Gordhan meant that Mr Moyane had acted maliciously in laying the 
charges against him.  
Mr Moyane says in his affidavit in the application for Leave to Cross-
examine Mr Gordhan that Mr Gordhan implied such allegation in his 
statement.   
Council for Mr Moyane submits that whether Mr Gordhan made the 
allegation expressly or by implication is neither here nor there as what 
is important is that it was made. 
 
7. Bearing in mind that earlier in his statement Mr Gordhan 
20 
had talked of Mr Moyane having laid criminal – charges against him it 
would have been difficult to think that when Mr Gordhan said he 
became the target of malicious and seemingly politically motivated 
criminal charges he did not also intend to mean that the person who 
laid those charges against him also acted maliciously in laying them.   
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 7 of 194 
 
Mr Gordhan’s reliance on the findings of Justice Nugent.   
 
8.  Mr Gordhan also highlights certain findings by Justice 
Nugent which he says form and I quote – double quotes “the basis for 
my belief that Mr Moyane’s actions as SARS Commissioner were part or 
the State Capture Project.”   
Mr Gordhan then deals with these findings in paragraphs 23 to 33 of his 
affidavit where after comes the last paragraph of the affidavit. 
 
9. Mr Gordhan refers to paragraphs 35 to 50 of Justice 
Nugent’s interim report. He states that is those paragraphs Justice 
Nugent set out “the extraordinary turmoil at SARS and for its senior 
10 
management in particular that followed Mr Moyane’s appointment.”  
He then says in the following paragraph that “this included the filing of 
his criminal complaint against me in circumstances that Justice Nugent 
found ‘unclear’ and which were later withdrawn.  This turmoil saw the 
removal of many senior SARS officials creating the opportunity for Mr 
Moyane to appoint senior management at SARS who failed to show the 
same integrity, skill, commitment – or commitment to its critical 
functions.” 
 
10. Mr Gordhan goes on to state that in his statement to this 
commission dated 11 October 2018 specifically in paragraphs 104, 127 
20 
and 127.4 he “recorded numerous examples of the acrimonious nature 
of Mr Moyane’s rejection of my oversight while I was Minister of 
Finance and his insulting attacks on me following my reappointment as 
Minister of Finance in December 2015.” 
 
Mr Gordhan then says in the next paragraph “this provides the 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 8 of 194 
 
context to and the basis for my belief that Mr Moyane’s laying of a 
complaint against me was something other than the actions of a 
reasonable commissioner of SARS.” 
 
The reference to this “at the beginning of this passage 
includes what Mr Gordhan said in paragraph 26 of the clarificatory 
affidavit.” 
 
11. Mr Gordhan then refers to a finding made by Justice 
Nugent and quoted the following passage from Justice Nugent’s final 
report.  
“The effective functioning of SARS caused for close 
10 
collaboration between SARS and other institutions.  
It is to be expected that the Commissioner of SARS 
will liaise closely with the Minister of Finance but 
while Mr Gordhan held that position there was active 
defiance.  When Mr Gordhan became concerned at 
the steps being taken to change the operating model 
he asked for it to be suspended but that was ignored.  
When he disapproved the – the extent of bonuses to 
be paid Mr Moyane again defied him bringing him 
into conflict with the Auditor General.  According to 
20 
Treasury officials the relationship between Treasury 
and Mr Moyane has all been broken down.” 
 
12.  Mr Gordhan also states “considering my interactions with 
Mr Moyane over this period and the subsequent findings of the Nugent 
Inquiry my personal belief remains that Mr Moyane abused his position 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 9 of 194 
 
as the former SARS Commissioner to institute criminal proceedings 
against me and others under SAPS Brooklyn Case Number 427/05/15 
since there was no reasonable basis for him to do so.” 
 
13. Mr Gordhan goes on to state that he viewed Mr Moyane’s 
conduct “in filing the charges against me as yet another expression of 
the defiant attitude he exhibited towards me as found by Justice 
Nugent.”  
 
I pause here to make the point that this allegedly defiant 
attitude by Mr Moyane towards Mr Gordhan of which Mr Gordhan says 
the laying of the criminal charge or complaint was another expression 
10 
is said by Mr Gordhan elsewhere in his clarificatory affidavit to have 
been part of a campaign aimed at putting pressure on him to resign as 
Minister of Finance so as to capture National Treasury under a different 
Minister. 
 
Mr Gordhan added that Mr Moyane’s conduct in “filing the 
charges” “against me” “also served the political purpose of attempting 
to pressure me and others to resign thereby advancing state capture 
and the capture of National Treasury in particular.” 
 
14.  The last paragraph in Mr Gordhan’s clarificatory affidavit 
is to the effect that Mr Gordhan stands by his contention that is 
20 
[indistinct] the nation by Mr Moyane’s legal representatives regarding 
Mr Moyane’s “personal goals, personal motive for filing the complaint 
that led to criminal charges being brought against me and my personal 
belief that those charges were part of the campaign to force my 
resignation from the position of Minister of Finance so as to facilitate 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 10 of 194 
 
the capture of National Treasury is unlikely to assist the important and 
urgent work of the commission given its time and resource constraints.” 
15. Mr Gordhan also states that his statement that Mr Moyane abused 
legal processes when he laid a complaint against is based on his 
experience of Mr Moyane’s [defiant] attitude and vilification of me 
following my reappointment as Minister of Finance.”  Mr Gordhan states 
– then states that he believes that Mr Moyane’s “defiant attitude” and 
vilification “were aimed at forcing or pressuring me to resign from that 
position so that the capture of National Treasury could proceed under a 
different Minister.”   
10 
Mr Moyane’s response to the clarificatory affidavit. 
 
16. Mr Moyane did not deliver an affidavit in response to Mr 
Gordhan’s clarificatory affidavit.  He delivered written submissions.  
This was not inconsistent with the directions issued on 6 May 2019.  In 
the written submissions council for Mr Moyane appointed that the 
reason why Mr Moyane did not deliver an affidavit was that “Mr 
Gordhan’s affidavit actually confirms the allegations of malice on the 
part of Mr Moyane.”  In support of this council for Mr Moyane referred 
to among others Mr Gordhan’s statements quoted in 3b and I above.  
Mr Moyane’s council submitted that Mr Moyane had already said that in 
20 
laying the criminal complaint against Mr Gordhan he did not act 
maliciously but acted in good faith and reasonably. 
The merits. 
 
17. While Mr Gordhan states he never alleged that Mr Moyane 
acted malicious in laying the criminal complaint he laid against him he 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 11 of 194 
 
states that as SARS Commissioner Mr Moyane had adopted a defiant 
attitude towards him and had vilified him with the aim of forcing or 
pressuring him into resigning as Minister of Finance so the capture of 
National Treasury could proceed under a different Minister.  Mr 
Gordhan also states that Mr Moyane “was motived wholly or in part by 
or he sought to advance the objects of state capture.”  Thereafter he 
states that he believes that while Mr Moyane was SARS Commissioner 
his personal goals included the advancement of the State Capture 
Project. 
 
18. There can be doubt that if Mr Moyane’s defiant attitude 
10 
towards and vilification of Mr Gordhan were aimed at forcing or 
pressuring the latter into resigning as Minister of Finance so that the 
capture of the National Treasury could proceed under a different 
Minister of Finance it would general speaking be in the interest of the 
work of the commission to grant Mr Moyane Leave to Cross-examine Mr 
Gordhan.  Equally there can be no doubt that if in laying the criminal 
complaint against Mr Gordhan Mr Moyane was “motivated wholly or in 
part by or he sought to advance the objectives of state capture it would 
generally speaking be in the interest of the work of this commission 
that I grant Mr Moyane Leave to Cross-examine Mr Gordhan. 
20 
 
19. Mr Gordhan did not in his statement of 11 October 2018 
expressly say that he believed that in adopting the defiant attitude that 
he says Mr Moyane adopted towards him after his reappointment as 
Minister of Finance and in vilifying him as he says Mr Moyane did Mr 
Moyane sought to force him or to put pressure on him to resign from his 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 12 of 194 
 
position as Minister of Finance so that the capture of National Treasury 
could proceed under a different Minister.  Nor did Mr Gordhan say in 
that statement that his position is that in laying the complaint against 
him Mr Moyane was motivated wholly or in part by or he sought to 
advance the objectives of state capture. 
 
20. Mr Gordhan also did not say in that statement that Mr 
Moyane’s personal goals while he was SARS Commissioner included 
the advancement of the State Capture Project.   However Mr Gordhan 
seems to explain this when he says in his clarificatory affidavit that 
relevant findings made by Justice Nugent form the basis of certain 
10 
relevant findings made by Justice Nugent form the basis of his belief 
that Mr Moyane’s personal goals while he was SARS Commissioner 
included the advancement of the State Capture Project.  It would seem 
that since those findings had not been made as yet when Mr Gordhan 
made his statement in October 2018 Mr Gordhan could not have formed 
that belief at the time.  Hence the absence of such allegations in that 
statement.  Mr Gordhan’s belief seems to be a belief that he formed 
after Justice Nugent had made the findings to which Mr Gordhan refers 
in his clarificatory affidavit. 
 
21. In the directions I issued on 6 May 2019 it was stated that 
20 
the directions were not intended to invite Mr Gordhan or Mr Moyane to 
furnish new facts which were not contained in their respective affidavits 
that had already been delivered to the commission but that only 
clarification was sought.  Those directions were also to the effect that 
should Mr Moyane wish to comment on Mr Gordhan’s clarificatory 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 13 of 194 
 
affidavit he must deliver to the acting secretary of the commission and 
serve on Mr Gordhan a short affidavit on or before 21 May 2019.”   
 
As already indicated above Mr Moyane elected not to comment 
by way of an affidavit on Mr Gordhan’s clarificatory affidavit.  The 
result is that Mr Moyane has not responded by way of an affidavit or 
affirmed declaration to Mr Gordhan’s clarificatory affidavit to the effect 
that he does mean that Mr Moyane was motivated in whole or in part by 
or he sought to advance the objective of state capture or that Mr 
Gordhan believes in the light of certain findings made by Justice 
Nugent in his reports that Mr Moyane’s personal goals while he was 
10 
SARS Commissioner included the advancement of the State Capture 
Project. 
 
Indeed he has not therefore given his version to this evidence. 
 
23. Ordinarily I would not grant an applicant Leave to Cross-
examine a witness if he has not given his version to the allegations or 
evidence implicating him.  Indeed this is what happened I considered 
Mr Moyane’s application for Leave to Cross-examine Mr Gordhan in 
respect of other issues.  However this time Mr Moyane previously did 
not consider it necessary to deliver an affidavit to deal with the 
allegations or evidence in Mr Gordhan’s clarificatory affidavit.  The 
20 
directions I had issued did not oblige him to do so. 
 
24. The day before the hearing of argument on whether I 
should grant Mr Moyane Leave to Cross-examine Mr Gordhan on the 
outstanding issue I caused a letter to be sent to Messrs Gordhan’s and 
Moyane’s legal representatives in which I indicated that my prima facie 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 14 of 194 
 
view was that I should grant Mr Moyane Leave to Cross-examine Mr 
Gordhan but that should I grant such leave it could be necessary that I 
direct Mr Moyane to deliver an affidavit or affirmed declaration in which 
he would set out his version.  In response to the letter Mr Moyane’s 
legal representatives furnished the commission with a letter which was 
to the effect that Mr Moyane’s primary contention was that I should 
grant 
him 
Leave 
to 
Cross-examine 
Mr 
Gordhan 
without 
any 
precondition.  The letter was also to the effect that the other options 
were for me to either grant Mr Moyane Leave to Cross-Examine Mr 
Gordhan but direct him to provide his version first as a precondition or 
10 
direct Mr Moyane to first deliver his affidavit or affirmed declaration 
setting out his version and only grant him Leave to Cross-examine Mr 
Gordhan thereafter.  Mr Moyane’s council confirmed this position during 
the hearing of argument.  If I grant Mr Moyane Leave to Cross-examine 
Mr Gordhan I will have to direct him to give his version. 
 
25. On behalf of Mr Moyane it was submitted that the prima 
facie view I had expressed with regard to granting Mr Moyane Leave to 
Cross-examine Mr Gordhan was justified and correct and that I should 
grant Mr Moyane’s application.  On behalf of Mr Gordhan it was 
submitted that I should dismiss Mr Moyane’s application because Mr 
20 
Gordhan had never said that in laying the complaint that Mr Moyane 
laid against Mr Gordhan he had acted maliciously.  The difficulty that 
arises from this submission on behalf of Mr Gordhan is that although Mr 
Gordhan does not or does say that he never alleged that Mr Moyane 
acted maliciously in laying the complaint he laid against him.  He says 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 15 of 194 
 
elsewhere in his clarificatory affidavit that the laying of the complaint 
by Mr Moyane had little or nothing to do with the legitimate complaint 
relating to an alleged crime.   
 
He also says that Mr Moyane abused a legal process by 
laying the complaint that he laid against him.  I also understand his 
evidence to be to the effect that in laying the criminal complaint that he 
laid against him Mr Moyane sought to advance the objects of state 
capture. 
 
26.  A question that may be asked is whether by requiring 
Mr Moyane to give his version to this Commission on the issues raised 
10 
in Mr Gordhan’s clarificatory affidavit this Commission is not repeating 
the work that has already been done by the SARS Commission.  This 
Commission does not wish to repeat the work of the SARS Commission. 
 
However two or three observations need to be made in this 
regard.  The first is that the terms of reference of the SARS 
Commission did not include an investigation into allegations of State 
Capture.  Secondly, this Commission cannot make findings against 
Mr Moyane or anyone for that matter - I am going to repeat that. 
 
Secondly, 
this 
Commission cannot 
make findings 
that 
Mr Moyane or anyone for that matter performed their duties in order to 
20 
advance the State Capture Project or the objects of State Capture 
without giving such a person the opportunity to be heard.  It is 
necessary for this Commission to hear Mr Moyane’s version or side of 
the story and if it is in the interest of the work of this Commission that 
he be granted leave to cross-examine Mr - Minister Gordhan. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 16 of 194 
 
 
Grant him such leave.  An allegation that someone performed 
his or her duties in order to advance the State Capture Project is a 
serious allegation and those facing such an allegation should be given 
an opportunity to defend themselves against it.   
 
27.  I consider that subject to one condition - it is in the 
interest of the work of the Commission to grant Mr Moyane leave to 
cross-examine Mr Gordhan. 
 
Before this Commission it must rank as the most serious 
allegation or statement for it to be said that you performed your official 
duties in order to advance the objectives of State Capture and speaking 
10 
generally.  Such a person should be granted leave to cross-examine 
with - it is in the interest of the work of this Commission to do so. 
 
The condition is that Mr Moyane will have to deliver an 
affidavit 
or 
affirmed 
declaration 
in 
response 
to 
Mr Gordhan’s 
clarificatory affidavit.  So as to give this Commission his version on 
issues raised in Mr Gordhan’s affidavit.  I will therefore grant 
Mr Moyane the required leave subject to that condition. 
 
In the result my decision is the following:  one, subject to two 
below Mr Moyane is hereby granted leave to cross-examine Mr Gordhan 
on a, whether in laying the criminal complaint or charges against 
20 
Mr Gordhan Mr Moyane acted maliciously.  B, whether in laying the 
criminal complaint against Mr Gordhan Mr Moyane was motivated 
wholly or in part by or he sought to advance the objectives of State 
Capture. 
 
C, 
whether 
in 
laying 
the 
criminal 
complaint 
against 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 17 of 194 
 
Mr Gordhan Mr Moyane was abusing a legal process for his own 
personal goals that had nothing to - nothing or little to do with a 
legitimate complaint relating to an alleged crime?  D, whether as 
Commissioner of SARS Mr Moyane sought to advance the State 
Capture Project. 
 
E, whether Mr Moyane’s personal goals while he was SARS 
Commissioner included the advancement of the State Capture Project.  
Two, Mr Moyane is directed to deliver to the Acting Secretary or 
Secretary of the Commission on or before 15 January 2020 and 
affidavit or affirmed declaration in which - in which he responds to the 
10 
clarificatory affidavit delivered by Mr Gordhan. 
 
Three, Mr Moyane’s affidavit or affirmed declaration must 
make it clear which averments or allegations or statements in 
Mr Gordhan’s affidavit he admits or denies.  What the basis are for 
denying or disputing those he denies or disputes and give Mr Moyane’s 
full version in regard to the allegations or comments. 
 
Four, the amount of time that will be granted to Mr Moyane to 
cross-examine 
Mr 
- 
to 
Mr Moyane’s 
counsel 
to 
cross-examine 
Mr Gordhan will be determined at a later date.  That is my decision. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Noted.  Thank you Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think we will take a short break and then resume to 
hear the evidence of today’s witness. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that in order? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  We need to just put some more documents in your 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 18 of 194 
 
witness file. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Relating to certain matters that will be raised by the 
first witness.  If we may do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So how much time do you think we should - 
10/15 minutes? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  15 minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  15 minutes? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Well let us make it - it is about 13 minutes 
10 
past 10.  Let us make it half past 10. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Pretorius are you ready? 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Thank you Chair.  The first witness today is Mr 
Rieaz Shaik, better known as Mo Shaik.  Before he takes the 
affirmation may I just point out that on your desk or on your bench 
20 
Chair is a new bundle, PP1 to PP4.  PP1 contains the statement of Mr 
Shaik and PP4 contains certain documents relevant to that statement, 
PP2 and PP3 are the statements of further witnesses to testify today 
and tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why is PP4 not part of PP1? 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 19 of 194 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:   PP4 is in that bundle, it has just been put in there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but you say those it consists of additional 
documents that relate to PP1? 
ADV PRETORIUS:   PP1 is the statement of Mr Shaik. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   PP2 and PP3 are the statements of the further 
witnesses to testify today and tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   PP4 contains certain additional documents relevant 
to PP1 that have just been placed in the file. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well why are they not made part of PP1, that’s my 
question. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   They could be, they could by, but ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Because they are only relevant to PP1? 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Yes it is just an administrative issue that had to be 
dealt with because the documents were paginated, PP1 to PP3 were 
paginated so when PP4 came along the pagination required them to be 
placed at the end.  That is the reason. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it possible to change that or is that ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS:   We can change it, it is not a problem Chair, we can 
20 
– it is just the page number that is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  It may be that since it’s been done it might be 
difficult, I am just having a look whether it would – all that would be 
needed is to change the pagination, maybe if the last page of Mr 
Shaik’s statement is for example page 20 then those other documents 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 20 of 194 
 
could come after page 20 and be marked 20A, 20B and so on. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   That could be done, and we can do that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   There is one other qualification in that the 
documents in PP4 are relevant to all the witnesses because all the 
witnesses deal with the same subject matter for these proceedings at 
least. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh they are not relevant only to Mr Shaik’s 
statement? 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Not only. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because that is what I understood you to say.   
Maybe – and they are not referred to in his statement? 
ADV PRETORIUS:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, then maybe it’s fine, we can leave them as they 
are, I think it’s simply because you said or I understood you to say they 
are – they belong to Mr Shaik’s statement but if they are relevant for all 
the witnesses then they can stay as PP4. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Yes Chair, just by way of clarification further these 
statements were taken and recorded some time ago, since then it was 
felt by the Legal Team that further matters should be dealt with, of a 
20 
general nature and of a specific nature, because the subject matter 
relates to all three witnesses, the fourth section of the bundle would 
rally logically apply to all of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that’s fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Thank you Chair. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 21 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  The file containing the statements of Mr Rieaz Shaik, 
Mr Njenje and Mr Maqetuka will be admitted as EXHIBIT PP and Mr 
Shaik’s statement will be admitted as PP1, Mr Njenje’s statement as 
PP2, Mr Maqetuka’s statement as PP3 and certain additional 
documents at the end of the bundle as PP4.  Yes? 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Thank you Chair, may I just by way of introduction 
refer to a few matters relevant to the evidence of the witness.  The 
three witnesses to give evidence today and tomorrow will deal with the 
activities of security officials. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before we do that I don’t know whether counsel on a 
10 
watch and brief would like to go on record or he is fine without going on 
record. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Perhaps he should. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.   Let him place himself on record.   
ADV LAMOLA:   Thank you very much Chairperson.   My name is 
Madimetja Lamola, I am here on a watch and brief on behalf of Dr 
Siyabonga Cwele. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you, the former Minister of – I get confused 
about security and intelligence ...[intervenes]  
ADV LAMOLA:   Minister of Intelligence. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay, alright, thank you. 
ADV LAMOLA:   Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   As I was saying Chair the witnesses who will 
testify today and tomorrow will deal with the activities of certain 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 22 of 194 
 
security officials, relevant to the terms of reference of the Commission.  
The first witness as we have stated is Mr Shaik. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   But in addition by virtue of the knowledge and 
experience of Mr Shaik in the security intelligence field he is able to 
assist the Commission firstly to understand the various constitutional 
structures which deal with the intelligence function dictated by the 
Constitution and the relationship between them.  He is also able to 
assist 
the 
Commission 
to 
highlight 
and 
explain 
the 
relevant 
Constitutional provisions, obviously not to interpret and apply them, 
10 
that is clearly the function of the Court and to the extent that you need 
to do so Chair yourself, but to explain generally the standards of 
conduct required by the Constitution of security entities and operatives 
about which there will be substantive – substantial evidence in addition 
in 2020 and that will be the first part of the Mr Shaik’s evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  33 Notices have been issued, the statements as I 
have said ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I guess a long time ago? 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Yes, acceptably Chair.    
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   The 33 Notices have been issued, the statements 
as you will have noted are very brief and it will be necessary to expand 
on them but not in a way which detracts from the procedural 
requirements. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 23 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   May the witness take the affirmation? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
MR RIEAZ SHAIK:   Rieaz Shaik. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection in making the prescribed 
affirmation? 
MR SHAIK:   No. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you solemnly affirm that the evidence you give shall 
be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, if so please 
10 
raise your right hand and say I truly affirm. 
MR RIEAZ SHAIK:   I truly affirm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much Mr Shaik, before we proceed I 
just want to say that I appreciate the fact that you have made yourself 
available to come and share what you know with the Commission, as 
you probably know from last year I have been calling for former DG’s 
and current DG’s, former DDG’s and senior officials in various 
government departments and in municipalities senior officials to come 
forward if they know matters that fall within the terms of reference of 
the Commission and there have been times when I have expressed the 
20 
view that although a number of them have come forward and we 
appreciate that I do feel that there must be many out there who know 
quite a lot who haven’t come forward. 
 
Indeed when the Reverend Chikane was here giving evidence 
last week we had a discussion about that and he gave me his 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 24 of 194 
 
perspective but I want you to know that we appreciate when senior 
officials who were – who have knowledge of some of the things that 
really are important for the Commission come forward to help the 
Commission understand what was happening, so I just want you to 
know that we appreciate that you came. 
MR SHAIK:   Thank you Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Mr Shaik you have in front of you a bundle marked 
PP1, in that bundle at pages 1 to 15 is an affidavit, is that your 
affidavit? 
10 
MR SHAIK:   That’s correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   At page 15 whose signature appears there? 
MR SHAIK:   It is my signatory. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   And are you satisfied that the contents of this 
affidavit are true and correct? 
MR SHAIK:   I am indeed. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   At page 1 from paragraphs 1 to 9 you tell the 
Commission some of the matters related to your knowledge and 
experience and your personal background, would you just go through 
those and tell the Chair of your own background please? 
20 
MR SHAIK:   Chair I – in paragraphs 1 to 9 I outline my history in 
respect to intelligence matters, which essentially started as a result of 
my detention, which led to a intelligence breakthrough for the ANC and 
in that capacity I received training in East Germany.  I then returned 
illegally into the country to set up an intelligence structure and I 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 25 of 194 
 
worked directly under the supervision and command of former President 
Jacob Zuma and as a result of the knowledge I accrued in the so-called 
underground days of intelligence I was included into the negotiation 
process, so I was a delegate to CODESA 1, CODESA 2, the multi-party 
talks I was nominated to serve on the Sub-Council of Intelligence, I was 
the Chair of the Amalgamation Committee that amalgamated the various 
statutory and non-statutory intelligence services in the 1991 to 1994 
period.   I was very much part together with my colleagues in passing 
the three pieces of legislation that governs the Intelligence Services 
and I am proud to say that I was also contributor to the Chapter 11 on 
10 
the Constitution which is a remarkable first in the world where matters 
of intelligence were in the constitution of the country. 
 
Since then and I then left the Intelligence Services in 1997, I 
joined the Department of Foreign Affairs, it was then called Department 
of Foreign Affairs, I served as Consul General in Hamburg, I returned, I 
was then appointed by President Mandela as the Ambassador to 
Algeria.  I then returned, served as the Special Advisor to Minister 
Dlamini-Zuma.   Then I left government again and I returned to 
government in 2009 in my capacity as Director General of South African 
Secret Service. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:   During the period from – or prior to 1994 and 
during the period up to 2009 did you have occasion to work with the 
former President Zuma? 
MR SHAIK:   Very much so. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   And we will deal with some facts in relation to 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 26 of 194 
 
evidence that the former President has given in due course.  In 
paragraph 10 you describe the fact that you were reappointed into the 
security establishment, together with two other persons who are to give 
evidence today and tomorrow, tell the Chair about that please? 
MR SHAIK:   That is correct Chair.   Some point in 2009 ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second Mr Shaik, I wonder if you can bring 
the mic just a little bit closer, ja, that’s better. 
MR SHAIK:   At some point in 2009, I think it was in May 2009 if I may 
be mistaken, I received a phone call, there was a lot of speculation 
before that in the media that my colleagues and I may be returning to 
10 
the Intelligent Services and we then received a phone call from the 
Minister’s office, from Minister Cwele’s office to avail ourselves for a 
meeting.   
 
When we arrived at this meeting ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Minister Cwele at that time was already Minister of 
Intelligence. 
MR SHAIK:   He was already the Minister of Intelligence, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, it is just as I said I get confused about 
Intelligence and Internal Security, so Intelligence is the right title? 
MR SHAIK:   Correct, I would try assist the Chair in making that 
20 
understanding of the difference between Intelligence and State Security 
Agency. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, it is just that I think at a certain time certain 
terms were used. 
MR SHAIK:   Correct. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 27 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then at another time they got changed. 
MR SHAIK:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I don’t know whether at some stage there was 
some kind of splitting of parts of the same, what was the same before. 
MR SHAIK:   Absolutely correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that is why sometimes it is ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS:   We hope to deal with that satisfactorily in a 
moment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is why sometimes those of us who are not very 
familiar with those operations get confused.   Yes thank you. 
10 
MR SHAIK:   So it will be safe to say sir that at the beginning of the 
Fifth Administration in 2009 the appointment of Minister Cwele was 
appointed as the Minister of State Security, all other Ministers prior to 
2009 were Ministers of Intelligence, so in 2009 when the former 
President announced his cabinet he appointed Minister Cwele as the 
Minister of State Security. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, that is interesting, ja. 
MR SHAIK:   So then at this meeting at Minister Cwele’s office the 
three of us Mr Njenje, Ambassador Maqetuka and myself met, we were 
in a holding room, and this is the first time we have spoken in a long 
20 
time and we were all okay why are we here, and very shortly then we 
were led into a press conference in which it was announced that 
Ambassador Maqetuka is the Director General of SSA, Mr Gibson would 
be the head of the domestic branch of the SSA and I was appointed as 
the head of the foreign branch of the SSA.   
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 28 of 194 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Yes, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry, I must have missed something, you don’t 
mean that you were sitting in the holding room and then led to a press 
conference and that was announced without any discussion as yet?   I 
must have missed something. 
MR SHAIK:   It was a very strange and odd situation for me myself this 
is the first time I was hearing that I would be now appointed as the 
Head of the Foreign Branch, but of course in the holding room we did 
discuss and I think the Minister did make a brief appearance to tell us 
that we are now assuming the responsibility of the management of the 
10 
Intelligence Services, but that is the way I recall it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, so it was just a brief ...[intervenes]  
MR SHAIK:   A very brief thing, and then we were led to the press 
conference, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay, okay, thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   If we may take a step out of your statement or 
affidavit for the moment and go to EXHIBIT PP4 and Tab 5 contains 
certain diagrams and an extract from the Constitution. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry, I’m sorry Mr Pretorius.  I think you need to 
explain something with regard to the pagination, I just realised at least 
20 
with regard to P4 that it seems that its paginated is a kind of a 
standalone pagination and not sequential from the beginning, we 
normally have pagination that goes from the first page to the last in the 
bundle, but if this is different I think it is necessary to explain that into 
the record, but also so that I understand. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 29 of 194 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:   If I may then Chair just note for the record that 
EXHIBIT PP4 which contains certain documents relevant to the 
evidence to be given is paginated from page 1 to page 47.  I do note 
too that the initials RS appear form page 39 onwards, but perhaps it 
would be better Chair if the initials RS were excluded from references 
and from the final copy to be corrected. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well PP4 it says, it starts from page 1 to whatever, 
but there’s a page – oh that’s just an index that comes before that, so 
that’s so from page 1 up to – what is the last page? 
ADV PRETORIUS:   47 Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  I think deal with the others as well, page 
– so PP1 has its own pagination, PP1 starts from page 1 to page 15. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Page 16 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it 16? 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Yes.  16 is just the stamp of the Commissioner of 
Oaths. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I don’t have 16, and I don’t have the stamp, but 
it’s not – there’s not supposed to be a stamp of the Commissioner of 
Oaths because it’s not an affidavit so how come you have 
...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:   No it is an affidavit Chair and if your file has not 
been updated I apologise, the statement has been replaced by an 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, well that compounds my problem because the 
witness didn’t do an oath this morning, he didn’t take an oath it was an 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 30 of 194 
 
affirmation so when I looked at this and said it is a statement, not an 
affidavit that was – that accorded with him not taking an oath and doing 
an affirmation. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Well Chair the fact is that the statement or affidavit 
before you was sworn before a Commissioner of Oaths, I am not sure 
whether it was affirmed at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well all I’m saying is – well not all, but part of what I 
am saying is certainly what I have for Mr Shaik is reflected on page 1 
as his statement, statement of Rieaz Shaik and at the beginning it does 
not say as affidavits normally do “I hereby make oath and say”, it starts 
10 
the story “I was an anti-apartheid student activist” and at the end of the 
– that statement goes up to page 15 and there is no Commissioner of 
Oaths certificate as one would have, so I do not mind being given what 
is to be used, I just want to make sure we have the same things, I do 
not know whether he has an affidavit or he has a statement like I do, 
but we must have all the same thing. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Can I explain Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   As I explained to you earlier the statements were 
taken some time ago, as a precaution I asked the investigators to have 
20 
it sworn, which was done.  My understanding is that you have the 
statement in your file, so your problem does not exist yet, it is only 
when the affidavit is filed, so perhaps we will just leave it as that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well if you are happy that we use a statement I am 
happy I just want to make sure we have the same thing. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 31 of 194 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Yes, they are identical documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   So for the purposes of the evidence which is given 
under affirmation any way perhaps we can proceed on the basis of the 
document in your file. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, so that the transcript does not talk about an 
affidavit and then here it is a statement. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Yes I will talk about a statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay, alright.   
ADV PRETORIUS:   Happy Mr Shaik? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Shaik do you understand what’s going on? 
MR SHAIK:   Yes if I can just add a little clarification sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SHAIK:   It is correct what you would have because the statement 
was given a year ago, and then in consultation with  the legal team it 
was agreed to turn it into an affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR SHAIK:   I must say in the affidavit that I had before me there are 
some changes, they are either I neatened it up in terms of instead of 
long history I kept it more precise. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes, okay. 
MR SHAIK:   And there were some typo’s that you will find and which 
may irritate you when you see it, has been changed.   
CHAIRPERSON:  So if both of you have affidavits, maybe if there is a 
spare affidavit I should just have an affidavit then we all have the same 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 32 of 194 
 
thing.  I assume the numbering is the same? 
ADV PRETORIUS:   The numbering is the same as I understand it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Well perhaps you could put this in your file please 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, it does not have to be stapled because it will just 
go in here as is.  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   And I will now refer to the paragraphs in the 
affidavit that you have in front of you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay, thank you. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:   That is what Mr Shaik has and that is what I have, 
and I apologise for the fact that it should have been on your file.  Just 
by way of introduction to the documents after Tab 5 in EXHIBIT PP4 Mr 
Shaik you have told the Chair that you were involved in the drafting of 
Chapter 11 of the Constitution. 
MR SHAIK:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   And you will obviously understand that once the 
drafter has released the written section or chapter for promulgation that 
is the end of the story as far as the drafters are concerned, thereafter 
it is up to the Courts to apply and interpret. 
20 
MR SHAIK:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Nevertheless you can assist us by pointing out not 
only the various structures to which the DCJ has referred, but you can 
also highlight some portions of the Constitution and explain the 
thinking at least behind them, subject to the fact that you cannot 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 33 of 194 
 
interpret. 
MR SHAIK:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   If you go please to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I guess it will be necessary for me to have a copy of 
the constitution. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Yes, you have in PP4 ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Or the relevant portions. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Chapter 11 yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay, no that’s fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Page 42 and following. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   There is an organogram at EXHIBIT PP4, page 39, 
do you see it? 
MR SHAIK:   Yes, yes I do. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   That is followed by an unnumbered A3 version of 
that page which is easier to refer to.  That I understand it is the 
organogram that applies to the Intelligent Services under the 
constitution for the period 1994 to 1997. 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Pretorius – oh you are at 39 of PP4 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes 39 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  It is followed by a larger copy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Which is easier to – to read Chair so I – I would 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 34 of 194 
 
suggest that you go to the page after page 39 and you will see an A3 
version of page 39.  Chair it is intended to put these up on the screen 
but in the meanwhile we can deal with the organogram. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  At page 39. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In red along the bottom of the diagram are certain 
entities dealing with intelligence, what are they? 
MR SHAIK:  These red blocks represent the different organisations that 
were created by the National Strategic Intelligence Act and they are the 
10 
National Intelligence Agency, the NIA which was responsible for 
domestic intelligence. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  If you would pause there a moment.  Is the Act the 
Intelligence Services Act 38 of 1994? 
MR SHAIK:  The Act that defined the – the mandate of the various 
intelligence component is the National Strategic Intelligence Act 39 of 
1994. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And that is the Act referred to on the right hand 
side of those four blocks? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Right.  That created four entities, what are those 
entities if you could just go through them again please? 
MR SHAIK:  The National Intelligence Agency responsible for the 
collection of domestic intelligence. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Right. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 35 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  And also had the counter intelligence function. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Okay.  The next one? 
MR SHAIK:  The next one is the South African Secret Service and the 
South African Secret Service was responsible for the collection of 
intelligence outside the borders of South Africa.  Foreign intelligence 
so to speak. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And then the next is Crime Intelligence? 
MR SHAIK:  The next is Crime Intelligence and that refers to the 
intelligence gathered by the police in respect of prosecuting domestic 
crime or international crime. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And the final one is Military Intelligence? 
MR SHAIK:  And Military Intelligence is intelligence required by the 
military for the deployment of troops and for their state of readiness. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Right.  You will see that above the National 
Intelligence Agency which you say deals with domestic intelligence and 
counter intelligence and the South African Secret Service which deals 
with foreign intelligence a reporting line to the National Intelligence 
Coordinating Committee, what is that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr – Mr Pretorius before we get there I just want 
to make sure that I understand the differences in functions of the 
20 
different units or agencies.  National Intelligence Agency you say that 
deals with what? 
MR SHAIK:  That deals with the domestic intelligence.  So in other 
words intelligence inside of the country that where the bulk of the 
issues relates to domestic issues whether they are political unrest, 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 36 of 194 
 
whether it is the reasons why we have unrest in the country, the crime 
networks, the cartels etcetera. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  So it is – and others could be on how government is 
perceived, how it is – the domestic component of intelligence is what 
we call the NIA’s function. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And included that they would have the function of 
counterintelligence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
MR SHAIK:  So in other words any threat directed towards the state, 
organs of state, individuals of the state that would be the function of 
the NIA to be able to count – firstly identify the threat and then counter 
that threat and broadly we refer to that as counterintelligence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So counterintelligence would be what the NIA does to 
deal with for example people planning to overthrow the government? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes that kind of thing. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But unless – unless… 
20 
MR SHAIK:  And we would know it also as… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Serious.  They would be less serious things that they 
would deal with as well? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct.  They are the serious things and the less serious 
things. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 37 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja.  Ja.  But I mean part of what they would look 
– part of what they would be concerned with be crime and how would 
they – how would their function differ from Crime Intelligence? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  The – yes there is a measure of overlap. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  To the extent that the criminal network becomes 
sophisticated and a good example will be the drug cartels. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  The movement of drugs and a very good example is and I 
hope I get it right. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  The drug Nyaope. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Which is decimating our townships. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And our cities. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Etcetera. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And Nyaope is a heroine based drug. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And heroine is a product of a plant grown in Afghanistan, 
Pakistan etcetera. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And that is that part of the world. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 38 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  We are here in – in Africa. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  The – that drug has to come from Afghanistan, Pakistan. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Through here and most times it enters the East Coast. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm 
MR SHAIK:  Of the Indian Ocean. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And then through various countries smuggled in – into 
10 
South Africa. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  So you can see just in that example. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  How foreign intelligence would be used to monitor the flow 
of these drugs. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And when it enters the country here it enters a distribution 
network. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR SHAIK:  So you can see now how the – the domestic intelligence 
will get involved in the distribution network. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  To understand the distribution network. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 39 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  And then eventually when the drugs are sold and the 
monies flow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Because monies will also flow in the reverse process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  You will get the Financial Intelligence Centre getting 
involved.  You will get the NIA getting involved in respect of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And when it is now prosecuted as a crime. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
MR SHAIK:  That is when Crime Intelligence gets involved. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so the – the South African Secret Service which 
I think you said deals with International or Foreign side of Intelligence 
– so they could be involved in monitoring the movement of Nyaope from 
Afghanistan or wherever and for example get to know that it is destined 
for our shores. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then they could then share that information with 
the NIA so that when it lands on our shores the NIA is ready to deal 
with it? 
20 
MR SHAIK:  Absolutely correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   And then when the NIA deals with it it could 
end up with Crime Intelligence and ultimately with SAPS and – in the 
courts? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  That is correct Sir. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 40 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  That was the – the way it was designed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And then if you look at the red line and maybe I am just 
getting ahead of the evidence leader. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  But… 
MR SHAIK:  But if you look at the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I just want to understand ja. 
MR SHAIK:  The red structures and above that is the National 
Intelligence Coordinating Committee. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And that is a – the committee that was designed to share 
this kind of intelligence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The information. 
MR SHAIK:  Both tactical intelligence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And at a strategic level. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  Okay.  Okay so – so Crime Intelligence I 
think I understand this other Secret Service from what the examples 
that we have just used. 
20 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But Crime Intelligence from what you say it looks like 
in the examples that we have used would – would not – would only get 
involved after NIA had been involved.  In terms of those examples. But 
in terms of other crimes it could act as an intelligence unit or first 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 41 of 194 
 
instance if you – if you understand what I mean? 
MR SHAIK:  Absolutely correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And let us just take another example in the case of ATM. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm bombings. 
MR SHAIK:  ATM bombs. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SHAIK:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  There the Crime Intelligence. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Would deploy its resources. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  To get to know who are behind that etcetera. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And they would then request. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  To the – the – the Civilian Intelligence Community. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Technological Support. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Which is then given to – to Crime Intelligence when they 
are leading the investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Hm. And the Military Intelligence really would 
relate to who – who wants to attack us or as a country or what? 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 42 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  So you will recall that in our awful history of 
apartheid. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  We had structures created under Military Intelligence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And a good example would be the CCB. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Which engaged in extra judicial killings in the country. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  So one of the … 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:  That was a civil cooperation bureau? 
MR SHAIK:  That is the civil cooperation bureau.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  So one of the key principles that emerged during the 
negotiations was that the military will not be able to conduct 
intelligence inside of the country. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And this was a – a – and it still remains a fascinating 
discussion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR SHAIK:  Because any institution that when it deploys has to rely on 
its own intelligence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  It does not invariably rely on other people’s intelligence 
when it is deploying. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 43 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  So it is easy in the case of the military when they are 
involved in operations outside of the country.  Military Intelligence will 
inform the terrain, the gathering, the persons that informs the 
deployment of the military outside the country.  Of course the difficulty 
will arise and – and we would have such a situation in the call to 
deploy the military inside the country.  Then the question will remain, 
what intelligence will the military rely on when it deploys inside the 
country?  But at the time we did not envisage that contradiction and we 
believed that through the mechanism of NICOC the coordinating 
10 
mechanism that we would be able to best resolve that issue if and when 
it arose. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I know that I – I just said that I take it that 
Military Intelligence is about intelligence relating to who wants to 
attack us. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes that is it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But – which is rather from outside the borders of the 
country.  But now if we want to know – or the President wants to know 
whether within the country there is a group of people who are planning 
20 
to go to the headquarters of the SANDF and kidnap the general … 
MR SHAIK:  Shoke. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja and other senior military leaders and go on radio 
and television and say, we have taken over the government of South 
Africa. If he wants to know whether there are people within the country 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 44 of 194 
 
who would be expected to pick up that kind of intelligence or is it all of 
them?  Or would the Military Intelligence be expected to pick that up 
themselves? 
MR SHAIK:  No.  The – in the main Sir that will be the function perhaps 
of the counterintelligence of the NIA and to some extent Crime 
Intelligence.  But let me just assure you firstly that I do not think there 
is anyone willing to attack South Africa.  And secondly those who want 
to take over the headquarters must first know where the headquarters 
is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR SHAIK:  And we get that wrong sometimes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay, no that – that is alright.  So – so the 
Military Intelligence is outward looking? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the – the NIA is inward looking? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  South African Secret Service outward looking and 
Crime Intelligence inward looking too. 
MR SHAIK:  And it may have a combination inward and outward. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Inward and outward. 
20 
MR SHAIK:  ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And military outward looking. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you very much.  I think I understand 
better now. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 45 of 194 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  We will deal with the reporting lines. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And oversight. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In addition. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Chair.  But before we do that these four entities 
that you have referred to share joint services as I understand it 
10 
including technological services like interception, monitoring and the 
like? 
MR SHAIK:  In the – in the case of Crime Intelligence and Military 
Intelligence there is a capacity by the Civilian Intelligence that has 
intercept capacities and a structure was created for request from the 
Military Intelligence and Crime Intelligence to this structure to intercept 
on behalf of Crime Intelligence and Military Intelligence. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Okay.  And those and other joint services such as 
training and the like, internal security in other words the security of the 
operatives and the entities are to an extent as you have explained 
20 
shared services? 
MR SHAIK:  The joint services pertained to the National Intelligence 
Agency and the South African Secret Service.  The – the Crime 
Intelligence was a division of the South African Police Service and they 
have their own organisational culture, training etcetera.  To the extent 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 46 of 194 
 
that sometimes there is cooperation yes but these joint services in this 
diagram represents the – the joint services that were prevalent in 1994 
between the NIA and the South African Secret Service. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Alright.  And you have explained that Crime 
Intelligence and Military Intelligence may request certain… 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Technological assistance from National Intelligence 
Agency and the South African Secret Service? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Alright.  You have told the Chair that these entities 
10 
report for coordination and cooperation to the National Intelligence 
Coordinating Committee. 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And it seems from the diagram that you explained 
that that committee reports to an intelligence coordinator who in turn 
reports to the President? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. I must – I must point out Sir that this was all 
applicable in the 1994/1997 period.   
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Things have changed since then. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes sure. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Okay.  The Crime Intelligence resorts under the 
South African Police Service reporting in turn to the Minister of Police? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 47 of 194 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And Military Intelligence resorts under the South 
African National Defence Force under the direction of the Minister of 
Defence? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Alright.  For oversight purposes in other words 
oversight over the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Activities… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Pretorius.  Am I missing something on 
this organogram because I do not seem to see the Minister of 
10 
Intelligence?  I see Minister of Justice, Minister of Police, Minister of 
Defence, Intelligence Coordinator reporting directly to the President. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Have I –  
MR SHAIK:  No it is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am not missing anything? 
MR SHAIK:  No you are not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Mr Shaik will explain that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Will explain okay, alright?  Well that – that came from 
20 
the fact that I thought the Minister would report to the President but 
then there is a coordinator.  Okay, alright, thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Chair I see it is eleven twenty I am not sure when 
you want to take the short adjournment? 
CHAIRPERSON:  We can take the short adjournment now or we can 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 48 of 194 
 
take it half past ten- half past eleven.  We did start at half past eleven.  
In terms of what you want to cover does it matter? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Well it will take some time to go through these 
because there are two more diagrams to go through. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  So it is… 
ADV PRETORIUS:  This is the situation to 1997.  It changed in 1997. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And changed once again in 2009. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  It is very confusing. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  So it is quite important to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So maybe it is better that we adjourn – take the tea 
adjournment and then continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  After that.  Okay alright.  We will take the tea 
adjournment now it is twenty past eleven we will resume at twenty five 
to twelve. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Let us proceed. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Shaik we will see in the 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 49 of 194 
 
diagrams to follow that indeed there is a Minister responsible for 
Intelligence - two different designations over time, but would you 
explain to the Chair please why on this organogram - 1994 to 1997 - 
there is no Minister that appears to be directly related to Intelligence. 
MR SHAIK:  Chair, the - the issue arose during the negotiation process 
how best should the Intelligence Services be managed a controlled and 
during the negotiation process that led to the sub council of 
Intelligence.  A set of principles were agreed upon and these principles 
then were reflected in the Constitution and in the Legislation. 
It was never envisaged that we would have a fully-fledged 
10 
Minister and if I draw your attention to the various sections in the 
Constitution.  In - in respect of defence … (intervenes). 
ADV PRETORIUS:  We will get there. 
MR SHAIK:  Oh.  We will get there.  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  So there was never envisaged that there would be a 
dedicated Minister of Intelligence and in 1994 under the then 
President Mandela the Minister of Justice assumed the administrative 
responsibility for the Intelligence Services not the direction and the 
20 
control in terms of the substance of their work, but in respect of the 
administrative matters. 
The budget matters.  The appointment matters.  The 
regulation matters, but not the control of the Intelligence process itself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Pretorius I think it is - it is convenient that 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 50 of 194 
 
before we proceed I - I see the structure in the Interim Constitution to 
the extent that what you say is how it was reflected in the Constitution. 
Obviously the administrative power of the Minister of Justice maybe 
might not be … 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the Constitution, but I would like to see that and 
then see how even the final Constitution is structured before we 
proceed, because then I think I will understand some of the 
explanations that you give better. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes Chair.  We had intended to go through Chapter 
10 
11 in some detail.  So if we may do that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And some of the concerns or questions you have 
raised will be answered in that process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Then we can go back to the diagrams. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No.  That is fine.  Let us - let us do that.  Even 
if we just look at simply the structure to say look at this.  Here are the 
main features.  This is not there.  This is there.  This is what this might 
mean … 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then later on we can go back if necessary.  Do 
we also have in here relevant parts of the Interim Constitution or not? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  We do not.  We just deal with the - chapter 11 of 
the … 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 51 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  The final? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Final Constitution. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, but there was no difference.  Do you know? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  The - the principles to which the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were the same?  Final Constitutional 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Witness now refers are in the Final Constitution. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  Okay.  Alright.  So where do I find the relevant 
parts of the Constitution … (intervenes)? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Page 42. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Page 42? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Of PP4. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  I would like to deal with the governing principles 
because in 198D there is important provision in relation to the 
structures. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And just for the record what we are looking at now is 
Chapter 11 of the Final Constitution? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  There are certain governing principles that were 
20 
established in the Constitution in relation to Chapter 11 Security 
Services.  What are those provisions and I would like to put all those 
on record through you Mr Shaik particularly 198D? 
MR SHAIK:  “The following principles govern National 
Security in The Republic:  A, National Security must 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 52 of 194 
 
reflect or resolve of South Africans as individuals 
and as a nation to live as equals, to live in peace 
and harmony, to be free from fear and want to seek 
a better life.  B, the resolve to live in peace and 
harmony precludes any South African citizen from 
participating 
in 
armed 
conflict 
nationally 
or 
internationally except as provided for in terms of 
the Constitution or National Legislation.  Three or 
C, National Security must be pursued in compliance 
with the law including international law and D, 
10 
National Security is subject to the authority of 
Parliament and the National Executive.” 
The important thing in A was a major shift in the paradigm 
that we adopted in this Constitution.  Essentially A refers to what we 
call human security.  Where the National Security of the country is 
pursued through human security.  The security of the citizens free from 
fear, free from want. 
It is remarkably distinct from State Security which is the 
purview or the paradigm that governed apartheid.  Where people were 
uprising in the country because of apartheid policies.  The intelligence 
20 
paradigm of that time was concerned with the security of the State. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Or a particular Government? 
MR SHAIK:  Or a particular Government. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Or particular officials within Government? 
MR SHAIK:  Exactly.  Exactly and whereas here is a fundamental 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 53 of 194 
 
constitutional shift where the Constitution puts an obligation to pursue 
National Security through human security of South African citizens. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The reference to the State as opposed to the 
reference to a particular Government of the day? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Might - might - would it be pursuing the security of 
the State as opposed to the security of a particular Government of the 
day.  To what extent would it be different from human security insofar if 
it is done properly? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  That is a very interesting distinction, sir. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  The - the understanding of human security is that we 
would address the concerns and the fears and the wants of - of your 
citizens.  Let - let me give you an example.  We have incredible public 
service delivery protests and public service delivery protest is a direct 
result of the lack of poor services. 
The solution to that is not to look at those who are agitating 
for the protest.  The solution to that is to address the issues of the 
poor public service delivery and that is a classic distinction between 
human security and what we will call State Security where you are 
20 
protecting.  Of course the police would have to protect the institutions. 
For example when our trains get burnt.  There is a fair 
amount intelligence that is required to prevent that, but ultimately the - 
the solution to that problem rests in insuring that there is efficient 
trained services and efficient and able and capable and affordable 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 54 of 194 
 
trained services. 
So if you put too much emphasis on the protection of the 
State’s assets or the Government’s assets you are forgetting the most 
fundamental thing.  What is the reason why this is happening? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I - I kind of qualify my question by saying if those 
who are supposed - who are responsible for State Security do their job 
properly.  What I had in mind is there would be no State without 
people? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the State must look after its people? 
10 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And therefore whether one cannot say even if you 
speak 
of 
State 
Security 
if 
the 
understanding 
is 
the 
correct 
understanding would it not lead to those people looking after the 
citizens properly as well? 
MR SHAIK:  Absolutely correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Absolutely correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you. 
MR SHAIK:  It goes to how you understand … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  The function of security …. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And hear what - what the founders of the Constitution felt 
that it was important to put the correct perspective. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 55 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  On how National … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Security should be viewed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and - and I guess - I guess that it may have been 
necessary to put it that way.  Even if it was an option to put it as State 
Security on the understanding that after 1994 State Security would be 
seen as including the security of the people. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It may have been necessary to put it that way in order 
10 
to emphasise what was not emphasised before. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  198B Mr Shaik deals with the issue of armed 
conflict both within the borders and internationally. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  The principle in relation to what one may term extra 
or constitutional armed force.  What does this principle say about that? 
20 
MR SHAIK:  The - and again this is influenced by historical context.  
Much of the - the paradigm to keep apartheid alive meant destabilising 
countries outside of South Africa where it was envisaged that liberation 
forces had military basis and a classical example you will know that in 
Mozambique you had tremendous amount of funding going from the 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 56 of 194 
 
then South African Defence Force to forces and I just do not want to 
name them. 
Perhaps I could.  Say went to Renamo which was a counter 
insurgency 
outfit 
in 
Mozambique 
that 
was 
engaging 
in 
the 
destabilisation of the national party.  The Frelimo Party that took party 
in 1997 in Mozambique or 1994 - 1974. 
CHAIRPERSON:  1974.  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  1974.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  So we then had a situation where South Africans were 
10 
engaged in armed conflict outside of South Africa and they were 
considered to be mercenaries and what we wanted in our Constitution 
is to avoid South Africans getting involved in international conflict 
where they are selling their services as mercenaries. 
So as a result of that a - a law was passed that prohibited 
that in the main and there were certain conditions that had - you had to 
apply before you engage in that kind of activity. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And what does the section say for president 
purposes - for present purposes in relation to the employment of armed 
conflict within South Africa. 
20 
MR SHAIK:  Armed conflict in South Africa? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  The … 
ADV PRETORIUS:  For example.  The arming of certain groups in order 
to attain certain objects within South Africa. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 57 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  It is absolutely forbidden and illegal … 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And should be prosecuted. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Then C and D in particular perhaps you could 
explain 198D in relation to the oversight responsibilities in relation to 
the operations and perhaps to expenditure in relation to security 
entities. 
MR SHAIK:  Again - again sir that the Intelligence and security in - in 
the apartheid era had certain features which was unacceptable for us 
as we entered the - as we wanted to construct a new paradigm.  For 
10 
example Intelligence or security could not be a law onto itself and the 
Nuremburg doctrine of I just followed an order or I just followed a 
command. 
We wanted to make sure that that none of that applies in our 
democracy.  So we then said that National Security must be subject to 
the authority of Parliament.  So Parliament should be fully involved in 
the affairs of Intelligence.  In the affairs of security.  So that Parliament 
is kept abreast of what is happening including the budget. 
Including money allocations.  Including operations and we 
came up with a particular formula in which for that to happen and you 
20 
will notice that we - we created under the National Strategic - the 
Intelligence Oversight Act.  We created for the first time in South Africa 
two important institutions. 
The first is the institution of a Joint Standing Committee of 
Intelligence which was then called the JC - JSCI.  It is a multiparty 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 58 of 194 
 
committee that has full access to all that Intelligence does and has full 
access to the records of the Intelligence Community, the budget 
etcetera and so through a Joint Standing Committee and Parliamentary 
Intelligence and we found creative mechanisms to get around some of 
the - the obligations of democracy and balancing transparency and 
accountability. 
I think those members are vetted - in Parliament are vetted.  
They go through a process.  They go through an induction on how to 
deal with the secret information.  So that is the - the first.  The second 
mechanism 
was 
the 
appointment 
of 
the 
Inspector-General 
of 
10 
Intelligence. 
Now we saw the Inspector-General of Intelligence as a kind 
of Intelligence Ombud that - where the public - where the public who 
feels aggrieved by any misconduct of the intelligence service would 
have an office or an instrument to be able to raise matters and we so 
felt that the founders of the Constitution felt it such an important 
institution that it put an obligation that it was put in the Constitution 
and under Section 2.10 of the Constitution it reads that: 
“2(10)(b), Civilian monitoring of the activities of 
those services by an Inspector-General appointed 
20 
by the President as Head of the National Executive 
and approve by resolution adopted by the National 
Assembly with a supporting vote of at least 
two/thirds of its members.” 
Now the two/third barrier was a very high barrier to set.  It 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 59 of 194 
 
was not by simple majority.  It is not by 60 percent.  By two/thirds, 
because again the founder of the Intelligence or the founders of the 
Constitution wanted to ensure that it is accepted by almost all of - of 
Parliament in the choice of the person in the Inspector-Generals Office. 
So those were the two institutions of oversight and the Act 
was the Intelligence Services Oversight Act that was passed. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  There may be further questions when we revert to 
the diagram … 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In relation to detail of the structure, but for the 
10 
moment would you please deal with Section 1-9-9 of the Final 
Constitution which deals with the establishment structuring and conduct 
of Security Services. 
MR SHAIK:  So under the - the establishment we defined under Section 
1-9-9-(1): 
“The Security Services of The Republic consist of a 
single Defence Force, a single Police Service and 
any Intelligence Services established in terms of 
the Constitution.” 
So no Intelligence Service could borne if unless established 
20 
by the Constitution and there is a particular power that is given to the 
President to do so and there is a condition that limits the power of the 
President in establishing of such a service.  I would do - I would come 
to that later. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 60 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I see that the Constitution is emphatic that in terms of 
the Defence Force it is a single Defence Force.  In terms of the Police 
it is a single Police Service, but it does not have that emphasis for 
Intelligence Service.  Is that - is that in accordance with what the … 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  It is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Discussions were? 
MR SHAIK:  It is in accordance with the discussions … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And it was envisaged that - that Intelligence will be a 
10 
National capability.  So there was going to be no - no province is going 
to establish an own Intelligence Service and therefore it was insisted 
that only by the Constitution and of course this is a clever way to write 
it, because if you look at the - the President’s power. 
Only the President can establish an Intelligence Service and 
only in keeping with National Legislation, but we will get - get to that 
later.  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And then from 1-9-9-(2) onwards. 
MR SHAIK:  So 1-9-9-(2) onwards.  Again it establishes: 
20 
“A Defence Force’s only lawful military force in The 
Republic.  
Other 
than 
the 
Security 
Services 
established in terms of the Constitution.  Armed 
organisational services may be established only in 
terms of National Legislation.  The security services 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 61 of 194 
 
must be structured and regulated by National 
Legislation.  The Security Services must act and 
must teach and require their members to act in 
accordance with the Constitution and Law including 
Customary 
International 
Law 
and 
International 
Agreements binding on the Republic.  No member of 
the Security Services may obey a manifestly illegal 
order.  … (Intervenes).” 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And I understand that subsections 1-9-9-(5) and 
1-9-9-(6) are informed again by our history? 
10 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  Informed by our history and we wanted - we wanted 
to remove completely the ignorance of the law.  So no Intelligence 
Service Member must be able to say I did not know the law and 
therefore the obligation was placed on the Intelligence or the Security 
Services which the Intelligence Services are part of. 
To teach and train its members not only on the Constitution, 
but also in terms of International Law and other - other law.  So it was 
a requirement to ensure that our new Intelligence Services or the new 
Security Services were going to act in - in the spirit of the Constitution 
and to uphold the Constitution in its entirety. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well was there actually a slight qualification in - in 
the reason for it.  Namely not - not that you did not want any member of 
the Security Services to say I did not know the law, because that might 
be fine when it cannot be said that you must have known this was 
illegal. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 62 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So in other words on the probabilities that what you 
wanted to do is to prevent people from carrying out manifestly illegal 
orders, because even when they saw - realised that this order is illegal.  
They could say well if I am instructed by the Commander … 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If I am instructed by somebody occupying that 
position … 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What can I do? 
10 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So they know it is illegal, but because of where the 
order comes from they might say I had no choice. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You wanted them to - you wanted to say once the 
order is manifestly illegal you cannot say because it came from 
somebody in a particular position. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You could not do it … 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  But where you in good faith did not think there was 
anything illegal with the order then you stand in a different place all 
together … 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But where it is manifestly legal.  That is what you 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 63 of 194 
 
wanted to deal with. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
MR SHAIK:  And - and you are absolutely right, sir and that is why it is 
in both cases where it is not manifestly illegal.  Then our teachings of 
our members of the law should equip them to make the right decision … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And where it is manifestly illegal they have a constitutional 
obligation not to obey that.  So we felt very strongly about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR SHAIK:  So you are absolutely correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No.  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Chair if I may just say at this stage this detail as 
you appreciate obviously is important, because it informs the 
constitutional standard against which the conduct which will be given in 
evidence or testified to in evidence over a period of time in the 
Commission must be judged.  Subsection 1-9-9-(7) is also instructive. 
MR SHAIK:  It is indeed and I … 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Can you explain that please? 
MR SHAIK:  It reads: 
20 
“Neither the Security Services nor any of their 
members may in the performance of their function 
a, prejudice a political party’s interest.  That is 
legitimate in terms of the Constitution or b, further 
in a partisan manner any interest of a political 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 64 of 194 
 
party.” 
Now again these were important principles that informed the 
negotiations and there was given our past we wanted to bring the 
Intelligence Services and the Security Services out of the realm of 
politics and the political machinations and we thought it was so 
important that it must be put in the Constitution. 
Where you can neither further an interest in - in a negative 
way nor further it even in a positive way and this placed tremendous 
obligation on all of the members of the services in the 1994 period, 
because we all came from a political history.  I for one came from the 
10 
ANC, but it means that henceforth once I joined the service my conduct 
in regard to an Intelligence Officer had to be incredibly distinct from my 
conduct as a member of the ANC and I could not in any way through my 
Intelligence Services work favour or prejudice the ANC or any other 
political party and this has given rise to a - a huge debate at least in 
my mind on the very concept of what is called political intelligence. 
When it comes to political parties and whether in - in the 
developed world it is considered illegal and unethical to monitor 
political parties and what is going on in political parties.  That is the 
subject of politics and democracy which Intelligence Services should 
20 
not get involved in.  Including - including if there are members in - of a 
political party that wishes through its own reasoning wanting to - to 
replace a sitting President of the - that party and as long as they do it 
legally and as long as they do it within the structures of democracy 
Intelligence Services have no basis to monitor even that. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 65 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I guess that the provisions of Section 1-9-9-(7)-(a) 
and (b) well they talk about a party, but you just referred to a situation 
where some people in a party might … 
ADV PRETORIUS:   
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Be wanting to unsit the President of that party and as 
you - you say as long as they do - do it legally and constitutionally you 
know Intelligence Services should have no business to be involved 
there. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  So this provides a basis does it not for any member 
of the Intelligence Services who would engage in any conduct to 
advance the interest of any particular political party that he or she 
would be acting in breach of this and possibly the relevant legislation 
as well. 
That - that should be none of their business as long as it is 
done within the principles of democracy and within the confines of the 
law. 
MR SHAIK:   That is correct sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and if it happens it’s just a breach of these 
20 
constitutional provisions and whatever may be in legislation. 
MR SHAIK:   That is correct sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This talks about a party and doesn’t talk about an 
individual, maybe when we go to the legislation there might be 
individuals as well, I’m not sure.  So if I am the head of Military 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 66 of 194 
 
Intelligence or maybe I’m not the head of Military Intelligence, if I am a 
possible candidate for head of Military Intelligence and I want to be 
appointed as head of Military Intelligence can I say to the President, I 
assume Mr President who appoints the head of Military Intelligence, is 
that so? 
MR SHAIK:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, okay maybe it’s a wrong…[intervenes]. 
MR SHAIK:   Then use the NIA example. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay maybe NIA, if I say to the President you 
know if I get appointed as head of NIA I will look after you or anything 
10 
like that or I will make sure that A, B, C, D does happen which will be 
in your favour, that’s clearly wrong. 
MR SHAIK:   Clearly wrong. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And clearly in breach of some legislation. 
MR SHAIK:   Indeed it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay. 
MR SHAIK:   And let me just touch on a very important point in respect 
of that sir.  The – different people perceive intelligence remarkably 
different.  Some people see intelligence as you know the dark arts, you 
are there to keep them in power by predicting the future etcetera and 
20 
that is a really antiquated concept of intelligence and those who 
believe in that concept of intelligence invariably get things awfully 
wrong but that is a subject matter for another time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I’m hoping that as we continue at some stage 
we will talk more about those things because you know it’s often said 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 67 of 194 
 
about our country that it’s got the right constitution, it’s got the right 
legislation, it’s got the right policies but things go horribly wrong with 
implementation and one of the things that I have publically said many 
times before that I believe should be looked at by this Commission is 
the question of whether, as a member of parliament who belongs to a 
particular political party when you are supposed to perform your duties 
there, including duties that may relate to votes of no confidence and 
impeachment and so on, can your party say to you irrespective of what 
you think is right or wrong, this is how you must vote and what do you 
do if your party says – let’s say your party says vote in this way but you 
10 
believe that, that’s not in accordance with the constitution you believe 
that holding the executive accountable means that you must vote 
differently but it is your party that has sent your name to parliament 
what do you do.  It raises the same question in a certain way that you 
have touched on to say when you are in intelligence you are not 
supposed to be advancing the interests of any political party you are 
supposed to be just doing your job.  You, in accordance with the 
constitution, and the law but there may be expectations.  Take yourself 
as – with your background in the ANC and struggle there may be 
expectations from certain people, your comrades who were in the 
20 
trenches with you who think, okay now that we have got him there so he 
will have to remember that he comes from us, he’s one of us he must 
remember even maybe that we put him there and therefore they might 
have certain expectations which might not accord with what the 
constitution says and what the law says and to what extent do these 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 68 of 194 
 
situations which give rise to these challenges, to what extent have they 
had a role to play in putting our country where it is now in relation to 
levels of corruption, in relation to allegations of State Capture and so 
on.  So it becomes important because maybe in certain circumstances 
people feel torn between acting in a certain way and acting in a certain 
way and it may be that some of those things need to be looked at.  So I 
just give you that context so that you may understand why I’m saying in 
regard to what you said, we might need later on to deal with it and let 
me have the benefit of your views on it. 
MR SHAIK:   Thank you I will sir thank you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Mr Shaik section 1998 importantly deals with 
principles of transparency and particularly for the evidence to be led in 
due course before the Commission, accountability.  What has section 
1998 provided, what was the thinking behind it? 
MR SHAIK:   The – do I need to read it into …[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Please I think it’s important. 
MR SHAIK:   So 1998, 
 
“To give effect to the principles of transparency and 
 
accountability 
multi-party 
parliamentary 
committees 
must 
20 
 
have 
oversight 
of 
all 
security 
services 
in 
a 
manner 
 
determined by National legislation of the rules and orders of 
 
parliament”. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Yes if I may just emphasise the must it’s not 
optional. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 69 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:   It’s not optional you are absolutely correct sir it is not an 
option it’s a must and again the reason being that we wanted, in our 
young democracy at the time for all parties to have a level of comfort 
that the workings of the Intelligence Services or the Security Services 
are in keeping with the values enshrined in the constitution and that we 
are consistent with the code of conduct expected of the Security 
Services given the history of our past.  So there was no attempt to hide 
the Security Services away from parliament in fact, a lot went into the 
thinking by ensuring that parliament plays a proper role of oversight 
over the Security Services and that was the thinking. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Yes and that would include oversight over 
expenditure? 
MR SHAIK:   Oversight over expenditure as well, correct.  So to the 
best of my understanding, in the case of the Police, the Military and the 
Intelligence Services these oversight committees do exist and these 
oversight committees have access to the budgets and are required to 
make an input prior to budget allocations. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Before we go to section 209 and to section 210 
which deal specifically with Intelligence, you will recall earlier this 
morning the issue of a responsible Cabinet Minister or a responsible 
20 
President arose in relation to the Defence Force Police and Intelligence 
Services and in that respect you were about to refer to section 2011 in 
relation to Defence and 2061 in relation to Policing. 
MR SHAIK:   Yes, if we look at section 2011 under the title Political 
Responsibility a member of Cabinet must be responsible for defence 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 70 of 194 
 
that is 201 and I’ll quickly read out 2061 again under police under the 
section Political Responsibility, 2016 says, 
 
“A member of the Cabinet must be responsible for policing 
 
and must determine National Policing Policy after consulting 
 
the provincial governments and take into account the Policing 
 
needs and priorities of the provinces as determined by the 
 
provincial Executives”, 
 
So in both the case of the defence and the police the 
constitution stipulates that there must a member of Cabinet responsible 
for that. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Perhaps it’s appropriate to go to 2091 to highlight 
the differences. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before that and maybe what you are referring to is 
an answer.  I haven’t looked at the constitution before the President, 
after elections, announces his or her Cabinet all the Executive power is 
– rests in him or her. 
MR SHAIK:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then when he or she has announced the Cabinet 
– members of the Cabinet then effectively he gives powers to various 
Ministers to deal with various things because there is legislation that 
20 
says what the Minister of this and that will do but what I’m not sure 
about is the reference here to a member of the Cabinet is supposed to 
exclude the President because, otherwise normally I would  imagine 
that the Cabinet – the President is part of the Cabinet but he is the one 
who puts it together but I may be mistaken in that regard maybe the 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 71 of 194 
 
Cabinet are the Ministers and he is simply referred to as President, is 
that something that you have applied your mind to?  I’m raising it 
simply because the reference to a member of the Cabinet, immediately 
suggests they are talking about a Minister but if the President is also a 
member of the Cabinet then technically it might not have the 
significance that I may have thought it has because if the President is a 
member of the Cabinet then there’s always a member of the Cabinet 
who is responsible for all of these – you might or might not be able to 
say something, I’m just asking…[intervenes]. 
MR SHAIK:   It’s a fascinating interpretation I must say but let me give 
10 
you the interpretation I understood at the time or the reasoning not the 
interpretation the reasoning.  We wanted to avoid a situation where the 
President assumes the responsibility as Minister of Police or the 
President assumes responsibility as a Minister of Defence as is in the 
case of certain countries where the President is also the Minister of 
Defence.  In the South African situation and especially through the 
negotiations 
we 
specifically 
wanted 
to 
avoid 
the 
Presidential 
assumption of the Military and Police power and therefore wrote it in 
this way, that a member of Cabinet must be responsible for Defence 
understanding that it is a member other than the President. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I guess what is possible is that in the constitution – I 
think in the constitution there is a section which says who the Cabinet 
is and I suspect it includes the President but what the difference – what 
may be important is that whenever the constitution intends to refer to 
the President maybe it uses President and therefor maybe – whenever 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 72 of 194 
 
it says member of Cabinet it refers to a Minister maybe – I don’t know 
whether also Deputy President but Deputy Ministers are not members of 
Cabinet as I understand the position.  So maybe whenever it says 
member of Cabinet it means a Minister. 
MR SHAIK:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When it intends to refer to the President maybe it 
always says President, I don’t know if Mr Pretorius has found 
something…[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Chair chapter five deals with the President and 
National Executive, Section 84 deals with certain powers and functions 
10 
of the President in his capacity as President or her capacity as 
President and Section 85 deals with the Executive Authority of the 
Republic which is also vested in the President but exercised together 
with other members of Cabinet.  Now that is at a high and general level 
and may not answer specific questions directly but those are the two 
sections. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that’s fine.  Probably the answer may well 
be that when issues intended to include the President in a particular 
function the constitution refers to the President and when it intends to 
– intends Minister it says member of Cabinet responsible for Police or 
20 
for Health and that kind of thing.  It might not be particularly significant 
but I just noted it in the context of Mr Shaik’s evidence. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Yes what is instructive to is Section 91 which deals 
with the Cabinet and affords the President the power to appoint and 
assign powers and functions to Ministers but it gives – 91(1), 2 and 3 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 73 of 194 
 
but what is instructive about  the sections to which Mr Shaik is now 
referring is that there is a specific provision in the constitution in 
relation to Police and in relation to Defence which stipulates that there 
must be a Minister and stipulates their powers at a constitutional level 
rather than at a level of the discretion of the President. 
MR SHAIK:   That’s correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay so there’s specific provision. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Yes and I think that is the point he was making. 
MR SHAIK:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes well I just see in Section 91(1) in the 
10 
constitution that actually the President is part of the Cabinet because it 
says, 
 
“The Cabinet consists of the President as head of the 
 
Cabinet, deputy President and Ministers”. 
 
So it seems that Cabinet includes the President but maybe that 
the answer lies in what I said earlier on that maybe when specific 
provisions or functions are allocated to the President, maybe it refers 
to the President but at least the one thing we know is that Cabinet does 
include the President. 
MR SHAIK:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   And importantly Mr Shaik in contrast to those two 
sections to which you’ve just referred dealing with the member of 
Cabinet being responsible for Defence and a member of Cabinet being 
responsible for Policing together with certain other obligations, do you 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 74 of 194 
 
have Section 209(1) and (2) which differ fundamentally in principle from 
those two sections in relation to the powers of the President as 
concerns Intelligence Services.  Perhaps you could just read 209 (1) 
and (2) and then explain please? 
MR SHAIK:   So under Section 209 (1), 
 
“Any Intelligence Service other than any Intelligence Division 
 
of the Defence Force or Police Service may be established 
 
only by the President as the head of the National Executive 
 
and only in terms of National Legislation.  (2) The President 
 
as the head of the National Executive must appoint a woman 
10 
 
or a man as the head of each Intelligence Service established 
 
in terms of sub-section (1) and must either assume political 
 
responsibility for the control and the direction of any of those 
 
services or designate a member of the Cabinet to assume 
 
that responsibility”, 
 
So the first part is that the President – only the President can 
establish an Intelligence Service and only in terms of National 
legislation.  National legislation should come first be debated by 
Parliament and then the President can establish it in terms of that 
National legislation.  So there’s a link, so the President’s power to 
20 
establish Intelligence Services is limited in my opinion.  Second, the 
President unlike the constitutional provisioning that says in the case of 
the Defence they must be a member of Cabinet in the case of Police 
they must be a member of Cabinet and the Intelligence, it places the 
obligation on the President to assume the responsibility of the 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 75 of 194 
 
Intelligence Services or designate a member of the Cabinet to assume 
that function.  Now…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So he has a choice or discretion in relation to 
Security Secret Services or Intelligence. 
MR SHAIK:   Yes the President…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But he has no choice on Police and Defence. 
MR SHAIK:   Absolutely correct and there’s a slight preference and the 
slight preference is, he’s got to assume the responsibility right, so the 
default is that he assumes it or he can designate it to a member of the 
Cabinet. Now I’m not going to seek an interpretation of the word of the 
10 
Cabinet but my understanding is that it is a member of the Cabinet 
already. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja so you have two diametrically opposed 
approaches, the one approach in relation to the Police and the Defence 
is that in effect the President must never take – assume responsibility 
of either of those in regard to Intelligence Services – if I say Secret 
Services is that still fine? 
MR SHAIK:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay in regard to that there is a preference as you 
put it for the President to be the one who takes that responsibility but 
20 
there’s an acknowledgement that he has a lot of responsibilities and he 
might prefer that a member of – somebody else must be responsible, 
then in that case he’s directed to designate a member of Cabinet to 
take that responsibility? 
MR SHAIK:   That’s correct sir. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 76 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you, yes Mr Pretorius? 
MR SHAIK:   And perhaps then we will then come back to the diagram 
to see why there was a Minister of Justice. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Yes we’re about to do so but perhaps for the sake 
of completeness we should just deal briefly with oversight provided for 
in Section 210, you’ve already referred to Section 210 but let’s deal 
with it nevertheless. 
MR SHAIK:   Okay so under the powers and functions and monitoring, 
 
“Section 210 National legislation must regulate the objects, 
 
powers and the functions of the Intelligence Services 
10 
 
including any Intelligence division of the Defence Force or 
 
the Police Service and must provide for a) the coordination of 
 
all Intelligence Services and b) civilian monitoring of the 
 
activities of those services by an inspector appointed by the 
 
President as the head of the National Executive and provide 
 
by resolution adopted by the National Assembly with the 
 
supporting vote of at least two thirds of it’s members”. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   And approved by resolution. 
MR SHAIK:   And approved ja correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   So whatever Presidential and Ministerial powers 
20 
exist in the constitution it is quite clear that there must be 
parliamentary oversight. 
MR SHAIK:   Absolutely. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Through specific mechanisms provided for by 
parliament. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 77 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct.    
ADV PRETORIUS:   Could we go back to the diagrams, unless there’s 
any further questions you want to raise Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   The provisions of the constitution that we have been 
looking at are those of the final constitution.  Earlier on we had some 
discussion, I was asking about the interim constitution and as I 
understood the position it was that the principles in the final 
constitution were the same as those in the interim constitution.  I’m 
wondering whether that is correct now, now that here it does 
contemplate the possibility that a member of Cabinet may be 
10 
responsible for Intelligence or whether what was meant was, under the 
interim constitution it was the same principles but the President at that 
time had elected not to designate a Minister for Intelligence despite the 
fact that constitutionally he could have done so but what may have 
happened since then is that the successive Presidents have elected to 
always designate a Minister for Intelligence that is why, therefore,  
between 1994 and 1997 the organogram didn’t reflect any Minister 
responsible for Intelligence Services but if you look at any organogram 
that might be applicable from a certain year till  now you will always 
see that there is a Minister.  So in other words, what I’m looking at is 
20 
whether the interim constitution also gave the President the same 
choice because this one does and the only reason why there was no 
Minister – there’s no Minister in that organogram for 1994 to 1997 
responsible for Intelligence is that the President at the time had 
elected not to assign a Minister for Intelligence whereas after that, 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 78 of 194 
 
various Presidents assigned a Minister.  Am I causing you any 
confusion? 
MR SHAIK:   No. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   It does – the question is obviously one that is 
reflected in the diagrams but not explained in the diagrams and I’m 
sure Mr Shaik can deal with it now. 
MR SHAIK:   To the best of my recollection the interim constitution did 
not express a view either which way on Intelligence matters I think it 
governed a whole range of other issues but nothing turns on that simply 
because President Mandela, in appointing his Cabinet in 1994 
10 
appointed the Minister of Justice to be the person responsible for 
dealing with administrative matters of things.  So he was the Minister of 
Justice and remember – and that was 1994.  The final constitution 
again to the best of my memory was adopted in 1996.  So in 1996 the 
final constitution made provisions for how this matter should be dealt 
with but that came after but in 1994 President Mandela did appoint the 
Minister of Justice the then – the late Minister Dullah Omar as the 
Minister of Intelligence and a Deputy Minister of Intelligence.  So he 
appointed a Deputy Minister but I’m sure the evidence leader is going 
to lead us to that matter of the coordinate of Intelligence. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no that’s fine, I think what was important for me 
is to just go back to the question which I had asked, whether the 
interim constitution and the final constitution was the same on this 
issue and I think you are saying to the best of your knowledge it may 
have been the same. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 79 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But we’ll need to check just so that one is sure about 
it. It may be that in the end it’s neither here nor there but I think it’s 
important to appreciate whatever differences there may have been over 
the years in relation to Intelligence particularly when there may be 
suspicions and allegations of Intelligence Services being misused and 
abused. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes indeed Chair.  The only observation for the 
present is that as I understand the interim Constitution it dealt with 
these matters in very general terms whereas the final Constitution is 
10 
far more specific in relation to powers and duties. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I just ask that you ask your members of the legal 
team who are assisting you if they can get me the relevant portion of 
the interim Constitution during the lunch break. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And we could print it and put it up too. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja we could ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Is that being done? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Thank you Chair.  Can we go back then to the first 
organogram dealing with the period 1994 to 1997 and would you just 
20 
deal please with the reporting lines to the President through the 
National Intelligence Coordinating Committee on the one hand and the 
oversight duties of Parliament, the Inspector General of Intelligence 
and the Intelligence Oversight Committee on the left hand side of that 
diagram please?  So two issues, reporting through to the President and 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 80 of 194 
 
Parliamentary Oversight. 
MR SHAIK:  So in 1994 once the – the various pieces of legislation was 
passed the President appointed a coordinate of intelligence and that 
coordinate of the intelligence was at the time sitting member of 
Parliament Joe Nhlanhla and – so he was appointed as the coordinator 
of intelligence and he was also assumed the function of the Deputy 
Minister of Intelligence.  And Coordinate Nhlanhla reported directly to 
the President as envisaged by the Legislation and coordinated the work 
of the Intelligence Services which is the section that we have been 
through in the block.   So he had direct access.  He was not a member 
10 
of the cabinet but the cabinet consisted of a Cabinet Security 
Committee in which President Mandela chaired.  No which Deputy 
President De Klerk chaired and President Mandela was in attendance 
together with Deputy President Mbeki.  And it was a function of Joe 
Nhlanhla and his team to make presentations to the cabinet on matters 
of intelligence and have direct access to the President in respect of 
other matters of intelligence.  That is the first lot. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And then oversight please? 
MR SHAIK:  The oversight is again because we were in that incredibly 
honeymoon period all the different parties worked together and the – 
20 
the Intelligence Joint Standing Committee and Intelligence Oversight 
was formed.  It was a multi-party body.  They were resourced to have 
their own offices.  Protection was put in for them to have safe 
document keeping etcetera.  But that was a multi-party committee and 
it functioned very well over the Intelligence Services and then the 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 81 of 194 
 
process began for the appointment of the Inspector General and if my 
memory serves me well I think the first Inspector General was Doctor 
Randera.  He was appointed as the Inspector General. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was Doctor? 
MR SHAIK:  Randera, Fazel Randera. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR SHAIK:  If my memory serves me well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes there was also the then Advocate Skweyiya I 
wanted… 
MR SHAIK:  Yes Advocate Skweyiya. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  I think was the first. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Right Advocate Skweyiya was the first and then Doctor 
Randera.  The office of the Inspector General had considerable power 
so to speak, the power of subpoena, the power of getting whatever 
document from the Intelligence Services and the Intelligence Services 
at that time was imbued with the spirit of democratic accountability.  So 
there was a much more forthcoming engagement with the office of the 
Inspector General then I would say it is now but that will be my 
20 
comment. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Then if we can go RS40 or not RS40 but page 40 of 
Exhibit PP4.  We have an Intelligence organogram for the period 1997 
to 2009.  What changed and how was that change brought about? 
MR SHAIK:  So – so you will recall that I said that the – a sitting 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 82 of 194 
 
member of Parliament late Joe Mhlanhla was appointed as the 
coordinator.  This gave incredible anxiety to the then democratic party 
who then also in the spirit of reconciliation and cooperative governance 
raised the issue with President Mandela’s office that you could not 
have a sitting member of Parliament being considered as the 
coordinator of Intelligence which was envisaged to be a – a non-
political party position in keeping with the – the sections that we read 
earlier. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In addition Parliament had oversight functions. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  And in addition Parliament had an oversight function.  
10 
Right.  So he had – so there was this conflict that was there.  It was 
then decided that the law be amended.  So the law was amended 
having just passed it in 1994 it was then amended and what then 
emerged was the – the diagram that you see before you here.  With the 
powers of the coordinator in the main were then housed under the 
Ministers of Intelligence Services and a Minister of Intelligence 
Services was established.  The National Intelligence Committee 
became now under the supervision of the Minister.  And this is the 
beginning of the Ministry of Intelligence and the development of a 
Minister of Intelligence as opposed to the reporting lines directly to the 
20 
President. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  The oversight functions of Parliament remained? 
MR SHAIK:  The oversight functions of Parliament remained except if 
my – again my memory serve me correct that the Minister or the – the 
Inspector General’s office became dependent on – or reported directly 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 83 of 194 
 
now to the Minister and increasingly became dependent on the Minister 
Budget wise, staffing wise etcetera.  So that was the other significant 
change. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry the Intelligence Oversight Committee 
mentioned there. 
MR SHAIK:  Remained the same. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was that the Parliamentary? 
MR SHAIK:  That is the Parliamentary. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because I have just written here Parliamentary to 
make sure it is clear that it is Parliament – a committee of Parliament. 
MR SHAIK:  It is a committee of Parliament Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then the National Intelligence Coordinating 
Committee was not a Parliamentary Committee? 
MR SHAIK:  It was not a … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So… 
MR SHAIK:  Bureaucratic. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I think that is why because they are on – more on 
the same level what I see here but there is – there are certainly 
different colours. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And Intelligence Oversight Committee reports to 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 84 of 194 
 
Parliament and the Inspector General reports to Parliament.  So – but I 
have just put in Parliamentary Intelligence Oversight Committee for my 
own purposes just to understand that – that is a committee of 
Parliament.  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes thank you Chair.  Perhaps blue is the wrong 
colour for Parliament.  At the – at the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I will say nothing. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  At the bottom of the page you have in red just to be 
fair Chair a number of other bodies.  It seems that there were some 
organisational change at the time. 
10 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct.  You would… 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Could you just please briefly describe the various 
entities that had developed administratively or organisationally at that 
time? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe before you do that Mr Shaik.  Under this 
organogram or maybe as would be the case subsequently.  Effectively 
the various units under Secret Services that we looked at when we 
were looking at the first organogram those – all of those units 
effectively now are represented under those red boxes at the bottom of 
this one – all reporting to the Minister? 
20 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. Okay. 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct.  So what happened was the process 
establish 
the 
National 
Intelligence 
Agency 
as 
a 
standalone 
organisation.  The Secret Services as a standalone organisation and 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 85 of 194 
 
then certain functions that were previously in the NIA were not created 
as standalone entities.  And those entities are indeed the National 
Academy of Training.  So it was called – A Training Academy that 
trained both members of the – the National Intelligence Agency and 
members of the South African Secret Service and offered training to 
other departments if so requested.  The National Communications 
Centre is the – is the centre that has the technological capacity to 
engage in technological intelligence interception and that is called the 
NCC.  The electronic communication of CONCEC was a – an entity 
created to deal with internal communications of government so that 
10 
government could communicate to each other in a more secure – 
secure way than it currently or it was doing at the time.  And lastly the 
office of the Interception Centre was a – again a authority created 
whereby the Police and the Military and the Civilian Intelligence could 
address its request for particular interception.  And again it had to 
follow a particular protocol.  The office of the interception would have 
to get judicial approval for this.  The judge will stipulate the period for 
how long and under what conditions etcetera and it was the office, the 
IOC obligation to ensure that the regulations or the stipulations were 
indeed adhered to. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And then on page 41 of Exhibit PP4 you have yet 
another series of structures and reporting lines.  Again please if you 
would explain to the Chair what changed and how was that change 
brought about?  And you mention particularly your thoughts about a 
proclamation being used. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 86 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  So under the – the Intelligence Organogram entitled 
2010 to 2019 there was now a – a reversal so to speak.  Right and the 
reversal was the proclamation created a new entity called the SSA the 
South African – the  
ADV PRETORIUS:  State Security. 
CHAIRPERSON:  State Security. 
MR SHAIK:  I cannot even get the name.  State Security Agency and 
the NIA was converted into the domestic branch of the SSA and the 
South African Secret Service was converted into the foreign branch of 
the SSA.  And all of this was done by proclamation. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Under the auspices of a Director General? 
MR SHAIK:  And all of this would have been under the auspices of the 
Director General.  I was made or Mr Gibson Nganga was made the 
Head of the domestic branch.  I was made the head of the foreign 
branch and because it was an interim period we assumed our functions 
as Director Generals of those previous services.  And it was considered 
this is be an interim period as the new paradigm was evolving.  I say 
that it was made by proclamation and it did create some anxiety for us 
and in particular for me because I was not too sure whether a 
proclamation is in keeping with the words that the President for any 
20 
intelligence service other than the intelligence division of the Defence 
or Police Service may be established only by the President.  Yes the 
President did establish by proclamation as the Head of the National 
Executive.  Yes he did so in his capacity as Head of the National 
Executive and only in terms of National Legislation.  I was not – I was 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 87 of 194 
 
not of the view that proclamation represents National Legislation.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Can we go back to the Provision of the Constitution 
that makes the point that only in terms of National Legislation – what 
was that section? 
MR SHAIK:  It is Section 209[1]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  209[1].  Well I think the ordinary understanding is 
that National Legislation means legislation passed by Parliament. 
MR SHAIK:  Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And if that understanding is correct then the 
establishment of any such service in – by way of anything other than 
10 
National Legislation passed by Parliament then – unless there is 
something that you and I do not know then it would appear that it might 
not have been in line with this.  Okay, alright. 
MR SHAIK:  Ja and that precisely was our concern. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And I must say it is a concern of Ambassador Maqetuka. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Concern of Director General Gibson and myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Because we had the experience and the knowledge of the 
20 
way – what was intended? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  By the Constitution.  What was intended in the Legislation 
and when we saw it in proclamation we were a little confused on is this 
usurping the – the authority of Parliament because if you remember 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 88 of 194 
 
earlier on we – it says that National Security must be subject to the 
authority of the executive and Parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And this was a structure of a National Security being born. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Through proclamation where Parliament has – had not yet 
the benefit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Of debating the proclamation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
MR SHAIK:  Or the National Legislation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Hm.  Hm.  And of course the – there would have 
been a particular rationale behind that kind of provision to say, only by 
way of National Legislation.  There is an emphasis you cannot do it in 
any other way.  It must only be the President and it can only be – even 
if it is him but it can only be in terms of National Legislation. 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that is… 
MR SHAIK:  And the intent was very clear. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It – it – in other words maybe the rationale might 
20 
have been and you can talk more about at some stage if it is necessary 
but the idea must have been that if it is legislation if it is established in 
terms of National Legislation that has been passed by Parliament then 
it will be acceptable to Parliament which is the representatives of the 
people of South Africa.  It would be acceptable to them but also then 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 89 of 194 
 
the issue of oversight I guess comes in?  Okay.  Thank you. 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And as you have pointed out Chair fundamental to 
this issue which we will research just to see that we have not missed 
something along the way is the Constitutional role of Parliament and its 
fulfilment of that role.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And perhaps even the usurping of that role but that 
is subject to our researches. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Mr Shaik if you look at this diagram dealing with the 
period 2010 to 2019 it does not reflect the Military situation but I 
presume that is the same?  It goes through the Minister of Defence? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.   
ADV PRETORIUS:  With the Intelligence function? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  What is important to perhaps to emphasise is the 
ongoing accountability of Crime Intelligence under the auspices of the 
South African Police Services still subject to the oversight of the 
Inspector General of Intelligence and indeed Parliament? 
20 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And then if one goes to the National Intelligence 
Coordinating Committee and the Intelligence Coordinator that remains 
the same but now reporting. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 90 of 194 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:  To the Minister of State Security as he is now 
named or she is now named? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  But what you have emphasised is that a single 
organisational entity the State Security Agency was formed with its two 
branches domestic and foreign? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct.  If I may just add one more point that – 
that in the manner in which all this has been arrived at the principle 
and which I am very passionate about – the principle of coordination in 
my view has been undermined.  So now we have gone back to a 
10 
situation where each intelligence agency – I mean each intelligence 
services whether it is the security, the Civilian Intelligence Service or 
the Police or the Military because they have been – there have been 
bad coverage about all of them you can see that you are starting to see 
the breakdown of the coordination which is what the Constitution 
intended.  So in a period of – from the time these changes were made 
you effectively have no coordination. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that cannot really be good because there should 
be a sharing of information and…nd that cannot really be good because 
there should be a sharing of information and… 
20 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And so on.   
MR SHAIK:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And it does not allow any particular intelligence 
agency or part of an intelligence agency to go off on a frolic of its own 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 91 of 194 
 
as it were. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct in the absence of coordination you would have 
frolics of your own.  You would have in the intelligence world everyone 
recruiting the same source and in my opinion has given rise to the 
entrenchment of a phenomenon not unique to South Africa.  The 
phenomenon 
of 
disinformation, 
information 
pedlars 
and 
bogus 
informants which is a phenomenon that features regularly in South 
Africa’s lexicon and language. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  So you will touch on that later in your evidence. 
MR SHAIK:  Later on.  Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:  But the two important principles as I understand 
you have emphasised are 1 coordination and 2 oversight and control. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Chair it is one o’clock is it convenient to take the 
long adjournment? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes let us take the lunch adjournment.  We will 
resume at two o’clock. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
20 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Let us proceed. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Thank you Chair.  Over the long adjournment we 
had occasion to obtain relevant portions of the Interim Constitution and 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 92 of 194 
 
although it needs to be checked I am able to say at the moment that it 
deals very sparsely and in very general terms with Internal Security 
which is a function in the Interim Constitution under the South African 
Police Service and then in the constitutional principles deals with 
Security Forces being: 
“Required to perform their functions and powers in 
the national interest and shall be prohibited from 
furthering or prejudice - prejudicing party political 
interest.” 
But subject to a check that those seem to be the only two or 
10 
three sections of the Constitution and constitutional principles that 
might be relevant.  So the - the simple answer is that there is no detail 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Certainly of the nature in the Final Constitution. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  If - if you … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Would like a copy now … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me have a copy. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Of the relevant sections.  We have not copied all of 
it … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  But we will do so after checking. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So we could replace this maybe tomorrow 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 93 of 194 
 
morning with one that … 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes.  It will be replaced tomorrow morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Properly paginated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Mr Shaik at paragraph 10 of your statement on page 
3 of the bundle - PP1.  You refer as you referred earlier to your 
appointment and the appointment of your two colleagues? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And you say in paragraph 11: 
10 
“Collectively we were acquired to form the new 
organisation the State Security Agency.” 
And you have alluded to that in your explanations of the 
changes in the structures earlier today? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  You refer in paragraph 11 to different organisational 
structures.  What are those?  That is before the change. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  These were the - the structures before the change.  
They were the structures that resulted first on the founding Legislation 
in 1994 and the Amended Legislation in 1997 and they are the National 
20 
Intelligence Agency, the South African Secret Service, the South 
African National Academy of Intelligence. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  It was for training? 
MR SHAIK:  The training.  The National Communication Centre which is 
the infrastructure for the interceptions.  The Office of the Interception 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 94 of 194 
 
Centres which is the facilitating office of the Regulatory Office and the 
Electronic Communications System.  Otherwise known as COMSEC.  As 
the Communication System to be put in place between an amongst 
Government departments. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes.  Then Mr Shaik you refer to briefly and in 
passing this morning to a significant principle in the changes.  It seems 
that prior to 2009 to 2011 the various Intelligence structures were 
separated organisationally? 
MR SHAIK:  That is - that is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And after the changes in 2009 to 2011 as in the 
10 
past they had become consolidated once more.  Is that correct? 
MR SHAIK:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Is there anything significant in that? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes indeed.  The - the white paper that informed the laws 
that were passed in 1994 had a very rational basis to why we wanted to 
have the dispensation that we negotiated for about four years and one 
of the central principles was to ensure that we do not have excessive 
concentration of power in one organisation which is what in fact 
occurred under the previous dispensation - the apartheid dispensation.  
Where you had for example the National Intelligence Service that 
20 
housed both the domestic operation and its foreign operation.  So one 
of the principles of the new dispensation was to separate these powers 
and … (intervenes). 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And coordinate.  Separate but coordinate? 
MR SHAIK:  Separate and coordinate. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 95 of 194 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  So that is why coordination became a - a principle and the 
separation of powers became a principle. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes.  I am sorry for interrupting.  Yes you were 
saying. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  So that was the - the rationale that informed the 
democratic dispensation of Intelligence and it would appear to me that 
by the proclamation we were now going back to a pre-democratic era 
where we were consolidating everything into one organisation again.  
With the unintended or intended consequence of excessive power in 
10 
one organisation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Had you been part of the discussions that led to the 
proclamation or did that - did those discussions happen while you were 
out of Government service and you came in when those had either 
advanced too far or had been completed? 
MR SHAIK:  I was not party to those discussions.  They happened prior 
to our coming … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And subsequent when we tried to have those discussions 
that was not forthcoming either. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  You were tasked however with the implementation 
of the outcome of those discussions as I understand it. 
MR SHAIK: 
 
That 
is 
correct. 
 
Under 
the 
leadership 
of 
the 
Director-General Ambassador Maqetuka. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 96 of 194 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Ja and then in paragraph 12 you express as you 
have expressed earlier your doubts about the constitutionality of this 
new arrangement that you were mandated to give effect to. 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  What were those doubts? 
MR SHAIK:  Well my - my first doubt with - was that it was not - the 
President could establish an Intelligence Service, but had to do so in 
keeping with National Legislation.  It seemed to me that we were 
establishing an Intelligence Service by proclamation rather with in 
keeping with National Legislation. 
10 
So Parliament was as we mentioned before did not have the 
benefit of discussing that National Legislation.  So that is the first 
objection I had.  The second was in the name and I know nothing much 
turns on the name, but State Security Agency seemed to me at least 
from a semantic point of view having moved away from human security 
which was the principle outlined in the - the Constitution, but and this 
is why when choosing the names originally in 1994 there was no 
reference to State Security in 1994. 
It was the National Intelligence Agency and the South African 
Secret Service and it was avoiding in the sense the use for the words 
20 
“State Security”. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you - you indicate that the name might not be 
important, but we - we do know that in certain circumstances the label 
might not be important, but in others it can be important.  The name 
can be important, because it is part of what is conveyed to people who 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 97 of 194 
 
have conduct or get to know about that institution or that office and if 
the name or the label does not represent what is intended. 
It could give a wrong perception about what the - the 
institution or the office is about.  So - so maybe you should not be too 
apologetic about pointing the significance as far as you are concerned 
of the difference between what was intended in 1994 and what is 
represented - what is represented by the proclamation in the change of 
the name of this institution. 
MR SHAIK:  Thank you, sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes and you have referred to the structural 
implications of the changes as well? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  You deal in paragraph 13 with the reporting lines 
that you were obliged to follow on your appointed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Pretorius.  You know Mr Shaik what you 
are saying about the change could well be very important.  Maybe when 
one or if one gets to understand from those who - who were involved in 
the discussions and who - who can articulate the rationale.  Maybe it is 
not so important. 
20 
I am not sure, but you - I see that in your statement 
paragraph 12 you say that you were never able to determine the motive 
or rationale for - I think - the change. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know and yet I would have expected that because 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 98 of 194 
 
of the seniority of the position you held yourself and particularly 
because of your prior involvement in the discussions leading to 1994 in 
regard to Intelligence.  I would have expected that you would know 
because if you ask you would be told what was the rationale, but am I 
to read that whatever attempts you may have made to try and find out 
why is that - is there a departure from what we envisage that you - you 
were not giving any clear answer. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Am I to understand that that is the position? 
MR SHAIK:  That is - that is correct, sir. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  The - and remember that the State Security Agency was 
under the leadership of the Director-General Ambassador Maqetuka and 
I know that he is to give evidence and under his leadership we have 
tried on numerous occasions … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  To get an understanding of the rationale. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   
MR SHAIK:  So that we could believe … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  In … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  What it is that we were … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 99 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  Were having to do … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And you were right … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  In the sense that yes all three of us had the knowledge of 
the negotiation process, the passage through the 1994 Parliament.  So 
there was in a sense a disquiet amongst us about knowing the rationale 
for why we had separated things and not knowing the rationale now for 
why we are amalgamating things all together, but then we - we never 
survived that long to get to that point. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it is just important for a number of reasons, but 
part of what some of us - some of us - the people wonder about.  Is 
sometimes where it is the same Government - it might have a different 
President at a particular time, but it is the Government of the same 
ruling party and one Minister goes another one comes in and there are 
so many changes. 
That it is as if it is a Minister from a new - a different party 
who has come in and sometimes not easy to understand.  Why?  You 
know, because you would have thought that the policies and certain 
things and principles that are being followed are the same, but 
20 
sometimes that happens. 
I mean you may or may not know I - I am hearing evidence in 
regard to the digital migration as well and I was part of the panel in the 
Constitutional Court which had that case and over a number of years 
stretching over 10 years you could see there was no real progress 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 100 of 194 
 
being made on these desk - these … 
MR SHAIK:  Set top. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Set top boxes.  Set top boxes and a new Minister 
would come and he would say this is the way we are going and then 
later on another one would come and say this is the way we are going 
and at the same time you would be having reports in the media that the 
policy position of the ruling party is different from what the Minister is - 
is doing.  So - so that is why I am … 
MR SHAIK:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Saying one would have expected that somebody as 
10 
senior as yourself … 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would have been given information as to what is the 
rationale for a change from what had been what - what all of you had 
been comfortable with from 1994. 
MR SHAIK:  Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
MR SHAIK:  Sir, I - I think it speaks to the very concept of coherence in 
- in Government and - and perhaps that we have not all fully 
understood the importance of coherence and continuity and etcetera 
20 
and I have discovered this problem throughout the continent and 
elsewhere. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Where this constant changing and the bureaucratic 
dysfunctionality it produces. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 101 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Mr Shaik throughout the sittings of the Commission 
the Chair has expressed an interest in the views and opinions of 
various people who have had the knowledge and experience that you 
have … 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  That you have and you have had.  He is obviously 
not bound by that, but what you have pointed out here is the factual 
basis for misgivings you had at the time? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And these misgivings led you to I presume ask 
questions in your own mind and of others.  With hindsight are you able 
to say what was happening here or even to give a view?  DCJ is not 
going to be bound by it, but I think he may want to know. 
MR SHAIK:  In - in my … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I - I just like hearing different perspectives, because 
whether I agree with them or not they may be beneficial in knowing 
about them. 
MR SHAIK:  In - in my generous interpretation of the hindsight.  I would 
say that there was a lack of experience in understanding the 
20 
complexities of Intelligence and why we designed what was designed at 
the time and with the dropping of my sugar levels I will say that it could 
be in my view a very narcissistic approach of the consolidation of 
power, because power is an attractive thing, but without assuming the 
obligations that come with the consolidation of that power. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 102 of 194 
 
So it could be either of the two and in particular I would say 
that in - in the conduct of very senior officials and I must - and I must 
say that if you take Ambassador Maqetuka as a much senior person 
than I am and so is Mr Njenje who have perhaps a longer history in the 
Intelligence Services. 
We were not accorded the kind of respect that should 
normally accrue to persons with that experience and to allow that 
experience to shape the policies that was unfolding and that was rather 
unfortunate and it led to a situation which just became untenable.  So 
in my view it was a combination of inexperience in the Intelligence 
10 
affairs and driven by a narcissistic consolidation of power. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you know one - one might not be able to be 
categorical, but if you are asking me about something and I am 
confident that it - it is the right thing to do and I do not have a reason 
to mistrust you.  It is something that I can - I should - I can tell you and 
I believe it is a sound basis for my decisions. 
I would think that the normal thing is if you are ask, tell you.  
This is why we have changed.  This is our experience.  You might agree 
or you might not agree, but I - I will not hide from you … 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  What the reasoning behind it is, but of course if I 
know that the reason - the real reason behind it is not a legitimate one.  
I might not want to be transparent to you about it.  Ja.  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  You mention power.  Let me explore your less 
generous version.  Power in relation to Intelligence Services.  Where 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 103 of 194 
 
does that lead or where can it lead? 
MR SHAIK:  Well … 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In relation to how Intelligence Services are used 
and to what end. 
MR SHAIK:  Sure.  The - it - it will go to a definition of intelligence.  
That I would say that I accept and is generally accepted.  Intelligence 
is a profession of actionable wisdom.  Where wisdom is derived from 
the transformation of data to information.  Information into knowledge.  
Knowledge into insight. 
Insight into wisdom which is designed either to predict events 
10 
or influence events and in both cases either in the prediction or 
influencing of events intelligence represents an enormous amount of 
power under that concept.  A - a knowing what is to happen and 
knowing things that are unfolding allows one to be able to - to 
inference the - the direction of what is unfolding. 
Let me give you a very simple example.  So if I know that you 
are going to be appointed the next Minister of - of Finance.  Sitting 
here and I know this appointment will take place in a few days’ time.  I 
would also assess how the market will interpret your appointment and I 
will be able to make a prediction. 
20 
A hedging of - of the currency against your appointment.  I 
could hedge the currency so that when that appointment does happen I 
would be able to get a windfall on it and of course I am assuming that 
you are a man and you are indeed a man of great respect in - in 
international communities. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 104 of 194 
 
Therefore I would be able to hedge the - the currency.  So 
you could see how knowing events beforehand is - is such a - an 
important thing and that power. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course another example where it might be if you 
know that I am going to be appointed Minister of Finance.  You know it 
in advance.  Even if you do not know it as certain.  Maybe you know it 
as a probability and you do not want that to happen.  You can use 
whatever information you have maybe to discredit me before the 
decision is made. 
MR SHAIK:  Indeed.  That is the dark … (intervenes). 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that right as well? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is what can happen? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And you have referred to the use of disinformation? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  You say in paragraph 13 that you reported to 
Minister Cwele together with your two colleagues who were appointed 
at the same time? 
20 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  How did you regard this duty to report to the 
Minister? 
MR SHAIK:  I for - I for one - this felt somewhat uncomfortable for me 
and I know this is a very career limiting thin, but reaching the age that I 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 105 of 194 
 
have I could say it.  That I never truly believed in the - the role of a 
Minister in Intelligence.  I always felt it to be an oddity and I can 
explain why I believe it is an oddity and I do not believe that the 
Constitution - the Constitution preferred that this be a Presidential 
responsibility rather than a Ministerial responsibility. 
However having now to report to a Minister in my own mind I 
knew it will - it will provide the basis of conflict.  Does a Minister direct 
Intelligence Operations?  My understanding is the Minister should not 
direct Intelligence Operations and a range of these issues made me 
feel uncomfortable about having to report to a Minister and the 
10 
preference is that it - you would go the President and it is - it is an 
expression or let me just say a derivative of maturity. 
That if everyone understands that there are matters in which 
a - a Head of the Intelligence Service or in this case the Head of the - 
the State Security Agency should have unfettered access to the 
President to go and discuss with the President matters of National 
importance. 
An example of which could be if there was Intelligence picked 
up about the very Minister of Intelligence.  What would the Director-
General do?  Will the Director-General take that Intelligence to the 
20 
subject of the Intelligence or should the - the Director-General be able 
to take this matter directly to the President and then the Minister 
should have the majority or the comfort to accept that in the event that 
such matters are taken directly to the President without his or her 
knowledge. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 106 of 194 
 
That that is an acceptable practice of Intelligence.  Whereas 
if you only had one single route through a Minister you have a - you 
would be presented at some point in time with some difficulties.  
Secondly, and this is again my issues and I know my colleagues may 
share it to various degrees. 
When you appoint a Minister of Intelligence in a Cabinet you 
are in effectively making him first amongst peers or her first among 
peers, because that Minister by the very portfolio that he or she 
occupies will come to know information about other Ministers for which 
he or she would have information about and it just seems that it - it is - 
10 
it is an unpreferred situation and it should go directly to the President, 
but like I am saying the Constitution make provision for the delegation. 
The law makes - established a Minister.  I just felt it was - 
and this is a globally contested debated issue.  I always favoured the 
notion that the Intelligence should report directly to the President and 
not via a Minister and if you do have a Minister stipulate quite clearly 
what the Minister is entitled to do not entitled to do. 
What should the Director-General do and what the Director-
General should not do.  So that there is no conflict in - in situations 
when it does arise. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Two things.  One, of course even when you report 
directly to the President and there is no intervening Minister there may 
be occasions when the Intelligence you pick points to the President 
himself. 
MR SHAIK:  Sure. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 107 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  In certain circumstances. 
MR SHAIK:  Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe - you might know better.  Maybe it is not 
something usual with Presidents around the world.  Maybe it is 
something that does happen, but - but of course the point you are 
making is you want to reduce to the absolute minimum … 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Situations of conflict. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you want to go to the ultimate office, but you also 
10 
made the point that the Minister does not direct the operations of 
Intelligence.  Now when you say that how differently - how different is 
that from other portfolios with regard to the Minister and their DGs.  
Normally one understands that Ministers will not get involved in 
operational matters. 
The - they will be dealing with policies and then the DG will 
be dealing with operational matters, but I guess there may be many 
cases where maybe the distinction is difficult to identify, but I just want 
to understand whether when you say that.  Namely the Minister of 
Intelligence would not or should not be dealing with direct - should not 
20 
be directing the operations. 
Whether you are simply reflecting what is something that this 
- that applies to other departments as well or you are articulating 
something that is peculiar to Intelligence? 
MR SHAIK:  I am - I am saying it is peculiar to Intelligence and there 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 108 of 194 
 
are various reasons for that.  In some countries the infiltration of some 
countries by your Intelligence Services is an event that could lead to 
those people coming under serious harm.  In the event that they are 
detected etcetera. 
 
So one has to apply incredible caution and the Director 
General and the law stipulates that the Director General is obliged to 
keep methods, sources, intelligence in such a way as to protect his or 
her members and the law makes no distinction from who it must be 
protected from but in my view it includes protecting it from the Minister, 
so that the Minister should not know that so and so may possibly be 
10 
working for the service or this is how the service is going to do certain 
things in order to protect the Minister, but also to protect the people 
involved in such operations, and because of the particular nature of 
intelligence due consideration must be given to what information is 
shared outside of the service and to who, and this is why the 
relationship of trust between the Head of the Service and the President 
is sacrosanct in Intelligence and the moment you feel that the Head of 
the Service feels that he lost, or she has lost the trust of the President 
the decent thing to do is to tender our resignation and to leave because 
outside of that trust no relationship in intelligence can work. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is your evidence therefore to the effect that even in a 
case where there is no intervening Minister, there is no Minister of 
Intelligence and the Head of Intelligence reports directly to the 
President is your evidence to the effect that in that situation the 
directing of the operations resides with the Head of the Intelligence and 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 109 of 194 
 
not the President? 
MR SHAIK:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, so that is how it should be and that is how at 
least maybe it was at a certain stage in South Africa. 
MR SHAIK:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay, alright. 
MR SHAIK:   And that is the way it should be, and that is why you have 
got to see the three pieces of legislation together.  The Director 
General is responsible for the operation of the Intelligence Services, 
you have an Inspector General in cases of abuses, you have the 
10 
Parliamentary oversight committee in the cases to oversee budget 
etcetera, so a very elaborate system of checks and balances were put 
into place to ensure that there is no abuse, but it was premised on the 
understanding that the Intelligence Services and in particular the 
Director General will be professional, will conduct themselves – we 
have stipulated all of that in the Constitution that it will do things by 
the law etcetera, and it required for this entire architecture to work 
together and I must say for the first three or four years in my view and 
then I left it was working together and there was much maturation 
taking place. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are now talking about ...[intervenes]  
MR SHAIK:   The 1994 ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  The Nineties, okay, okay, ja, thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Thank you, and of course in relation to the 
separate functions of the Executive and the Minister and the 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 110 of 194 
 
operational functions of the Intelligence Services you later illustrate an 
example of a clash? 
MR SHAIK:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   The relationship between yourself at least and 
Minister Cwele was strained, we know that.   What was the first 
indication of such strain.  Chair we are at paragraph 14. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe before – I am sorry again Mr Pretorius, maybe 
before that let me ask this question.  You have told me how you – in 
your view this situation should be in terms of reporting and what – how 
it was originally after 94, and you did say the Minister of Justice was 
10 
given the possibility of administrative matters in relation to Intelligence 
and not directing operations.  Once there was a Minister of 
Intelligence, as you understood the structure that is now even before 
we talk about what happened in reality, was your understanding with 
the Minister being – with that being a Minister of Intelligence he or she 
might involved in directing operations by virtue as being there as 
opposed to the President or it wouldn’t necessarily mean that he or she 
would be involved with directing operations that could still be left to the 
director, to the head, but it would just depend maybe on the person, on 
the incumbent? 
20 
MR SHAIK:   Yes in this particular case I – it is my evidence that the 
Minister attempted to direct an operation, which I found to be unlawful 
and we will come to that and I would give you examples and you can 
look again at various examples, but let me just give you one, and it is 
really unfortunate that the example I was going to use that has been 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 111 of 194 
 
raised by the previous, by the former President Zuma.    
 
Former President Zuma made reference to spies in his 
evidence before the Commission.   Now spies is the work of the 
Intelligence Service.   You can imagine a situation where a Director 
General who is in charge of the Intelligence Service and Counter 
Intelligence and is now instructed by a Minister to please provide him 
or her the name of spies in the country and this is now given to a 
Minister.  That Minister because of changes in politics leaves a – the 
government service, does that Minister forget about who the spies were 
or not, or do they retain it in their head and what risk does that present 
10 
to those spies in the country. 
 
So that is one example where it is very dangerous for a 
Minister to demand operational knowledge about matters, but the 
President, when a President is no longer the President there are 
certain protocols that go into effect to still keep that President as if he 
were in a previous, as if he still was a President.   This is why the 
Presidential protocols are so intense, so ex President Mbeki, ex 
President Motlanthe, all still have to a certain degree protection and 
the use of State in order to keep them, and one of the reasons is, is 
that they would have in their capacity as Presidents come across very 
20 
sensitive information of the State.   
 
A Minister is not accorded that protection, a Minister is not 
accorded that protocol and God forbid I am not suggesting that ex 
Ministers of Intelligence are given this kind of protocol, I am just saying 
don’t appoint them in the first place Chair. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 112 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But are you therefore saying that you could have a 
Minister of Intelligence without necessarily implying that he or she 
would direct operations? 
MR SHAIK:   Correct, you could. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, so in principle you could have the Minister 
...[intervenes]  
MR SHAIK:   In principal you could yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But when it comes to operational matters he or she 
could not be involved there. 
MR SHAIK:   That is correct, and that is why I would argue sir that it is 
10 
a member of cabinet, not a member to cabinet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR SHAIK:   If you get that subtle distinction. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   You were going to tell the Chair of the first incident 
which the relationship between yourself and others and the Minister, 
paragraph 14. 
MR SHAIK:   In paragraph 14 ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Pretorius we are taking long on this but I think it is 
very important for the understanding, you know I certainly appreciate 
20 
all the explanations that I am getting in terms of intelligence. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Yes, if I may just say Chair there is a substantial 
amount of evidence to be given and this background is very important 
in order to evaluate that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes that evidence ja. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 113 of 194 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:   I mean it is essential. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SHAIK:   Chair you would recall that in 2009 the – during 2009 
there was the Minister Cwele’s wife was subject to a drug trafficking 
offence and this matter related to the kind of protection or the kind of 
services that the SSA and particularly the domestic branch of the SSA 
was giving to Ms Cwele.  We discussed this matter and in particular it 
was a level of discomfort for Director Njenje and he raised this matter 
with the DG Maqetuka and myself and we had a forum of meetings 
where we all three would decide on a particular way and a dissention 
10 
would mean we keep debating until we have consensus. 
 
We discussed this matter, we debated it through all ends and 
concluded that we, the SSA, again under the leadership of Ambassador 
Maqetuka will inform the Minister that we will no longer be providing 
these protection services to Ms Cwele, the Minister’s wife.   Of course 
this did create ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Just articulate what the form of the form of the 
protection was, maybe I missed that, just – I know I think it’s in your 
statement. 
MR SHAIK:   I am also mindful sir of not giving the evidence of my 
20 
colleagues, who are here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh please, please, remember I am not – so where we 
ask you questions that might compromise those things please just 
remind me. 
MR SHAIK:   Okay. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 114 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are not too used to those things but too used to 
transparency so if ever I ask you anything question and you feel that it 
might require you to give information that you shouldn’t give because of 
the – because it belongs to Intelligence please feel free to let me know, 
so if you – if it is not something you can indicate, I was just thinking 
maybe police officers who – and so on, but I leave it to you to 
...[intervenes]  
MR SHAIK:   No we are not far off, my understanding is that the 
domestic branch of the State Security Agency provided a kind of 
logistical support in terms of transporting Ms Cwele from the home to 
10 
the court, from the court back home, and all of these things incur 
expense and that expense has to accrue to a particular operation and 
Director Njenje had to sign off on it.   I think it is his 
uncomfortableness about continually signing off these matters made 
him to initiate the discussion amongst the three of us with all three of 
us agreeing to – that this service should be terminated. 
 
Of course the second and related issue is that we were 
management, the senior management of Intelligence Service providing 
services to a person who was convicted for drug trafficking offences 
and this is not ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So this is now post the conviction? 
MR SHAIK:   This is – no during the trial. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh during the trial. 
MR SHAIK:   During the trial. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 115 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:   And with the presumption of innocence it was creating a 
sense of awkwardness to us in the sense of our own morality so to 
speak, so this discussion had to happen with the Minister and Director 
General Maqetuka led that discussion, supported by Director Njenje. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, you may continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Mr Shaik in paragraph 15 you deal with certain 
changes made to the cabinet by former President Zuma around – in and 
around October 2010. 
MR SHAIK:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry again Mr Pretorius.  What you have not 
10 
said, and I don’t know whether that’s because of anything connected 
with Intelligence, what you haven’t said is what was the response of Mr 
Cwele to the news that you had decided to terminate this support.  Is 
that something you can say? 
MR SHAIK:   That conversation, I do not have that direct information. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay one of the other witnesses might have. 
MR SHAIK:   I am sure that it is coming via Maqetuka and Gibson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   You refer in paragraph 15 of your statement Mr 
Shaik to a cabinet reshuffle in and around October 2010 at the hands of 
20 
the former President Zuma. 
MR SHAIK:   That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   There is one particular appointment there that is 
relevant to our evidence, what was that? 
MR SHAIK:   That was the – I mean I was saddened by the replacement 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 116 of 194 
 
by Minister Siphiwe Nyanda by Mr Padayachie but that just saddened 
me but the one that concerned me is the replace of Fikile or the 
appointment of Minister Fikile Mbalula. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   There was a press report to which you refer in 
paragraph 16 in relation to the appointment, what was that? 
MR SHAIK:   So some time in 2011 was a press report that dealt with 
an NEC meeting of the ANC in which it was alleged in that report that 
Minister Mbalula raised his appointment or been informed about his 
appointments by the Guptas being called and informed about that 
appointment, and we had again under the leadership of Ambassador 
10 
Maqetuka we established what we call the Monday morning forum with 
the three of us under his leadership, Maqetuka, Gibson and I would 
meet every Monday morning to discuss things that occurred in the 
weekend or in the past week and it was a brainstorming session 
between the three of us, and the midday we would invite our deputies 
for lunch and others and have a kind of management meeting that will 
end sometime often late into the night, and this is the way we operated. 
 
So on this particular, this was a Sunday, on the Monday we 
met and we discussed this report and we were taken aback by the 
issues that were in that report. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Was the decision in relation to the matters that 
ought to be investigated, I will ask you ...[indistinct –mic off] 
MR SHAIK:   So as you will recall sir that what was alleged in that 
report that there was an NEC meeting, and in this meeting Minister 
Mbalula raised the point that his appointment, he was notified of his 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 117 of 194 
 
appointment by one of the Gupta brothers but generally for the purpose 
of this discussion the Gupta Brothers.   
 
Our concern was (a) this is either a breach of national security 
occurring in the office of the President, so there was a leak from the 
Office of the President, two, this is possible because the Guptas 
overheard this discussion while the President was in consultation with 
someone and they obtained this information and were now peddling this 
information for whatever benefit they wanted, or thirdly that they in fact 
actually suggested this appointment which makes this even more 
serious because then as foreign nationals they are suggesting who 
10 
should be in the National Cabinet of another country. 
 
All three of these matters fall in the realm of National Security 
by my understanding.   A leak upon the President’s Office, information 
peddling if they have overheard this information and three if they 
suggested the name and this is a matter of counter-intelligence where a 
foreign national is influencing the appointment of cabinet ministers of 
another government, all three issues needed to be investigated. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Did you discuss the intended approach with anyone 
else, for example your Deputy Directors General? 
MR SHAIK:   Yes, so following the – following our morning meeting we 
20 
had lunch with our Deputy Director Generals and others and we 
informed them of our decision that an investigation into the Gupta’s 
should now occur based on the rationale that we have given, and I must 
say that an Intelligence investigation is an Intelligence investigation.  It 
will involved technological intelligence, it will involve surveillance, it 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 118 of 194 
 
will penetration, it will involve having a full understanding of the whole 
picture to answer those three questions primarily because it pertains to 
national security and a breach at the highest level of the government. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   There was a related issue pertaining to the 
investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Pretorius, well to those who are not 
close to Intelligence and Secret Services, those of us who are not close 
to those, to Intelligence it might not have been as apparent as it now 
seems to me and others who are listening to your evidence what this 
could mean if it meant that the Gupta Brothers or one of them was able 
10 
to overhear sensitive information emanating from somebody in the 
Presidency or from the President, because today it might have been 
about the appointment of so and so as a Minister but tomorrow it might 
have been information about something that really goes to the security 
of the country. 
MR SHAIK:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So it was quite something, quite serious even from 
that angle leaving out the others? 
MR SHAIK:   It is very serious sir, if – and let me tell you of the three 
scenarios the overhearing the discussion is the least of the dangerous 
20 
ones, right, because if they have overheard it and if we have 
investigated and were allowed to investigate this we would have been 
able to make certain recommendations as Intelligence normally do, we 
will make recommendations in terms of how to avoid this situation in 
future, so that didn’t happen, but the second option, the option that if 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 119 of 194 
 
the appointment occurred at the suggestion of the Gupta’s and that is a 
significantly serious matter because it meant that there’s real 
possibility that a foreign government was making appointments. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hmm, hmm, hmm, no I think that scenario is the one 
that has been dealt with quite extensively in the public domain. 
MR SHAIK:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course the – any President who gets an 
inappropriate suggestion like that would respond in the only way that is 
appropriate for this situation but of course you could have various 
people you know who may innocuously at one stage or another say to 
10 
the President you know what Mr Shaik would be good for the police you 
know, you know maybe next time you think about reshuffling the 
Cabinet think about him, you know, here is his track record, as long as 
the President doesn’t feel bound to do that I would imagine that that’s 
not a problem, is that right? 
MR SHAIK:   Correct, that’s absolutely correct and in fact it does occur 
in our media where editors or journalists would make certain 
suggestions that in order to fix this and this department up appoint so 
and so to that department, and that is considered democratic lobbying, 
which is not necessarily a counter intelligence matter, but it is done 
20 
openly, it is done transparently and it is done –also it may even happen 
behind closed doors, that too is not a problem. 
 
The problem here in my opinion was the fact that the people 
who were making this suggestion, if they indeed made this suggestion, 
found it necessary to inform the person who was appointed before  he 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 120 of 194 
 
was appointed that he was going to be appointed, so the benefit was 
not a contribution towards good governance, the benefit was to 
demonstrate that they had knowledge of the appointment before the 
appointment occurs. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well that’s quite important, but maybe your – you use 
in your evidence the word suggestion, maybe it should be something 
much  more than suggestion because a suggestion implies that it’s just 
an idea you know but maybe if it became something more than a 
suggestion maybe even an instruction you know that maybe that’s 
where the problem becomes even ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR SHAIK:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...more difficult because my friends might make 
suggestions about certain things in my company or in my department as 
minister but you know as long as they are just suggestions and nothing 
more I don’t feel bound and those people don’t think that they can 
dictate to me what I do that might be fine.   The problem might be 
where the suggestion is no longer a suggestion, it is an instruction or 
where the President, whoever it may be in that situation may feel bound 
to give effect to the suggestion because of whatever. 
MR SHAIK:   Correct yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  But part of the importance of what you say about what 
you think the rationale must have been for them to then go to the 
person to be appointed to demonstrate that they had the knowledge. 
MR SHAIK:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  May well link with what Mr Ramathlodi said in this 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 121 of 194 
 
Commission when he gave evidence about, and expressed his views 
about the Waterkloof landing because, and I remember it because last 
week I dealt with when Minister Nkoana-Mashabane was here was that 
he was saying that landing as far as he was concerned wasn’t just a 
landing of that aircraft, it was the Gupta family showing the whole 
country and the world that they might not be President but they land 
where Presidents land, in other words they were in charge.  I hope I am 
not misrepresenting but that’s how I understood Mr Ramathlodi’s 
evidence to be to say they were telling everybody we are in charge, so 
when you then say if they get knowledge by whatever means that the 
10 
President intends to appoint so and so as Minister and then they go to 
that person to share that information it may be that you are right that 
the motive is a very wrong one. 
MR SHAIK:   Yes, sir intelligence we make use of the word called 
created dependencies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What’s the word? 
MR SHAIK:   Created dependencies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR SHAIK:  I am absolutely convinced that the need for the Gupta 
brothers to tell Minister Fikile Mbalula that he was going to be the 
20 
Minister of Sport was to determine a created dependency.  That crated 
dependency was to extract value from him being the Minister of Sport 
and of course if one looks at the business investment of the Gupta’s 
there were in cricket, in sport stadiums.  So the benefit was to extract 
value.  If he was made the Minister of Water you know well I do not 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 122 of 194 
 
know but you know they are – if he was made the Minister of Water I do 
not think they would have informed him.  The Portfolio of sport is 
related to their business interest and they needed to create 
dependency of him onto them so that when they do come back on the 
value that he would felt obliged to respond because of the created 
dependency and please do not get me wrong Sir I am not saying that it 
happened.  I am saying the mechanism by which we from Intelligence 
would have seen it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well that is quite important but I am looking at other 
evidence and that part of the – what I have got to do is not look at 
10 
evidence in isolation.  I have got to look at all the evidence and where 
there are links.  You know – link – link them.  I have heard evidence 
where – of course I mean the public knows about the evidence of Mr 
Jonas which was to the effect that he was taken to a meeting at the 
Gupta residence and that the – Mr Duduzane Zuma was there when a 
Gupta brother, one of the Gupta brothers said they wanted to make him 
Minister of Finance and said Minister Nene would be – would be 
dropped from cabinet or dismissed whatever the term was that they 
used and that he was – they wanted him to be the new Minister.  And it 
seems that you would be talking about the same thing to say maybe 
20 
they wanted – if he accepted they wanted to make sure that when he 
became Minister of Finance he would remember that… 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They made him Minister of Finance. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 123 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And therefore he would feel some loyalty towards 
them. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And there would be some dependence because if they 
made him Minister they could unmake him Minister.  They could have 
him dismissed. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so one has that and then of course you have 
other situations where somebody who is in a certain position like Mr 
Saloojee of Denel at a certain stage was brought I think by Mr Essa I 
10 
am not sure to a meeting I think at the Gupta residence and at one of 
the meetings Minister Gigaba who was Minister of Public Enterprises I 
think was there.  He was brought at the time but according to the 
evidence not much happened but apparently he did say something like I 
hope you people can work well, or something like that I cannot 
remember.  But also you have an occasion when Mr Saloojee was 
brought into a meeting at the Gupta residence and Mr Duduzane Zuma 
was – was present but there is not much according to the evidence that 
he said but he was present. 
MR SHAIK:  Ys. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then you have Mr Dukwana former MEC in the 
Free State Government who was taken to the Gupta residence and 
according to him at least on one of the occasions Mr Duduzane Zuma 
was there but not much – he did not say much there.  So one does not 
know whether even the presence of Mr Duduzane Zuma at some of 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 124 of 194 
 
these meetings where certain people are brought in was meant to 
convey the message – a certain message to the people.  So I was just 
mentioning. 
MR SHAIK:  I understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because I thought what you said might be linked to 
those – to those scenarios. 
MR SHAIK:  Thank you.   
ADV PRETORIUS:  Perhaps Chair Mr Shaik was being polite in the way 
he expressed his views earlier on.  But I am sure you have disabused 
him of the need. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Yes thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Mr Shaik there was another reason for the 
investigation which you relate in paragraphs 20 and 21. Please tell the 
Chair about that? 
MR SHAIK:  Chair you will recall that at the particular time in – in 
multilateral affairs the US administration under then President Barak 
Obama was engaging with negotiations in respect of Iran to lift the 
sanctions that was in place on Iran because of the attempts with the 
Iranian government to build its nuclear facilities outside of the 
regulatory proceedings.  I was approached… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Shaik.  Just to close off the issue 
relating to the newspaper article. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which talked about Mr Mbalula having been informed 
of his pending appointment by the Gupta brothers. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 125 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You – you have not told me – you said you decided to 
investigate but you have not told me about what happened.  Is that 
because it is a sensitive – it is an intelligence matter because 
otherwise we lawyers want to close all gaps.  We want to hear the 
whole story  So I say somebody reading the transcript would say, he 
said they investigated, the decided to investigate and what happened 
and nobody asked what happened?   
MR SHAIK:  Sir the – you will recall that after our Monday morning 
foreign meetings we had lunch with our Deputy Director Generals. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  We agreed on the investigation.  It was supported by our 
Director – Deputy Director Generals and related to that investigation is 
another aspect which – which I am … 
CHAIRPERSON:  To which you will come. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay so at some stage you will be able to either tell 
me what happened to that investigation. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or to tell me. 
20 
MR SHAIK:  Yes 
CHAIRPERSON:  For certain intelligence reasons. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You might not be able to tell me. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 126 of 194 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Or to tell you what did not happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  So in relation I was approached by the then US 
Ambassador stationed in Pretoria that the state department is 
concerned about the possible funding of Shiva Uranium which is a 
Gupta owned mine and they had reason to believe that such financing 
may be coming from Iran.  And they are concerned.  This is – when I 
say they I mean the United States is concerned because it is a very 
sensitive time in the negotiations with Iran in regard to the – the 
discussions about lifting of the sanctions and coming up with a new 
10 
approach to Iran and if this is the case then they did not know whether 
to interpret this as Iran going rogue or what – what is the situation and 
could we determine whether Iranian funding is in fact behind Shiva 
Uranium? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  What were the consequences for South Africa be if 
this scenario were correct? 
MR SHAIK:  The consequence for South Africa would have been 
enormous. 
1. We would have been seen to be going rogue in violation of 
multinational multilateral agreements and such violations would 
20 
have consequences.  And of course it would be an enormous 
financial consequence to the country if sanctions were then by 
necessarily extended to South Africa. 
So it was another aspect of intelligence that needed to be dealt with.  
And this is a very good example of how intelligence services work.  
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 127 of 194 
 
Although in this case the approach was from the state department to 
me via the Ambassador and – and in my evidence I also point and I am 
sure it is going to be led by Director Ngange that they too were 
approached directly by the American Intelligence to – to determine the 
source of this funding on the Uranium mines. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Right.  You say in paragraph 21 that you did 
discuss this concern with the President at the time? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And you were given certain reassurances? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:  To the effect of… 
MR SHAIK:  The – I was… 
MR SHAIK:  That the – that the Iranians are not behind Shiva Uranium 
funding. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Right so as I understand it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am… 
ADV PRETORIUS:  The decision was made for more than one reason to 
conduct an investigation? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  You say in paragraph 23 that shortly after this 
20 
decision was made certain things happened.  What happened? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  The – I – I cannot recall whether it happened on the 
same day or the day after but a few days after that meeting that we 
took to investigate the Gupta family Mr Maqetuka informed both Ms 
Ngange and I that we are required to fly urgently to Cape Town where 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 128 of 194 
 
the Minister has summoned a meeting of us in Cape Town.  So we flew 
to Cape Town that evening and we arrived there at night for a meeting 
with the Minister. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes.  Before you get to the contents of the meeting 
Mr Shaik there are two issues that perhaps you should inform the Chair 
of.  The first is how frequently would a Minister take steps to call to 
account operational executives in operational matters?  Was this a 
common occurrence? 
MR SHAIK:  Well this is the first that it has happened to me but during 
the period in which I was the Head of the Secret Service or the Foreign 
10 
Branch of the SSA I was never called to explain an operation.  So this 
the first operation that Minister Cwele deemed it necessary for me or 
for us to come explain. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And the second point is,  
CHAIRPERSON:  Now which year was this?  I do not think your 
statement specifies. 
MR SHAIK:  It is 2011. 
CHAIRPERSON:  2011?  Okay.  You would not remember what month 
and so on or [indistinct]. 
MR SHAIK:  Oh I think these are now in the latter months of 2011. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MR SHAIK:  Because by 2012 I was history. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Mr Shaik would you comment then on the basis of 
your own knowledge and experience in relation to intelligence matters 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 129 of 194 
 
on the appropriateness or otherwise of a Minister becoming involved in 
operational matters. 
MR SHAIK:  The – Chair I found it – I found it inappropriate.  I would 
go so far as to say illegal but then I would have required the courage to 
go and prove that illegality in a court and it was just going to be a 
messy affair.  But it is – it is not done like that.  The – the better way 
would have to been to await the outcome of the investigation and then 
dealt 
with 
the 
issues 
of 
the 
investigation. 
 
Dealt 
with 
the 
recommendations of the investigation.  But making known your view of 
an investigation on a matter of National Security when you are the 
10 
Minister 
of 
National 
Security 
is 
an 
indictment 
also 
on 
your 
understanding of National Security. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We – that is before we get to the actual content of the 
discussion ne? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes I am coming there now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  It is just a matter of general principle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no that is fine I will … 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Mr Shaik what was the tone of the meeting? 
MR SHAIK:  Well the meeting was extremely confrontational – 
20 
extremely confrontational.  The – you know the Minister… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I just want to say I know it happened a long time ago 
but the more you are able to tell me about the details of the discussion 
and the tone the better so I get as good a picture of how the meeting 
was as you have. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 130 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  Okay.  So the – when we arrived – so the Minister has a 
holding room.  We were in the holding room and the Minister then I 
think there was a meal provided for us and from there we went into the 
– the Minister’s meeting room.  The Minister attended that meeting with 
two people. One was appropriately now Ambassador Zlomo who is 
South Africa’s Ambassador to Algeria who at the time was a special 
advisor to the Minister.  And he attended – he also attended the 
meeting by Mr is it Doctor Kaw Mabangu – Kaw – there was a 
gentleman by the name of Doctor Kaw and I just – the surname just 
escapes me but I will get it. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mabanga or Mabanga?  I am just... 
MR SHAIK:  No, no .. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am just thinking of surnames along those lines. 
MR SHAIK:  Mavungo but I will check and I will give. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You will check ja okay. 
MR SHAIK:  I will confirm the surname. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  But there was Doctore Kaw and… 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what was his position? 
MR SHAIK:  He is a member – he was – he was the Head of the 
20 
Ministerial Services and a member of the service.  And in particular a 
member of the Foreign Service.  When we … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which fell under you?  Which fell under you for 
instance? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes which fell under me. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 131 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  So when we started the meeting we objected to his 
presence on the basis that he is a junior official.  We are going to be 
discussing – because the Minister indicated that he wanted to discuss 
the Gupta matter.  I will – our Gupta investigation and I am not too sure 
whether it is the Director General who insisted or I insisted that – that 
Doctor Kaw please leave the room on the basis that he is an official 
from the service and we would not want to have that discussion.  
Insofar as Ambassador Zlomo was concerned Ambassador Zlomo just 
returned from a – a posting at a multilateral – intelligence multilateral 
10 
institution and we found it acceptable for him to present in the meeting 
insofar as him being an advisor to the Minister. But with no 
participation rights. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But the other did agree to leave? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes he did agree to leave. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ja. 
MR SHAIK:  He agreed to leave ja.  So the Minister wanted to hear 
from Ambassador Maqetuka what the reasons behind the investigation 
were.  Ambassador Maqetuka took him through or thinking. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How – how did he know about it – about the decision 
20 
to investigate had Ambassador Maqetuka told him or how had that – 
because you said you had just made the decision before.  Or is me 
showing my ignorance about intelligence. 
MR SHAIK:  No, no you are showing your – you are showing your – 
your – you are showing your intelligence about intelligence matters.  
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 132 of 194 
 
The Minister was informed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  We have not yet… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Officially? 
MR SHAIK:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR SHAIK:  The Minister was informed by someone present at the 
meeting. We were unable to determine who informed the Minister but it 
was clear that the Minister was informed from a participant in the 
meeting. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So he asked – he wanted to be told. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  About this decision? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you saying Ambassador Maqetuka took him 
through. 
MR SHAIK:  So Ambassador Maqetuka led the – the argument and 
essentially which was the arguments that we have covered to now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm 
MR SHAIK:  National security and I think in that meeting and again 
20 
Ambassador Maqetuka will go into it.  But there were other noises 
around the – the Gupta family. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  This matter needed to be investigated.  It was ultimately in 
the interest of the President that this investigation happens.  Because 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 133 of 194 
 
either the investigation is going to find that there is nothing to this 
story.  And if there is nothing to the story then the President is in a 
sense cleared by the Intelligence Services.  If there was something to 
the story then there were corrective action that could be taken.  But I 
must confess Chair that the Minister was having none of it.  Reason left 
the room when we entered and we could not find each other.  In fact it 
deteriorated where the Minister made this matter incredibly personal.  
He argued that the reason why we doing this investigation is because 
we want to pursue or further the business objectives of Mr Njenje.  We 
all at this time in fairness to Mr Njenje I have never seen him more 
10 
angry than I have seen him in that meeting.  Ambassador Maqetuka 
denied that.  I denied that.  We were not furthering the business 
interest of Director Njenje.  In fact when we had our early morning 
discussion it was Director Njenje who placed on record his conflict and 
what his involvement or – and I will not say involvement – his 
interaction with how it came to be that he interacted with the Gupta’s 
and what was behind it etcetera.  And we were very satisfied with his 
explanation.  And if anything in deference to him he wanted us to 
ensure that that does not feature in the investigation.  So if anything it 
was completely the opposite to what the Minister was alleging.  Again 
20 
we tried to explain to the Minister and the again the Minister did not 
listen.  It seemed to me that the Minister did not want this investigation 
to happen.  For reasons that I am sure the Minister would explain.  I 
can only but speculate but he did not want this investigation to happen 
and the meeting was incredibly tense. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 134 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well if somebody – if you – if you come to know that 
the police or any official agency of the state is conducting some 
investigation and you may be the subject of the investigation and you 
know that they will find nothing.  I wonder why you would say stop the 
investigation.  You may or may not be able to comment on this but I am 
trying to understand why if the senior – [indistinct] senior management 
of intelligence take a decision such as this on the face of it in good 
faith to do their job why anybody could say, stop it if as far as they 
know the investigation will find that nobody did anything wrong or 
particular people did not do anything wrong.  Because if you say it must 
10 
be stopped you leave a question mark about the – the person or 
persons who were to be investigated.  But if you allow it to continue 
and he finds out that it clears them then the whole thing is buried. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you – you might be able to say something?  You 
have done a lot of investigations I am sure. 
MR SHAIK:  I am – I am – for me and again I will speculate I think it 
goes again to one of the reasons why you should not have a Minister of 
Intelligence.  Because a Minister serves at the favour or behest of a 
President and therefore would seek to either ingratiate themselves or 
20 
would seek to get favour from a President.  The Director General of an 
Intelligence Services serves the national interest of the country and 
often those two things the National – serving the national interest 
versus serving the favours of a President may not be … 
CHAIRPERSON:  They might no coincide 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 135 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  They may not coincide. And I think this is a – a classical 
example where the national interest was undermined in order for 
favour. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  How long did this meeting last? 
MR SHAIK:  To best of my understanding I think it could have been a 
hour to about two hours. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Right. 
MR SHAIK:  An hour to two hours. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Right. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  So was the only reason that the Minister advanced for 
saying that the investigation should be stopped that it was an 
investigation intended to benefit Mr Njenje or it was driven by him 
whatever he said?  Is that the only reason he gave or are there other 
reasons that you – that he gave because I would like to know if there 
were other reasons and hear and be able to assess their validity. 
MR SHAIK:  I think he also gave the reason that he did not deem it 
necessary that in terms of the media scoping etcetera he did not see 
that the scoping exercise that we did in respect of you know this is 
what is being said in the media, he did not see it threatening National 
20 
Security.  He did not see it as we seen it.  The – and he was I think 
willing to say that these are matters that have – political matters that 
the report in the paper – political matters which should not require 
attention.  And he – I actually got the sense that the Minister did not 
believe that which was being alleged was in fact turned out to be true.  
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 136 of 194 
 
So I do not think he believed the allegation.  And therefore he was 
dismissive of it.  Whereas we on the other hand did not take a view 
about whether the allegations in the media was to be believed or not 
believed.  We took the view that the matter should be investigated so 
that we could arrived at an objective understanding of what in fact 
occurred. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course if he did not believe what was being 
alleged and now investigation was done and it turned out that he was 
wrong in not believing what was alleged the consequences could – 
could be and could have been disastrous.  So is the position not that 
10 
he ought to have sought to air on the side of caution and say, well I do 
not believe it but if these three senior people who have experience a 
lot of 
experience in intelligence believe 
there should 
be 
an 
investigation I should leave it to them.  Because if they find out that 
there is no problem then it is fine.   
MR SHAIK:  Absolutely correct and again not - not to take any perverse 
pleasure from this.  It did turn out to be correct.  It was a disaster and 
as a result I am sitting before you on a matter of State Capture and I 
think in - in fairness if we were allowed to do the investigation.  We 
maybe - we may - I am not saying it would necessarily be the case.  We 
20 
may be talking about different things now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well that is - that is quite important Mr Shaik and it 
goes back to an issue I raised with you much earlier.  Well I mentioned 
to you.  Namely - you must tell me if I think I mentioned, but I did not 
mention it.  Namely I talked about I think the role of parliamentary - 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 137 of 194 
 
Parliament in terms of its oversight obligations, but I did not refer to 
oversight obligations, but what I was about … 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is part of oversight.  Namely about the votes of no 
confidence and so and so on. 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So one of the things that I believe I will have to look 
into if I come to the conclusion that yes there was State Capture or 
something that should not have happened and - and that happened.  I 
may have to say how did it happen.  Who are the possible role players 
10 
who could have prevented it from happening and what mechanisms 
were in place that could have been used to prevent it from happening? 
Were those mechanisms used effectively and hence one could 
look at Parliament’s performance of its oversight obligations in regard 
to when did they start suspecting State Capture.  What did they do 
about it?  The same thing when it comes to the levels of corruption in 
the country and all of that.  What did they do? 
What are they doing when they - what do they do when they 
execute their oversight obligations.  So you - you say here.  Here we 
were from the Intelligence Community being Senior Managers having a 
20 
meeting with the Minister.  We had made a decision that this could pose 
a National Security issue and should be investigated. 
We decided to investigate it, but here is a Minister of 
Intelligence to whom we - we report who says no.  It should not happen 
… 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 138 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you say - with the benefit of hindsight you say 
well looking at what subsequently happened … 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Indeed … 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There is a chance that - if we had been allowed to 
conduct our investigations there is chance that maybe we could have 
come up with recommendations or that could have prevented it from 
happening or even if it did not prevent it completely, but maybe it might 
10 
have been limited and not as - have gone as far … 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As it did.  So - so I am just saying that what you are 
saying is quite important, because it throws … 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Also on that, because to the extent that there - there 
was State Capture and so on.  We need to know where did we go 
wrong.  Who was supposed to do what?  Who did not do their job and if 
they had done their job could we have been here … 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And so on.  So that is quite important. 
MR SHAIK:  Chair, I - I just want to sad that and in this case I would - I 
would be as direct as I could be.  The - I think it - it does constitute a 
dereliction of duty on the part of the Minister having assumed the 
function of the Minister and intervening in the way he did.  He - he did 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 139 of 194 
 
cause grievous harm to the wellbeing of the State, because immediately 
after this incident was of course the Waterkloof landing incident. 
Now I wonder - I mean the Waterkloof landing incident for me 
which is also of - of deep concern, because it was a - it is a - a military 
air force.  It is not a normal air force.  It is a military air force in which 
- you know.  To enter a military air force its airspace etcetera.  
Requires a phenomenal amount of intervention. 
I think that was again a - an incredible narcissistic 
demonstration of power.  Unnecessary and it should not have 
happened.  It was a violation of National Security and if we were 
10 
allowed to have done our investigation the - I do not think you would 
have at least for sure you would have had the Watergate affair. 
I mean the Waterkloof affair.  I am also - I must say on - on 
record sir, because and I know I am stretching it here.  That is common 
practice of Ministers to assume the power and responsibility and the 
perks that come with the jobs of being Ministers, but then are the first 
to - to cry that they did not know when there are problems. 
How could you not know that an aeroplane was landing at a 
military airbase?  How could you not know and now I accept that 
Ambassador Bruce Koloane and I know him and he is a - a - he was a 
20 
great Ambassador.  He was a very effective Ambassador.  He was a 
very effective officer of protocol, but I think in one of your 
recommendations if you do indeed make recommendations DJ. 
That this notion where officials take the fall for the errors of 
their politicians.  I think we should bring that to an end.  We should 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 140 of 194 
 
bring that to an end.  Do not become a politician if you do not want to 
take responsibility.  Take the credit.  Take the risk, but also take the 
responsibility and the obligations that come with your office. 
Do not pass that obligation or do not pass the blame onto 
officials when you know that - you know - essentially you are - you - 
you are not owning up to your own responsibilities as Ministers and I 
think in both those cases these are classic examples where Ministers 
do not own up to the responsibility of their office. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well that is - that is quite important, but it touches 
upon something that I raised with Minister Maite Nkoana-Mashabane 
10 
last week who was here to give her side of the story to say why she 
recommended to the then President that Mr - Mr Koloane be made 
Ambassador after what had happened and his role in the Waterkloof 
landing. 
Being known insofar as he had confessed to certain things 
and made certain admissions.  Of course as we all know there is the 
question of whether the President at the time knew about this or did not 
know about it.  Of course Mr Koloane had told certain officials in 
Waterkloof that - that in effect the President knew or that he had been 
told by one or other Minister that he knew and wanted this to happen. 
20 
Of course later on he said no that - that was just him lying 
and so on and so on.  So - but we are dealing with the matter on the - 
on the basis that assuming that the President did not know and assume 
that Mr Koloane was right.  That this was his whole idea … 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 141 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But how could you then get the same guy promoted … 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you yourself say the appointment as an 
Ambassador is an honour and you say yourself that you knew before 
you made the recommendation that this person had admitted to lying 
about this.  Something as important as this and you accept that the 
person did not have integrity.  You accept that to be an Ambassador 
you must have integrity.  How could you … 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then go to the President and recommend that the 
10 
same person should be made President.  That is what we were 
discussing and I raised the issue about values.  You know.  You say - 
you know - Minister have got to take responsibility.  I mean you would 
know that you know some people would take responsibility and will say 
leave - leave my junior staff and whatever.  I made this decision.  I take 
responsibility.  I accept whatever criticism. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As opposed to those who want to come in only when 
there is credit … 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And shift out of line. 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Move out of line when there are problems and then 
push junior officials forward to say they must take responsibility.  So I - 
I certainly believe that accountability is critical in our democracy and 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 142 of 194 
 
that it starts with being able to stand up for what you believe is right 
and if you believe what you stand for is right. 
You say this is what I believe.  If you get persuaded 
differently.  Then you say now I have changed my mind, because I have 
been persuaded otherwise, but the question - the question of senior 
leaders hiding behind junior officials.  I think is unfortunate.  So I 
understand what you mean and … 
MR SHAIK:  Thank you, sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think people must take responsibility for their own 
roles in whatever.  Mr Pretorius. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Thank you Chair.  You will recall a few minutes ago 
Mr Shaik that you gave evidence in general terms about the principles 
which adhere to the relationship between a Minister on the one hand 
and the Operational Executives on the other.  At this meeting in Cape 
Town did the Minister say anything about his authority and whether 
investigations could or could not be conducted without his authority? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  There was a - a debate about that, but by that time 
the meeting deteriorated.  With the Minister saying I am instructing you 
not to continue with this investigation and I think at that point we 
became uncharacteristically in the event - in the case of my two 
20 
colleagues uncharacteristically equally impolite. 
Saying we are going to investigate and we could not move 
past that point and then I think it was Ambassador Maqetuka who then 
made the suggestion that we would rather prefer to discuss this with 
the President directly. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 143 of 194 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In a sense that the meeting in Cape Town resulted 
or did not result in any agreed way forward was this - was the issue 
between yourselves on the one hand and the Minister on the other 
resolved? 
MR SHAIK:  No.  The matter was not resolved.  The - we did not accept 
not to - we did not - we did not accept to stop the investigation.  We did 
get the opportunity to get a meeting with the President and the Minister 
undertook to arrange that meeting with the President.  So the matter 
was so to speak pushed up the - the ranks for a discussion with the 
President. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Right.  Have you any idea from that meeting or 
elsewhere where the Minister would have received information about 
the business interests of Director Njenje? 
MR SHAIK:  Well I can only but assume that he may have received that 
information from the Guptas themselves. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Have you any idea of what the Intelligence 
capabilities of the Gupta family were? 
MR SHAIK:  The - the Gupta family at that time was deploying a large 
amount of security personnel and - and often the security personnel 
also engaged in information gathering.  Not of a very quality.  Mainly 
20 
speculation and rumour mongering etcetera and I did pick up that the 
Gupta family had a kind of intelligence operation going, but I did not 
put much reliance on it and I must say I should have. 
Much to my detriment, but I did not put any much reliance on 
it and in fact subsequently I found out that it was done that intelligence 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 144 of 194 
 
capability that informed the President that there is a possible grouping 
of people who want to - to topple him.  In fact I too was accused of 
being one of the people who was planning to topple President Zuma. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is this - is this now around 2011? 
MR SHAIK:  It is around 2011.  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  2011.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Late 2011.  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In relation to whether or not the Minister had the 
authority either to instruct or to stop an investigation and in relation to 
the issue as to whether Operational Executives were entitled to conduct 
an investigation without the authority of the Minister.  What was the 
position put by yourself and your two colleagues? 
MR SHAIK:  The - the position to the best of my recall is that the 
Minister does not have that authority.  We will continue with this 
investigation subject to a discussion with the President. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  How did the meeting end? 
MR SHAIK:  Coldly. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just repeat. 
MR SHAIK:  Coldly.  I think we all got up and none of us said our 
goodbyes in a very polite manner and we just left. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I - I thought at some stage during the meeting the 
way you are describing it.  There must have been quite some heat in 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 145 of 194 
 
the meeting.  So later on it was cold. 
MR SHAIK:  Later it was cold. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  No, no.  I am … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you done with the meeting or if you are still …? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  No.  Not entirely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Just one more question. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No.  That is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In relation to whether the investigations should 
10 
continue or should be stopped.  I think you have told the Chair that no 
agreement was reached … 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In that regard. 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  What was the position of yourself and your two 
colleagues in that regard? 
MR SHAIK:  We were of the opinion that we will continue with the 
investigation.  That the justification that we had was - was legitimate 
and that the justification for the - the investigation was legitimate and 
20 
warranted the investigation and that we should get the investigation 
going. 
However we wanted to meet with the President, because by 
making the - the position that the Minister does not have authority over 
the - the direct operations and who does.  Of course the President does 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 146 of 194 
 
and we therefore wanted to raise this matter directly with the President 
to continue this - this operation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That was the outstanding question? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes.  I have - I - I just want to put … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  The version of Ambassador Maqetuka … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Do that, because that is what I … 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I had in mind.  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  As you have told the Chair there will be further in 
10 
relation to the evidence in relation to this meeting and I would just like 
to 
put 
to 
you 
the 
version 
of 
that 
meeting 
as 
testified 
Ambassador Maqetuka. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As contained in his statement. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes and I will give - give you a copy of his 
statement. 
MR SHAIK:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You - you said as testified to. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In his statement.  Yes.  I apologise. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  As to be testified perhaps. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Well did you put a question or you are still 
looking for …? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  I would like him to have the benefit of the … 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 147 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Copy in case he wishes to comment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja.  Okay.  Somebody must (indistinct).  Both 
counsel are sitting this side.  One of them must sit this side.  So you 
can help.  One of you must be that side.  So you can help with - if - if 
the witness needs to be assisted.  It is much better if there is 
somebody this side. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  I understand.  My authority does not always extend 
that far. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I - I thought - I thought … 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Accept in operational matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I thought the lead - the leader of the - of the team 
can direct how the members of the team - where the members sit. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes.  I - I will take note of that.  Encourage from 
that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In regard to the meeting … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well he might need a few minutes to have a look if he 
has not seen it before. 
MR SHAIK:  No.  I have not seen it. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Just - just have a look. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Would you just look at paragraphs 6 and seven.  
That is all you need to look at. 
MR SHAIK:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  For the moment at any rate. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 148 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  Good. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Okay.  Paragraph 6 the following statement is 
made: 
“I informed the team …” 
That is yourself and Mr Njenje. 
“…that while the investigation was still ongoing the 
then 
Minister 
for 
Intelligence 
Services 
Siyabonga Cwele 
apparently 
got 
wind 
of 
the 
investigation and summoned us to a meeting in 
Cape Town.” 
10 
That is consistent with what you have said? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  He - he says the meeting started in the early 
evening and went on till about midnight.  I do not think much turns on 
that.  The next sentence he says: 
“The Minister …” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I am - I am sorry.  That might be important 
because you thought it took about an hour or so. 
MR SHAIK:  No, no.  I said at least two hours. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  An hour or two you said. 
20 
MR SHAIK:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And there was dinner and so forth.  So - ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, after the meeting? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 149 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR SHAIK:  No, no.  There was dinner before the meeting.  
(Intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, before the meeting. 
MR SHAIK:  So it went on quite late. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  So … 
MR SHAIK:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So from the time you arrived … 
ADV PRETORIUS:   
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  To the time you left it might have been beyond 
midnight whatever. 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct.  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But the actual discussion may have been about an 
hour or so? 
MR SHAIK:  About two hours. 
CHAIRPERSON:  About two hours? 
MR SHAIK:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  The statement continues in paragraph 6: 
20 
“The Minister introduces the reason why he had 
called us as the fact that Njenje was undertaking an 
investigation 
of 
the 
relationship 
between 
President J G Zuma and the Guptas and that Njenje 
was conducting this investigation for his own 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 150 of 194 
 
business interest.” 
Your comment in that regard. 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  That is correct you say.  Paragraph 7: 
“I insisted to the Minister that this was not Njenje’s 
investigation, but that of the SSA in terms of its 
mandate.” 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  “The Minister continued - the Minister …” 
Sorry.  My apologies. 
10 
“This the Minister ignored and he continued with his 
line of addressing the issues on Njenje.” 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  “The meeting ended without resolving the 
matter.” 
So far … 
MR SHAIK:  We … 
ADV PRETORIUS:  It seems that you are in broad agreement … 
MR SHAIK:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  At least. 
20 
“Later we learnt from the media that the Minister 
had instructed us to stop the investigation.  I have 
to say that I do not recall him having given such an 
instruction. 
 
Let 
alone 
that 
a 
Minister 
for 
Intelligence would have no mandate to stop an 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 151 of 194 
 
investigation where the organisation had assessed 
the need to so investigate.” 
It seems that there is some difference between your 
recollection and the recollection of Ambassador Maqetuka. 
MR SHAIK:  No.  I - I do not see a substantially different. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Well he says he does not recall such an instruction 
being given … 
MR SHAIK:  The - the … 
ADV PRETORIUS:  To stop the investigation. 
MR SHAIK:  Well the Minister was insisting that we do not continue 
10 
with the investigation.  That is … 
ADV PRETORIUS:  So your recollection is clear. 
MR SHAIK:  That is what I was recalling.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And he was giving reasons … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SHAIK:  That the investigation is related to the business interests 
of Director Njenje and we were arguing that it is the National Security 
20 
imperative that is driving the investigation or the need for the 
investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the - there might be significance in establishing 
whether he was giving an instruction or he was saying this must stop.  
With a view to giving instructions or whether he was simply expressing 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 152 of 194 
 
a view that was contrary to the view of the three of you and saying he 
thought there was no need for it for whatever reason. 
So I do not know whether Ambassador Maqetuka may be 
seeking to make a distinction when he says he does not remember or 
recall the Minister gave an instruction.  Whether he means whatever he 
may have said he did not view as an instruction … 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But he may have expressed his views which were to 
the effect that he was against you continuing with the investigation, but 
maybe he views them - he viewed them as nothing than - more than the 
10 
Minister’s views.  So I do not know whether that is the - that is the 
angle, but I emphasise it to you for purposes of you being able to say 
whether as far as you - your recollection is concerned you are quite 
clear that the Minister was saying stop this thing.  As opposing to just 
giving … 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  His own views or whether he was giving his - his 
views and nothing more. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct.  I mean I am - and also I must say that as the 
Head of the Foreign Branch I was not directly in the firing line so to 
20 
speak.  I was there in the support line and the - the Minister would if he 
was going to instruct.  The Minister could have written this in a letter to 
say. 
I hereby instruct you not to engage in this investigation and I 
- best of my recollection I do not think that happened, but what I 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 153 of 194 
 
understood from the forcefulness from which the Minister was debating 
with us the manner of the debate.  The - the level of his questioning.  
He in no uncertain term expressed an incredible unhappiness about our 
wanting to investigate and I read from that that he wanted us not to 
investigate and I - I viewed that as an instruction not to investigate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So to the extent that there might be a debate about 
whether what he said amounted to an instruction - verbal instruction … 
MR SHAIK:  Huh-uh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As opposed to a written instruction to the extent that 
there might be a debate about that.  Maybe in terms of your version and 
10 
Ambassador Maqetuka’s version is it possible that what you - what 
there should be no debate about as far as you are concerned among 
the three of you is that the Minister sought to put a lot of pressure on 
the three of you to stop the investigation. 
MR SHAIK:  Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There should be no debate about that? 
MR SHAIK:  There is no debate about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There should be no debate about that? 
MR SHAIK:  No, no, no.  At least from my point of view. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
20 
MR SHAIK:  No debate about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Throughout it was quite clear he was putting a lot 
of pressure? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Whether you say that amounted to an 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 154 of 194 
 
instruction or not. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It might be another thing, but he was putting a lot of 
pressure and all three of you should - should probably agree on that? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  By way of summary then we have a meeting that 
took place for up to two hours or more than two hours.  What was the 
essential point of difference between the three Executives and the 
Minister? 
10 
MR SHAIK:  We believe that the - as a result of the analysis of open 
source information that we had and other information that there was a 
justifiably warranted investigation that should be conducted by the 
Intelligence Services with its full capacity into the Guptas.  The 
Minister’s position was that he did not think that the evidence 
warranted an investigation and he expressed his unhappiness to us in - 
in no uncertain terms about our desire to continue with that 
investigation. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  You have given evidence that the meeting was to 
say the least confrontation and adversarial? 
20 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Strong views were expressed? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Did you ever take a position which showed that you 
had been persuaded by the Minister’s views? 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 155 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  I am sorry, sir. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Did - did you agree at any stage with the Minister’s 
stance? 
MR SHAIK:  Oh no.  Oh no.  Not - not … 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Did he at any stage agree with the stance that you 
had taken, that is the three of you? 
MR SHAIK:   I thought at one moment in the discussion that the way we 
put our argument was compelling and that he would have to agree to do 
this, but the – he opened the door slightly that yes this may warrant a 
look into it, but then he closed that door immediately and focused again 
10 
on Njenje, so at that point we were lost. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   So over the period of the meeting in quite 
confrontational circumstances  ...[intervenes]  
MR SHAIK:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   ...and confrontationally expressed is it your 
evidence then that the Minister persisted in his view that the 
investigation should not take place and you persisted in your views that 
it should take place. 
MR SHAIK:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well to the extent that you might not have given me 
20 
the details I am going to ask for I would like them because it may be 
difficult to make a determination between putting pressure in a meeting 
putting pressure to stop the investigation and expressing view which 
were contrary to the three of you but doing so firmly, so you said that 
the meeting was confrontational and there’s some things that you can 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 156 of 194 
 
remember that so and so said this or did this, you know you might not  
have the bending of the table or anything like that, but I just want to 
get that picture if you are able to remember you know somebody, how 
this was, how the confrontational condition, the atmosphere of the 
meeting manifested itself in terms of the discussion, in terms of the 
interaction. 
MR SHAIK:   One example that comes to mind is that when the Minister 
started to give reasons but it is Mr Njenje’s business interests that’s 
driving this investigation, and not the National Security imperative, 
Minister – I mean Ambassador Maqetuka countered by saying but 
10 
Director Njenje explained fully and fully disclosed this to us and we are 
convinced that it has nothing to do with his business interests at all. 
 
The, I think Director Njenje entered the discussion as well and 
tried to convince the Minister that this is absolutely not the case and 
the Minister was having none of it so at some point the Minister said 
no, no, no, you know you are conflicted on this matter you know and 
the debate went around and around whether there was a conflict or was 
there no conflict, whether the business interest was driving the 
investigation or not but the Minister did not want to listen to the fact 
that we needed to investigate the Guptas, did not want, did not. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And in the course of the discussion did he mention, if 
you are able to remember, that this investigation should be stopped or 
anything like that, I think effectively that’s what you he his stance was 
but I am wondering what terminology he was using. 
MR SHAIK:   Ja, at the level of the discussion I am trying to now just to 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 157 of 194 
 
a memory recall, the level of the interaction between us as Director 
Generals and him as Minister often there is a language that is spoken 
amongst you know the – if I express my unhappiness on a matter I am 
literally telling you you are not going to proceed any further, and I on 
the other hand will tell you no I am going to proceed further. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR SHAIK:   You now pushed it to the barrel where the next step is the 
written word, the “I instruct you not to do this”.   I think we were 
becoming close to the written word. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR SHAIK:   But the disagreement was tactfully around a very 
important mandate, do you Minister have the authority to instruct on an 
operation or not, and we were you know you can say what you want to 
say but we are going to continue this and the only person who can tell 
us not to do this is the President, because he is responsible for the 
direction of the Intelligence Services so we avoided an overt 
confrontation with the Minister or an absolute breakdown where it now 
has to go to the passage of letters and I up to stage do not know 
whether letters did cross the table. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR SHAIK:   And our way out was with the meeting with the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So, but the issue that the Minister did not have the 
authority to stop the investigation that you raised as the three, you 
raised with him. 
MR SHAIK:   Yes, yes correct. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 158 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and either says that you wouldn’t raise it unless 
you believed he was trying to stop the investigation? 
MR SHAIK:   Correct, that is so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR SHAIK:   That is correct sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
MR SHAIK:   And again I would repeat in my understanding 
interpretation language the culture of Intelligence the Minister was 
unambiguous in his unhappiness about the investigation and as a result 
the view that we were left with was that he does not want this 
10 
investigation to continue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, ja. 
MR SHAIK:   There is no doubt about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There is no doubt about that. 
MR SHAIK:   None whatsoever. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   Mr Pretorius I see we are at nine minutes past 
four, from my side if it is fine with everybody we can continue and try 
and finish with him, I don’t know what your situation is, I don’t know 
what Mr Shaik’s situation is.   How long do you think we need for him to 
finish?   In the end we must do justice to the matter, so that is 
20 
important, but – well while you are looking maybe Mr Shaik if we 
continue for another 30, 40, 45 minutes, maybe up to an hour to finish 
would that suit you? 
MR SHAIK:   That will be fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That will be fine from your side. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 159 of 194 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:   We still have to consult with Ambassador Maqetuka 
but ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no I am – if the arrangement was that if we don’t 
finish he is available tomorrow we can continue tomorrow that is fine, 
but I just thought that since we have got two other witnesses it may be 
that it is better to finish with his evidence today, but I am not rigid. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Chair can I suggest compromise, because there is 
a substantial amount of evidence still to come. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   The statement is in parts quote terse and I would 
10 
also like to canvas with Mr Shaik certain issues arising out of the 
evidence of the former President, which might fall peculiarly within his 
knowledge, so that is in addition to the statement, so it is not just a 
matter of remaining parts of the statement, but there are issues on 
which I would ask leave to ask further questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no that is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   And one set of questions that is not contained in 
the statement, so may I suggest five o’clock. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am easy, that is fine, I didn’t expect we would go 
beyond five o’clock but as you say you know more than I do now there 
20 
may be other matters that you want to raise.  I am quite happy that we 
go up to five o’clock and then if we don’t finish then subject to his 
availability tomorrow he can ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS:   I hope that accords with the availability. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If we don’t finish by five o’clock would you be 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 160 of 194 
 
available tomorrow morning to finish? 
MR SHAIK:   Sure I will make arrangements 
CHAIRPERSON:  You would make arrangements? 
MR SHAIK:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   That is all subject to the absolute unreliability of 
counsel’s predictions in relation to time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay alright, let us continue then.   Or maybe we 
should take a little bit of – a ten minutes break. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then – is ten minutes fine? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, let’s – well it is about twelve minutes past.  I 
will just say let us come back at twenty five past. 
ADV PRETORIUS:   Thank you Chair. 
MR SHAIK:   Twenty five past? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja ,twenty five past.   We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us proceed. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Shaik just one question on the 
meeting with the Minister to which you have testified.  The issue of Mr 
Njenje’s business interests was that the only reason given for a 
discontinuation or suggested discontinuation of the investigation? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes to the best of recall yes and of course it was now that 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 161 of 194 
 
I look back on it the Minister was drawing extensions from – from an 
investigation into the Gupta’s that may extend to possibly investigation 
into the President.  My – my recall and I think the – the argument that 
we made is that that is not necessarily the case.  We are investigating 
the Gupta’s in – and whatever ramifications will come of it will come out 
of it.  And of course it is then up to the – the President or the Minister 
how to then deal with the recommendations that will be made.  The – 
the fear that the investigation may extend to the President again was 
unwarranted.  But the Minster was not clear in the reason why he did ot 
want this investigation to stop.  He just – it seemed to me at least that 
10 
he was of the view that he is going to come, provide a meal, have a 
discussion with us that this is going to end and it was going to end like 
that.  So I think he was also taken aback by the – the belief that we 
had that this is a National Security issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well earlier on I wondered whether there was 
something in the choice of the word fear.  Why should it be a fear but 
you are – you are actually expressing. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What you understood to be his position. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Minister ja.  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Just as a matter of principle even if one of the three 
executives has a conflict of interest would that have affected the in 
principle decision to investigate where there was a need to investigate’ 
MR SHAIK:  Absolutely not.  The – and in fact a proper investigation 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 162 of 194 
 
would allude to the conflict of interest to the extent that it needed to be 
placed on record.  The – so even that was – was not a reason to stop 
the investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would there not have been a way if there was any 
legitimate concern about a possible conflict of interest attaching to Mr 
Njenje?  Would it not have been possible for the investigation to be 
continued without Mr Njenje being involved himself in the investigation?  
Or was the problem that he was head of the very branch or unit that 
would do the investigation? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes now Sir the – the Mr Njenje would not be directly 
10 
involved in the investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  His personnel, his people and the entire service in terms 
of the required components would.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  So there would have been a measure as it should always 
be [indistinct] intelligence investigation a measure of objectivity.  So 
even to that extent I felt the – the Minister’s concerns were – were 
somewhat irrational to put it – put it mildly.  There was no case to stop 
it.  Even if you looked at the methodology nothing in the methodology 
20 
would have led to the investigation being compromised or prejudiced or 
biased in any way. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Did a meeting with the President follow? 
MR SHAIK:  It – it did indeed.  The… 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 163 of 194 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:  How long after the meeting with the Minister? 
MR SHAIK:  To the best of my understanding again memory is a faulty 
thing I believe that meeting occurred the next day or the day after.  But 
we did not return to Pretoria we stayed in Cape Town and then attended 
the meeting the next day. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Where did you meet with the President? 
MR SHAIK:  We met at the President’s residence in Cape Town.   
ADV PRETORIUS:  Who was present at the meeting? 
MR SHAIK:  At the meeting was the – we waited first for the President.  
So at that meeting was Ambassador Maqetuka.  Was Director Njenje 
10 
and myself and then we were joined by the President. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And what happened at the meeting?  If you could 
just describe to the Chair principally the exchange between yourselves 
on the one hand and the President on the other? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  The – the President welcomed us.  We were all 
seated.  I did get a sense that he was briefed about why we were there 
and obviously he knew that it was about the matter of the Gupta 
investigation.  But the President started off with a discussion on 
essentially what is called the – I got to get this pronunciation right – 
the Richard Mdluli Report.  There was a… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say Richard Mdluli Report? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR SHAIK:  The – that report and I do not know whether evidence of 
that was led before the commission yet? 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 164 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I – I am not – I do not think I have heard of a 
Richard Mdluli Report. 
MR SHAIK:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – yes. 
MR SHAIK:  The report essentially was a report conducted by Police 
Crime Intelligence when Mr Mdluli was the head of Crime Intelligence 
and it eluded to a – a possible gathering of ANC people who were 
planning in New Castle to topple the – the President Zuma.  And we –  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh I remember that part from the media. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  But not from the – yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. So  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes ja. 
MR SHAIK:  It is that report I am referring to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  The Director General under the – the leadership of the 
Director General an investigation into that report was conducted by the 
SSA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is now Ambassador Maqetuka when you… 
MR SHAIK:  Yes by Ambassador Maqetuka. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  He initiated the investigation. 
MR SHAIK:  He initiated a report because again and I do not want to – 
to lead his evidence but he was called by the – the Judge in charge of 
interception who raised a certain concern about the number of 
interceptions that are occurring in the police and there seems to be 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 165 of 194 
 
something not right in the police service.  Ambassador Maqetuka in his 
capacity as a DG of SSA subjected the – the Ndluli Report to a veracity 
test to see how truthful this report is.  Is there anything in this report 
that is correct or accepted?   
CHAIRPERSON:  So – I am sorry.  So there is what the public would 
have read in the newspapers? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  About a gathering of some ANC people in New Castle. 
MR SHAIK:  In New Castle that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or Escort I cannot remember. 
10 
MR SHAIK:  Yes, ja.  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Plotting to unseat – I do not know whether the former 
President or – but plotting some things. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You say that – those media articles were based on 
what you refer to as the Mdluli Report 
MR SHAIK:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, oh. 
MR SHAIK:  The Mdluli Report is the report that spoke of that meeting 
in New Castle, Escort. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  But where the newspapers got their stories you 
do not know? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  We do not know where the newspapers got it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja but there was Mdluli Report that talked about that 
meeting. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 166 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that report was directed to whom? 
MR SHAIK:  To the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To the President. 
MR SHAIK:  And to the – and to the Minister of Intelligence.  The 
Minister of State Security as I understand it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay ja you may continue. 
MR SHAIK:  So we – so Ambassador Maqetuka subject to that report to 
10 
a veracity test to see whether elements of that report is truthful or not 
truthful.  And the conclusion… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry just to make sure we are on the same page.  
What was the gist of that report as you – as you? 
MR SHAIK:  That a grouping of people came together Ministers, non-
Ministers came together in either New Castle or Escort and they had a 
meeting about how to topple President Zuma. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Zuma.  Okay alright. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Continue. 
20 
MR SHAIK:  So that report – our report or the domestic branch’s report 
on that report was submitted via the office of Ambassador Maqetuka to 
the Minister and then from the Minister to the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I know I was interrupting you.  So Ambassador 
Maqetuka initiated an investigation to establish the veracity of the 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 167 of 194 
 
Mdluli Report? 
MR SHAIK:  Of the claims within the Mdluli Report correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja claims in the Mdluli Report and the result of that 
investigation was a report from yourself – from your – from 
Intelligence? 
MR SHAIK:  The SSA yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which was then submitted to the Minister – Minister 
of Intelligence and ultimately to the President. 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay continue. 
10 
MR SHAIK:  Right. So the President starts with our report on the Mdluli 
Report in the meeting that we now have.  And he says that he has read 
our report unfortunately he believes the Mdluli Report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And so too does the Minister believe the Mdluli Report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And he finds that our report not to be standing the test of 
time.  The – so in other words he was rejecting our report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And accepting the Mdluli Report. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So from what you said it appears that your report 
must have – must have been critical of the claims made in the Mdluli 
Report? 
MR SHAIK:  Indeed it was. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And the President was then saying he and the 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 168 of 194 
 
Minister of Intelligence were persuaded by the Mdluli Report rather 
than by your report? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Did the former President give any factual basis for 
rejecting what his security operatives have told him? 
MR SHAIK:  No.  To the best of my recall he did not.  He pronounced 
10 
that he believes the Mdluli Report.  And of course that set the tone of 
our meeting because essentially our report that rejected the Mdluli 
Report was now being rejected by the President who we are directly 
responsible to providing intelligence to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And all three of you and you must tell me if this is not 
something you can say?  All three of you were agreed that your report 
was the correct report? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And your report was the product I take it of your 
20 
own investigations? 
MR SHAIK:  And analysis. 
ADV PRETORIUS:    And analysis. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so it must have been quite something is it not 
for – to have a situation where the – the President rejects a report that 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 169 of 194 
 
three of the most senior people in the intelligence accept to the correct 
report.  It must have been quite something to the three of you or not 
really? 
MR SHAIK:  No in the intelligence world that is considered a – again I 
am trying to find the polite word.  It is considered to be a lack of 
confidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  The – that when a President who is ultimately responsible 
it is different the President saying is – I do not accept your position or I 
do not accept your view about a particular matter. But when you have 
10 
written a report and in which you say that the allegations contained by 
that element within government – and if you remember it is Crime 
Intelligence and he says, no he agrees with the Crime Intelligence 
Report he is just – it is a vote of no confidence in your capacity.  So we 
were all taken aback.  I was taken aback because as I have said I have 
a long history with President Zuma especially in matters of intelligence.  
And on matters of intelligence he would know that you know all of us 
have a long history, all of us have a long working history with him and 
that if our views are rejected it is a tough one to deal with.   
CHAIRPERSON:  And I guess – I guess it is one thing if it is a report by 
20 
one person. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One of you. I think the – the one thing that makes it 
worse is that it is – as far as you are concerned all three of you say 
this is the right position. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 170 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And for that to be rejected by the President would be 
quite something. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Did the matter then turn or did the discussion then 
turn to the issues of the Gupta investigation? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  What transpired? 
MR SHAIK:  The – to my recall Ambassador Maqetuka outlined our 
10 
investigation, the reasons for our investigation.  He had a document 
with him outlining the scan for the reason the investigation.  He took 
the President through the discussion that we have had with the 
Minister.  The acrimonious discussion with the Minister and said to the 
President that we are here to say that we should conduct this 
investigation into the Gupta family.  The President and I must say with 
all due respect to the President he did not go off the handle, he did not 
scream or shout, he said fine he hears us.  But he would like to explain 
the Gupta family to us.  And the President went into a rather long 
explanation about the Gupta family of how he first met them.  Of how 
20 
they were of assistance to Duduzane Zuma when no-one was going to 
employ Duduzane.  How they have helped him in certain of his own 
trials and tribulations.  And he – they are simply a – a business family 
and that they were in fact introduced to the ANC and to people in 
government rather by people associated with President Mbeki and it is 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 171 of 194 
 
– you know – so they are not a – a creation of his own making but this 
is a continuation of a – a relationship that existed through the passage 
of time starting with the Mbeki administration.  So he had a very long – 
he was very calm – he was very clear, very pointed in – in all of the 
issues leaving and saying to us that he did not think that there was an 
issue to be investigated.  You know because he understands all the 
matters connected to the Gupta family.  We listened very painfully – 
patiently. I cannot recall whether we pushed back but it was clear to me 
that and later when I checked with the others that President Zuma in no 
uncertain terms expressed his preference for no investigation to 
10 
continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Did he say anything about foreign capital and the 
purchase of the Uranium Mine? 
MR SHAIK:  No that – that matter was discussed previously with him 
and I.  He may have alluded to it in this meeting but that was a 
previously – he may alluded to it.  That is a lot of speculation and 
rumours about the Gupta’s but you know this is not the case.  They are 
very good business people etcetera.  And that there are a lot of 
rumours around them.  And of course it was associated to the – and 
part of a victimisation narrative.  A victimisation narrative and meaning 
20 
that – and this is what hurt me more that investigation into the Gupta’s 
is because people wanting to get to him as the President.  So he saw it 
as a part of a victimisation narrative and of course what was surprising 
and I say hurtful to me because I have had a long personal history with 
President Zuma and so did Maqetuka and so did Gibson and we were 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 172 of 194 
 
speaking to him in his capacity as President but not unmindful of his 
own long history in intelligence.  And as an intelligence officer he 
should have understood what we were saying that you know this is a 
matter of National Security and if you could simply put your own feeling 
aside for the moment and see it as National Security we would then be 
able after the investigation to deal with the issues insofar as it pertains 
to him. But I got a sense by the time President Zuma was very much 
wedded to the narrative that there are people trying to topple him.  
There are – you know spies around every corner who is trying to set 
him up and – and it is not really about the Gupta’s at the end of the day 
10 
it is about him.  So it was – as he continued to speak it became a very 
uncomfortable discussion for us because I could not – I could not 
categorically say in my own mind that he was actually saying that we 
are part of those who want to topple him.  But I – I was left with that 
feeling and it did make me for the first time uncomfortable.  And this is 
a – a – a relationship of many decades with President Zuma and myself 
and I never imagined that I would ever be in that position where I would 
have to doubt whether he actually trusts me or not.  So it felt odd and 
awkward for me personally.  And I am sure it must have felt like that for 
the others as well. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Did he specify how the Gupta family had helped him 
with his son Duduzane? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes if I recall he mentioned that Duduzane at some point 
went to India for studies and then stayed with the Gupta family or got 
to know the Gupta family there.  And then when he came back they 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 173 of 194 
 
continued that relationship.  And he elaborated that this was a 
relationship that you know did not begin today, did not begin when he 
was a President and begun a long time ago.  And perhaps it even 
reached its height at the time where he was most in despair and it is 
not related to him being President.  The – so I got – I got firmly he – 
and of course I have heard this before and he repeated it.  But this 
time he repeated it in the narrative of people wanting to topple him and 
etcetera. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Assume for a moment that the narrative about the 
Gupta’s and their relationship with the President was being used as 
10 
part of a conspiracy to harm or dethrone President Zuma.  Would that 
have been any reason to stop the investigation? 
MR SHAIK:  No.  The – the basis for the investigation was simple.  It 
was in our opinion a breach at the highest level of the land.  And the 
breach again is either it was information peddling on their part.  A leak 
from the President’s office or a suggestion by them for the appointment 
of a Minister.  And in our understanding of intelligence it was clear in at 
least my mind that they were attempting to engage in created – creating 
dependency and often you create dependency to extract value. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And was this perhaps not in the exact terms you 
20 
have expressed now but were these sentiments conveyed to the former 
President? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes they were conveyed to the former President. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  You say in your statement in relation to what you 
recall and do not recall about a specific instruction from the President.  
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 174 of 194 
 
Well what do you say now about whether he instructed you or not 
expressly to stop the investigation? 
MR SHAIK:  The President in no uncertain terms expressed his positive 
sentiment towards the Gupta’s and in the context of the narrative that 
he outlined that the – that there were attempts to topple him that – I 
can only but read into the matter that it was the non-verbal way of 
instructing us not to continue with the investigation.  And I – I left – I 
left the meeting with no uncertain terms that this investigation should 
not continue.  Not because it was necessitated but because this is the 
wish of the President that it should not happen. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Right.  So do I understand from that answer that 
there was no express instruction? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  In as many words, stop the investigation. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes he did not say, stop this investigation 
ADV PRETORIUS:  You were left with a certain impression at the 
conclusion of the meeting which you have now expressed to the Chair. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Did you act on your conclusion? 
MR SHAIK:  Shamefully I would have to say something rather shameful 
20 
here that I think we left the meeting with the view that the investigation 
should not continue.  And if it does continue it is going to continue at 
the cost of our jobs.  But of course we also left the meeting with the 
view that our relationship with the Minister had broken down.  Now our 
relationship with the President has broken down and in – in not so 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 175 of 194 
 
polite language stuff was going to hit the fan rather soon.  So we – we 
– I do not know whether the – the domestic branch is going to continue 
the investigation or not but I think we were of the view that we will not 
continue the investigation. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  On reflection how did you regard the attitude of the 
President in relation to security matters in general and this matter in 
particular? 
MR SHAIK:  I think the – the President was – he disregarded his own 
experience in this matter.  He disregarded the collective professional 
advice of three of the top senior Directors and Director Generals of the 
10 
intelligence community that was advising that there is a legitimate and 
warranted basis for investigation.  And I think in that regard he did not 
properly apply his mind to – to his obligation to – to provide effective 
and efficient direction of the Intelligence Services.  And I think – I think 
the country has paid the price as a result thereof. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  How did you feel as a senior security official after 
the meeting had concluded? 
MR SHAIK:  Well I think the – to have the President reject your advise 
is – is – when you are the – in the top echelons of the intelligence 
services a very difficult thing to deal with.  Because like I have said it 
20 
is – it is – you are appointed as a Head of an Intelligence Services 
because you believe that you have certain qualities and one of the 
important qualities of an intelligence head is the ability not only to lead 
a service but to able to manage information discreetly with discretion, 
with analysis and when a Head of an Intelligence Service and when 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 176 of 194 
 
three of them say to you that Sir we think this investigation is 
warranted and for the President to say, in not so many words, no it is 
not.  It is – it is a – it is a big thing in the intelligence world.  It is a put 
down that you would spend lots of hours reflecting on.  Because it is a 
fundamental breach of the trust relationship between you and the 
President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I do not know how Crime Intelligence ranks when 
compared to the Intelligence branches that the three of you were 
dealing with or is two and then the Head. 
MR SHAIK:  The Crime Intelligence. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Two - two units.  You, Mr Maqetuka and Mr Njenje. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am just trying to remember whether there were three 
units.  No.  I think there were two units. 
MR SHAIK:  Two units. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The internal and the external? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then Mr Maqetuka was the Head of a combination 
of the two? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  I - I take it that Crime Intelligence was quite 
important.  Maybe might not have been at the same level as the 
Intelligence or Secret - State Security Department that Mr Maqetuka 
was heading. 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 177 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Those were two … 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Different. 
MR SHAIK:  And - and what was unique in our situation that 
Mr Maqetuka or Ambassador Maqetuka had the full authority of a 
Director-General in SSA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  He is the Accounting Officer. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Director Njenje at the time was a Director - appointed at 
10 
the level of a Director-General. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  An Accounting Officer … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And so to was I an Accounting Officer. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Whereas the Crime Intelligence Division … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Is a Division … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR SHAIK:  Of a large organisation in which there are many … 
CHAIRPERSON:  SAPS? 
MR SHAIK:  SAPS in which there are many divisions.  So … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Again it is the level of the Director-General’s is much 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 178 of 194 
 
higher than the level of a divisional head. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm and - and of course there is not just one … 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Person at the level of Director-General.  It is three … 
MR SHAIK:  It is three. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Senior officials. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who are at that level as … 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
As 
well 
and 
the 
department 
that 
10 
Ambassador Maqetuka was heading and the department from which all 
three of you came or the department you were serving different units - 
two different units.  Was the one that effectively specialises on 
Intelligence? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Crime Intelligence is just part of Intelligence 
generally.  So - so this was not just a case of the President not 
agreeing with your report, but also it was a question of him not 
agreeing with your report in preference to what - what other report? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So - so if it was - your report was standing along 
maybe it might have been one thing, but it was a comparison. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I can imagine that you must have felt - all three of 
you must have being - felt quite bad. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 179 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  We did.  We did, sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  The - and of course the - added to the matter is the long 
histories that we have with the - with President Zuma. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  We have advised him through many parts of his life.  When 
he was the Head of Intelligence.  When … 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the ANC? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes and when - in the ANC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
MR SHAIK:  And when he had certain difficulties … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And now that he was the President.  So … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  You - you may not be happy on the way I presented … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  My - my advice … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  But what you would have to accept is that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR SHAIK:  The sincerity of my advice … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Cannot be … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Questioned? 
MR SHAIK:  Questioned … 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 180 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And I think we felt that he questioned the sincerity … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Of our advice and that made - made us feel … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Uncomfortable … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And in the - in the world of New Age and the world which 
we should live in.  In the world of empathy it was difficult to deal with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just going back to the meeting with him.  Am I right to 
10 
understand that there was a big difference between the atmosphere 
under which your meeting with the President was conducted compared 
to the atmosphere which prevailed at the meeting you had with the 
Minister. 
The one with the Minister having been very confrontational 
and the one with the President seemingly from what you say having 
been very civil and polite.  Am I right? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct.  It was very civil.  Very polite … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And I would add one more.  It was prescriptive. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  In the sense that the President was speaking. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Giving his views.  We were listening. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 181 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  Where we could push back we pushed back ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  But ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  The more he spoke the more we retreated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Into the position of ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  So - so would it be correct to say it was a meeting 
where both sides were listening to each other?  They might not have 
agreed, but they were listening to each other - to each other’s points of 
10 
view or is that not a proper description? 
MR SHAIK:  It would - it would be a proper description. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  To the extent that we were listening more. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SHAIK:  As the - President Zuma spoke more ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  But I think he understood ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  The reason why we were arguing that there should be an 
20 
investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  That I - I was left with no uncertain at least in my mind and 
for a couple of reasons.  One is that we were articulate.  The second, 
the reasons we gave were compelling and thirdly that given his own 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 182 of 194 
 
experience in Intelligence that he knew what we were talking about. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did he raise this issue of Mr Njenje’s conflict of 
interest or business interest that … 
MR SHAIK:  No.  He did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The Minister had raised? 
MR SHAIK:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He did not raise that issue? 
MR SHAIK:  No.  He did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So was the position that as far as you could see he 
gave you this long explanation that he gave you, because he wanted 
10 
you to be persuaded that there was no need for - for the investigation.  
Is that how - how you would see it? 
MR SHAIK:  That is - that is the way I - I saw it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How you saw - you said you saw it. 
MR SHAIK:  That he was giving this long explanation so that we could 
be persuaded to the believe that no - no investigation … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Was necessary. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Of course he added it in the context of the narratives to 
20 
dispose him and the victimisation … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Narrative. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Which - which made it difficult for us to push back on … 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 183 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Because here is a President telling you that people are 
trying to topple me.  I am giving you an explanation that my 
relationship with this family is - is untoward and if you are pushing 
back on reason why we - we need to investigate the family.  It is - it is 
as if he is saying that, but you are the guys who want to topple me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So - so the one thing you are clear about.  He did not 
say stop the investigation? 
MR SHAIK:  He did not say stop. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  The second thing you are clear about.  He took 
10 
time to explain his relationship with the Guptas and so on and so on 
and three, it was quite clear that he was against the continuation of the 
investigation. 
MR SHAIK:  That is the correct … (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  His view was against it? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  His view was against it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was against it.  Ja. 
MR SHAIK:  Or put better he did not think it necessary. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Did not think it was. 
MR SHAIK:  Given the fact that he was providing the … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  The background to … (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what he knew. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and then you say he then put in this bid that as I 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 184 of 194 
 
understand it.  You must tell me if I am not understanding your 
evidence correctly.  He then put in this little bit that was too the effect 
that there are people who - there were people who wanted to topple 
him. 
Was - was your impression from the discussion and from what 
he was saying that if the three of you were to push and say - assuming 
you could - were to push and say we want to continue.  You - he might 
see you as part of people who wanted to topple him or what. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  That - that did occur to me in all … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR SHAIK:  Honesty. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but you also said the discussion was such that 
although he did not say you three were a part of that, but you felt some 
...[intervenes]  
MR SHAIK:  No.  He did not say that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You felt some impression that he might not have been 
sure that you are not of it or something like that. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes and do not forget sir that we are - we are Intelligence 
Officers in our own right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR SHAIK:  And joining the dots … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Is not a difficult exercise. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  At that - that level. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 185 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  So one of the dots that was joined in my mind … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SHAIK:  And I am not speaking on behalf of anyone else. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  In my mind that pushing this investigation further … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SHAIK:  Was going to lead in my view … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SHAIK:  To the President concluding … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SHAIK:  That we are part of those now … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of whatever agenda. 
MR SHAIK:  Ja.  The fictional or non-fictional and - and I must say … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  That it is fictional … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SHAIK:  But it was going to lead … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  To that.  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Going back to the issue of who directs the 
operations of … 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Intelligence.  You said that the Minister should not … 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 186 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Be doing that.  At some stage we talked about the 
Head of the Intelligence being the one doing that, but at some stage 
maybe - maybe two times or so you talked about - you talked in a 
manner that made me believe that it would be within the prerogative of 
the President to direct operations … 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of - of Intelligence.  Is that correct? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct.  I mean the - the Constitutional states it.  The - 
quite categorically under Section 2-0-9-(2). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR SHAIK:  “The President is the Head of the National 
Executive.  Must appoint a woman or a man as the 
Head of each Intelligence Service established in 
terms of subsection 1 and must either assume 
political responsibility for the control and direction 
…” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  
 “…direction of any of the services or designate a 
Member of Cabinet to do so.” 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  So the President does have - he does have the power … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  To direct … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 187 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  And of course and this is perhaps something that arising 
out of your - your own report sir would be to tease out this definition of 
political responsibility.  What does political responsibility mean, but 
that is - is an issue that we should park for - for your report, but in my 
view the President has the power to direct the Intelligence Services. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So - no that is - that is fine.  I think that people like 
you who have experience and knowledge of the Intelligence need to 
show sufficient interest in the work of the Commission and the 
recommendations that the Commission could make, because you being 
the experts in the area. 
10 
It would be important that when the Commission looks at 
recommendations or invites - I mean submissions that some - some of 
the people who have expertise and experience.  Could make some 
submissions to say the Commission should consider the following 
possible recommendations that could assist in the future with regard to 
Intelligence. 
So - so - but going back to your meeting with the President.  
So - so your understanding would therefore be that once the President - 
once it is clear from what the President says that he is not approving 
the pursuit of a certain investigation.  Since ultimately the power to 
20 
direct the operations of Intelligence verse in him.  You - you would 
have no choice but to accept that situation? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And ultimately I understand you did accept that 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 188 of 194 
 
situation? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  So to summarise at the point that you departed from 
the Minister - in the meeting with the Minister I understand your 
evidence and correct me if I am wrong to be that the three senior 
Executives were determined to continue with this investigation subject 
to a discussion with the President? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  You went to a meeting with the President where to 
your knowledge he exercised his constitutional powers and influence? 
10 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  The result of that intervention was that the 
investigation was terminated? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Chair it is past 5 o’ clock.  We have a way to go … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And … 
CHAIRPERSON:  No. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  There is much to be done before tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Should we start a little earlier tomorrow?  
20 
Maybe. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Because we have to consult … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because Wednesday is another witness. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  I would prefer if we started at the normal time … 
CHAIRPERSON:  At 10. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 189 of 194 
 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And attempt to finish … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja and - and you think you will manage or you say 
you will cross the bridge when you come to it? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Chair one is reluctant, because - because much of 
this evidence forms the background to evidence that will come later.  
One is reluctant to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not to do justice. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Divest oneself of the advantage of hearing … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Senior officials in the investigations, because the 
question of accountability, the question of controls, the question of 
financial accountability and supervision all are central to evidence that 
is to come.  In other words to answer the question did you pose.  How 
did it happen? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  So okay.  We will - we will start at 10 
tomorrow and then see how it goes, but before we adjourn I just want to 
put this question and maybe you do not have an answer to it.  Do - do 
you know from the point of you - of Intelligence what should happen 
20 
when the Intelligence branch has got information that needs to be - that 
has got an issue that needs to be investigated or people that need - 
need to be investigated, but the Head of the Intelligence or the Minister 
of Intelligence or the President is conflicted.  Well I am - I am asking 
all three because … 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 190 of 194 
 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It could be different.  Do you know what the position 
would be with the - at that time Ambassador Maqetuka if there was 
something and maybe a friend of his seems to be investigated.  What 
would he - would he deal with that situation?  Would he take part in 
making any decisions or would he disclose or would he not be part of it 
and then … 
MR SHAIK:  Sir … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You can deal with the Minister as well.  Although you 
might have dealt with and then I come to the President. 
10 
MR SHAIK:  In - in the matter of governance in relation to all of this 
with Ambassador Maqetuka it is easy.  You can go above to the Minister 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And - and then convince the Minister that that investigation 
needs to happen etcetera.  If - and if there was no Minister you can go 
to the President and justify an investigation or an official or another 
Minister, because in effect that is what happens on Counter Intelligence 
investigations, but when it comes to a matter pertaining to the 
President himself where - that is where the Constitution the law is also 
20 
silent, because it was never a situation envisaged and even if it was 
envisaged the way to deal with the matter I have no other - no - I 
cannot think of any other way. 
I can think about whistleblowing.  I can think about providing 
this kind of information to - to the Joint Standing Committee of 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 191 of 194 
 
Intelligence, but all of them would come up with the same problem and 
this beggars the question that has always been the case.  Who guards 
the guardians and that is the essence you are dealing with here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well - well there is enough time for us to ponder over 
the issue to the extent that it is relevant, but there - I think there is a 
provision in the Constitution which if I recall correctly is along the lines 
that when the President is conflicted.  I do not know whether it simply 
says he is not available to - to perform a certain duty the Deputy 
President should perform the duty. 
Now it maybe that I do not know if it is around 2-0-9 or 190.  
10 
It may be that there might be debates if it says not available.  There 
might be debates about whether or not that would encompass a 
situation.  No.  It is not 2-0-9. Maybe 190.  Whether it would 
encompass a situation where physically the President is available, but 
maybe legally he is not available to perform the duty, because he 
should not do so, because he is conflicted. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Section 90(1). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it Section 90? 
MR SHAIK:  91. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  90(1). 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Do you want to read it Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS:  It reads under the heading Acting President: 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  “When the President is absent from the 
Republic or otherwise unable to fulfil the duties of 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 192 of 194 
 
President or during a vacancy in the Office of the 
President an Officer Bearer in the Order below acts 
as President.” 
And then it lists: 
“A, the Deputy President.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS: 
 
“B, 
a 
Minister 
designated 
by 
the 
President.  C, a Minister designated by the other 
Members of the Cabinet.  D, the Speaker until the 
National Assembly designates one of its other 
10 
members.” 
And then two: 
“An Acting President has the responsibilities, 
powers and functions of the President.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I think - I think that is the one I had in mind.  So 
one of the scenarios is where it says where the President is otherwise 
unable to fulfil the duties.  There may be an argument that it caters for 
a situation where he is physically available … 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But … 
20 
MR SHAIK:  But conflicted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  For some reason … 
MR SHAIK:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Unavailable. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 193 of 194 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe because he is conflicted.  Maybe because of 
some other reason there maybe, but also I think the ethics - Executive 
Ethics Act if I am not mistaken maybe having something about … 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or maybe even the Constitution maybe having 
something to say Members of the Executive should not act in 
circumstances where they are conflicted, but we do not need to look at 
it now.  So I - I was just thinking whether in that kind of situation 
whether he should have dealt with the matter himself or he should have 
let somebody else deal with it, but … 
10 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We - we might look at it closer to the time of the 
recommendations and the debates and submissions. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  Section 96(2) … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  And 96(1) also refer to the Code of Ethics to which 
you referred. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS:  “Members of the Cabinet and Deputy 
Ministers must act in accordance with the Code of 
20 
Ethics prescribed by National Legislation.  Members 
of the Cabinet and Deputy Ministers may not 
undertake any other paid work, act in a way that is 
inconsistent with their office or expose themselves 
to any situation involving the risk of a conflict 
25 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 192 
 
Page 194 of 194 
 
between their official responsibilities and private 
interests or use their position or any information 
entrusted 
to 
them 
to 
enrich 
themselves 
or 
improperly benefit any other person.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No.  Thank you.  Thank - thank you very much.  
We will adjourn for today and we will start at normal time tomorrow - 10 
am.  So we leave it at that.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 26 NOVEMBER 2019 
 
10 
