 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 
 
 
 
DAY 193 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 2 of 185 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 26 NOVEMBER 2019 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Pretorius, good morning everybody. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  We are ready.  Good morning Mr Shaik.  
Are we ready? 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes we are. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Chair just as homework we looked at the 
interim Constitution.  There are a few more references other than the 
ones to which we alluded yesterday.  They are not material but we will 
10 
prepare a memorandum which we can simply submit to as a matter of 
law.  Morning Mr Shaik.   
MR SHAIK:  Morning. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  You will recall that yesterday we ended at 
the point where you had described to the Chair the contents of your 
meeting with the former President.   
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  After that meeting what did you learn 
about the incident involving Minister Mbalula and the information given 
to him or allegedly given to him by the Gupta’s regarding his imminent 
20 
appointment as Minister? 
MR SHAIK:  The – I have learnt that the information alleged in the 
newspapers was indeed correct.  That Minister Mbalula in the NEC 
meeting raised the issue of his appointment or the notification of his 
appointment by the Gupta’s before he was appointed.  So that matter 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 3 of 185 
 
was confirmed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did that confirmation come immediately after your 
meeting with the former President? 
MR SHAIK:  It came – it came – it came after the meeting with the 
former President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It came out. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It came out of that meeting? 
MR SHAIK:  No it came – no came – no came after the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh after? 
10 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR SHAIK:  And the – I have consulted with the person who gave me 
that information. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And he in fact did appear before the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And it is former Minister Siphiwe Nyanda. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you.  So… 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  You have described to the Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – I am sorry Mr Pretorius.  You have moved away 
from the meeting with the President? 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just to… 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Well save for one question but in effect 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 4 of 185 
 
yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay let – well let me wait until you have asked 
that one question because it might be the one I am thinking of.  So I 
will let you. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Your interaction with Minister Cwele and 
your meeting with the President.  You have alluded to the effect that 
those interactions had on your working relationship both with the 
Minister and with the President, the former President. 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Just sum up the… 
10 
MR SHAIK:  Well in my opinion. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  The outcome please. 
MR SHAIK:  In my opinion it was quite clear that I have lost the 
confidence of the President.  And secondly my relationship with 
Minister Cwele was set on an irrecoverable breakdown trajectory.  And 
this was and I must say one of the many issues in which I did not see 
eye to eye with Minister Cwele. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  When you say there had been a loss of 
confidence in your view was the loss of confidence by the President 
justifiable? 
20 
MR SHAIK:  No it was not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were you able to tell during the meeting with the 
President whether in expressing the views that he expressed he in good 
faith did not see your point of view about the investigation or would you 
say he saw our point of view but maybe there were other reasons why 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 5 of 185 
 
he continued to take the position that he took?  Is that something you 
are able to – to – to assess or is that something that you were not able 
to assess?  And you do not whether it was a case of him genuinely 
believing that you were wrong to want to do this as opposed to say – to 
knowing that you are right but not wanting it done for whatever reason? 
MR SHAIK:  Sir I would answer that question in two ways and using two 
frames of reference.  The first in – is my capacity as an Intelligence 
Officer.  I do think the President in his capacity as a President 
understood what we were saying and the enormous consequences of 
what we were saying and it is for that reason he went into a very 
10 
elaborate explanation of his relationships.  If he was not concerned 
about what we were saying he would have simply dismissed our 
concerns.  So when I – it is my experience that when someone goes 
into an elaborate explanation of relationships it is because they are 
seeking to clarify that relationship and the basis of it. So that is my – 
wearing my intelligence hat.  As someone who has known the President 
for an incredibly long period of time I do know that President Zuma 
when – I will not say he is stubborn but when – when he does make up 
his mind on a matter it is often difficult to shift that mind-set.  So I 
think there was an element of that.  But I think thirdly and I have had 
20 
this experience in relation to my own family member and his 
relationship.  He – I think he was being very loyal to the friendship that 
he was having with the Gupta family and often that loyalty even though 
was causing him some embarrassment in respect of his public office the 
mind-set in his mind that he could defend that friendship and he could 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 6 of 185 
 
do so justifiably was made easier in his mind-set by embracing – 
embracing the victimhood state of mind.  And I think he was as a 
consequence in a state of mind that says, he can see nothing wrong, 
there is nothing wrong here and that we should accept that there is 
nothing wrong.  So the facts did not matter at that point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it is quite important for – for me to try and 
understand various perspectives and also to try and understand exactly 
what his thinking was in regard to this issue as well as in regard to 
other allegations and evidence that has been given in regard to other 
incidences relating to the Gupta’s about him.  Mr Mbalula gave 
10 
evidence here that on the – at the meeting of the NEC where he raised 
the issue that Mr Ajay Gupta I think it was – Mr Ajay Gupta had called 
him ahead of the official announcement of his appointment as Minister.  
I think it was – I cannot remember whether it was of Police or of Sports 
and Recreation when he raised that issue at the NEC.  If I recall 
correctly he testified – it might not have been at that meeting but he 
testified if I remember correctly that whenever the issue of Mr Zuma’s 
friendship with the Gupta family was raised but maybe this was Mr 
Ramatlhodi maybe I am getting mixed up.  But one of them said 
whenever this issue was raised with – with him to say, this friendship, 
20 
your friendship with the Gupta family is damaging to the organisation 
and to government whoever of the two that is Mr Mbalula or Mr 
Ramatlhodi whoever gave the evidence that his response was of that 
something like there was nothing wrong with the friendship.  The Gupta 
family had helped I think he meant his children when nobody could help 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 7 of 185 
 
them.  So one of the questions that arises in my mind is whether if 
these things are true because he still will come and deal with them and 
give his side of the story but if they are true whether this may have 
been a situation where it can be said that he was beholden to the 
family and whatever would harm them he would try and protect them.  
Or whatever they wanted they would get.  Maybe that is to why it may 
be most of the things that they might want they would get.  There is 
also the evidence which he has disputed by Mr Themba Maseko who 
says he was told by the late Minister Chabane in I think late January of 
2011 that he had received a call from President Zuma who at the time 
10 
was out of the country to say he should remove Mr Maseko from the 
position of CEO of GCIS and – or dismiss him or remove him and by the 
time he arrived back in the country Mr Maseko should no longer be in 
that position.  As I see – as I say he has denied that evidence but if 
that evidence were true it may be linked to the fact that according to Mr 
Maseko a few months earlier he had refused to cooperate with the 
Gupta’s.  He had a meeting with Mr Ajay Gupta and a telephone 
conversation which ended on the basis that Mr Ajay Gupta said 
according to Mr Maseko “I see that you do not want to cooperate I will 
report you to your seniors and they will sort you out or you will be 
20 
sorted out.”  So it may be linked to that.  Now if it is true and then you 
have a situation where three senior officials of the intelligence come to 
him, they are clear that there should be an investigation involving the 
Gupta’s and he is clear that the investigation is a bad idea. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 8 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the – the three senior officials end up not having 
to proceed.  And – and you say as you understand the position he 
appreciated the threat to National Security it is not as if he did not 
appreciate it. 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I do not know whether given that – all this that I 
have just mentioned you – you are able to say anything about what 
impact this friendship may have had on him in regard to making any 
decisions that connect – that were connected with the them or their 
businesses. 
10 
MR SHAIK:  Chair I do not – I do not have specific knowledge about 
that relationship and I like – like most others were reading the 
newspapers, picking up what we were picking up about what – what 
would appear to be an inappropriate association and of course the 
appropriateness of the association may not lie in the friendship itself.  
But it was quite evident that some kind of influence peddling was taking 
place by the Gupta brothers and in particular one of them that has been 
mentioned.  And the President needed to be alive to that information 
peddling.  And the fact that he was dismissive of it will forever remain a 
mystery to me and whether it was – whether he was dismissive of it 
20 
because he was beholden I have no particular knowledge of that.  But 
the inappropriateness of the behaviour of the Gupta family I think that 
is not in doubt anymore.  And I must say that I was present with Mr 
Maseko at the time that he did get that call. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 9 of 185 
 
MR SHAIK:  I recall we were having lunch together and he was on his 
way to Sun City and he was going to Sun City when he was sitting 
across me when his phone range. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And I could hear it was a difficult phone call that was 
taking place.  So when he put the phone down he mentioned to me, can 
you believe I just got a call from Ajay Gupta who I do not know who is 
telling me that his – I must take adverts out in the New Age newspaper 
etcetera.  And Mr Maseko was quite rattled by that phone call.  And it is 
one of the instances that I had even though indirect but somewhat 
10 
direct experience of the kind of abuses or the kind of approaches that 
the Gupta family was taking with government officials. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MR SHAIK:  But like I said Sir it remains a mystery and I think the 
country awaits President Zuma’s explanation for what was the nature of 
that relationship and why – why in the light of so many people raising 
the issue he still felt it necessary to defend it.  And if not defend it not 
put the kind of appropriate checks and balances in place.  And this is – 
this goes to why the office of the President is so important to be staffed 
by the appropriate people to be managed in a particular way.  It is to 
20 
avoid you know in a sense undue influence on the office for whatever 
reason and the intelligence services are there in fact to protect the 
President from such undue influences. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No thank you.  So – and you said that after the 
meeting the three of you accepted or decided that there was not going 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 10 of 185 
 
to be an investigation, is that right? 
MR SHAIK:  That was my understanding Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That was your understanding/ 
MR SHAIK:  That was my understanding. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And certainly as far as you know the investigation did 
not proceed? 
MR SHAIK:  The investigation – well there was subsequently no report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  That was given to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR SHAIK:  On the progress of the – 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Of the investigations so I can only but assume. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SHAIK:  That the investigation did not continue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  But events soon caught up with all of us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  In respect of this matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  You said something yesterday and I just want to 
20 
make sure I understand it.  I thought expressed some kind of 
disappointment that you found yourself in a situation where you had to 
accept that whereas you thought an investigation was called for but 
none was going to happen. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 11 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  I just want you to deal with that a little to 
make sure I understood. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What the basis of your disappointment was.  I do not 
know if you put it as a disappointment but… 
MR SHAIK:  It was – it is a – a bit of an internal reflection and I have 
debated often myself. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And amongst our colleagues whether we should have 
continued. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  With the investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Whether we should have said, this is it and draw the line 
in the sand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And conducted that investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes it would have led to enormous troubles. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR SHAIK:  It would have meant going through labour courts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Because the moves to get us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Removed from the Intelligence Services have done. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 12 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And I think it required a – a – it required an extraordinary 
amount of courage and foresight. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  To be able to say, despite the fact that you have lost the – 
the confidence of the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  To continue with something. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Because there was a Constitutional Court. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Ruling on this matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm 
MR SHAIK:  It is the matter of Billie Masetla versus the Presidency 
where implied in the power to appoint. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Is the power to remove. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  So yes it was clear that the – the power to remove us did 
reside with the President. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And if we did continue with the investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  I think that removal would have been forthcoming. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 13 of 185 
 
MR SHAIK:  And of course then it meant us contesting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  The removal on the basis of constructive dismissal. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Or – and find the labour law hook to find – to get back to 
your job. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  But it was a mountain too high to climb. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  But I – I often think and that is why I said it reflected a 
10 
shame partly because it was a battle that we found ourselves fighting.  
The – but we come from organisations.  We used to come from the 
ANC.  We have history.  They – they are people who know us. There 
was organisational meetings.  There is different cabinet Ministers at the 
time.  There was the Deputy President.  There were others but there 
was a silence.  And in the light of the silence is an acceptance of 
defeat so to speak.  So I think – and I am not – I am not blaming 
anyone for their silence.  I am not holding them responsible for their 
silence but silence became a feature of the way governance was 
occurring and accepting your dismissal or accepting your removal 
20 
became to be a very weird definition of dignity.  But there was a 
silence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you refer to the judgment of the Constitutional 
Court in the Billie Masetla matter.  As I recall that judgment it would not 
have provided you with any comfort because for the situation you were 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 14 of 185 
 
faced – you were contemplating. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because in that matter although it was found that I 
think – I hope I am not misrepresenting the judgment.  It was found that 
I think Mr Masetla had been unlawfully dismissed or unconstitutionally 
dismissed.  The Constitutional Court said he should not be reinstated. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And therefore you were very much in the same 
position an if the President decided to remove you and you believed 
you he was doing so unlawfully chances that if you went to court you 
10 
could get your job back might have been very diminished if there at all. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so you – if you were aware of all of those things 
you – all of that would have been something that would not have given 
you much courage. 
MR SHAIK:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I would imagine to – to follow that possible approach 
of saying we will pursue the investigation if we get fired we will 
approach the courts. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  The – yes – I mean that would – that would have 
20 
been a – a demonstration of the breakdown of trust between ourselves 
and the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And of course the Minister. Which – which would have 
worked against us because the courts would have in my view have 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 15 of 185 
 
argued knowing that it was breakdown in – in trust you still continued 
with an operation for which it was preferred that you did not do and we 
would have entered into the realm of insubordination.  So I think we 
wanted to avoid that.  But we did use – in fact I did use the benefit of 
that Constitutional judgment because the Constitutional Court as you 
correctly said ruled that the dismissal was unlawful but he cannot get 
his job back because of the irretrievable breakdown of trust.  But the 
relief the court gave him was that his contract and all the perks and all 
the things that was due to him had to be made payable to him.  And I 
think that was a – a judgment that gave me much relief because in the 
10 
subsequent matters that occurred between the Minister and I I relied on 
that judgment to ensure my rights. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  I think it could have provided the relief in terms 
of making sure that even if you did not get the job back you would be 
paid the remuneration that you would have received if you had 
continued with your… 
MR SHAIK:  Contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Term – your contract up to the end. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The only thing of course is that if your focus was to 
20 
get the investigation done it would mean that you would not get it done 
because if you are removed and you cannot come back you will get 
your money but that very investigation that you really wanted to be 
done then will not done.  And I think it is unlikely anyone who gets 
appointed to – in your place would pursue it knowing that you had been 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 16 of 185 
 
removed for wanting to pursue it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so the judgment might have taken care of your 
financial situation and the family which is an important thing but to the 
extent that you may have thought this which we want to investigate 
relates to National Security and it is important for the nation that would 
probably have come to an end. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SHAIK:  The – and I think that – that unfortunately is the case.  
10 
However I think and I am just speculating again that given the issues 
that are there all law enforcement agencies, all law enforcement 
agencies would have to apply their minds to the question of an 
investigation into the Gupta’s in regard to any criminal matter.  If I 
could offer some advice Sir I would suggest that the commission makes 
such an inquiry of all law enforcement agencies including the South 
African Revenue Services whether in the light of speculations or issues 
that were publicly reported whether they conducted any investigations 
and would they avail those investigations to the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it is interesting you make that suggestion 
20 
because your evidence as – actually triggered that thought in my mind.  
Because if the intelligence wanted to do an investigation and this is 
what happened what other security related agencies may have had to – 
may have had cause to investigate one or other thing relating to the 
Gupta Families.  Did they make decisions to investigate?  Or did they 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 17 of 185 
 
not make the decisions to investigate even though there were grounds 
to do so?  And if they did make the decision to investigate where did 
those investigations end?  And did they get the support that they were 
supposed to get from whoever?  Were there any people who interfered 
with those investigations?  So I think your suggestion is a - is a good 
one.  It is important to have a - a view as part of trying to see to what 
extent various - you know - security agencies may have had 
opportunities of doing something and maybe they did not do anything 
themselves or tried, but were not - were prevented or were not assisted 
to - to continue. 
10 
MR SHAIK:  Or persuaded otherwise. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Thank you.  Mr - Mr Pretorius.  You can proceed. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you.  Rising out of your evidence 
this morning Mr Shaik you have dealt with the meeting between you and 
the President and tried to understand from a subjective point of view 
his motivations, reasoning, good faith stance and the like.  I would like 
to put it to you from a different perspective please. 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  At that meeting the President was being 
approached in his capacity as Head of Intelligence? 
20 
MR SHAIK:  As the Head of the Executive responsible for Intelligence. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Intelligence.  Yes.  We have used the 
term … 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Loosely I understand and you have 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 18 of 185 
 
referred to his constitutional responsibilities in relation to the control 
and direction of services in 2-0-9 of the Constitution? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  At that meeting the issue of his 
relationship with the Gupta family arose? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And he sought to explain at the very least 
let or even defend his relationship with the Gupta family? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Now clearly and you have used the word 
10 
there is a conflict? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Objectively speaking your opinion and it 
is an opinion and the Chair will be aware of that obviously, but he is 
interested in opinions.  Given your knowledge and experience of the 
constitutional responsibility of the President in his capacity as the 
Executive personal accountable for Intelligence.  Was this a justifiable 
approach? 
MR SHAIK:  In my opinion sir it - it was not a justifiable approach.  The 
President in his capacity as President could not separate his personal 
20 
relationship from his responsible as a Head of State.  In particular to 
the advice that was given by his Chiefs of Intelligence and I think in - 
in that sense he was not fully cognisant of his responsibility and the 
constitutional responsibility that he had in the direction of the 
Intelligence Services in either what the Intelligence Services do or do 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 19 of 185 
 
not do. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Let us move to paragraph 29 of your 
statement.  If we may. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that moving away from the meeting? 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Just one last question.  Maybe two.  In terms 
of what the President said to you at that meeting after you and your 
colleagues outlined why you believe it was necessary to conduct an 
investigation.  You did say that he gave a long history of the Gupta 
family and maybe his relationship with them as well, but he went to 
10 
town explaining various things. 
My question is this in whatever he said was he addressing 
the pertinent issues or the pertinent grounds which made you or the 
three of you believe that there should be an investigation? 
MR SHAIK:  No.  He was not.  The - he was not in - in everything he 
was saying.  Yes.  It would have explained the close personal 
relationship that he had which maybe justifiable which may be 
understandable, but he was not applying his mind to the National 
Security issue that information was peddled which implicates his office 
and therefore needed to be investigated objectively and I think the one 
20 
- the one issue that I must raise is that the difficulty the three of us had 
in speaking to - to former President Zuma about the matter is that in 
many ways he was once upon a time our Head of ANC Intelligence and 
the relationship was making the assumption and we were making the 
assumption that the - the fact that we were raising it and the way we 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 20 of 185 
 
were raising it. 
That the President would rely on his previous knowledge 
about Intelligence and no that this is a serious matter that needs to be 
looked at.  Irrespective of his personal relationships an approach could 
have been designed to have managed that and insure that you know the 
personal relationship is - is taken into consideration in the finding of - 
of the investigation itself.  So I just got the sense that his state of mind 
had involved to a point where he could not make that separation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you - you understood my question correctly, 
but I am going to say this just to make sure it is clear.  You could have 
10 
a situation where you get evidence that so and so was - has committed 
the crime of theft at such and such a location.  Blah, blah, blah and you 
have information that he was seen in that vicinity maybe carrying 
something that looked like what has been stolen.  So you say I want to 
investigate this, but somebody who is a friend to that person might say 
to you no, no, no.  You are wasting your time. 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That man is a good man … 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And he might start telling you about let us say his 
20 
struggle credentials and so on … 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And so on and so on, but not answering the question 
whether there is not a need to investigate, because there is information 
that he was seen … 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 21 of 185 
 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the vicinity of where something was stolen and 
carrying something that looked like what was stolen. 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So - so that is what I am looking - I am looking at. 
MR SHAIK:  Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Whether within the context of that example he was 
dealing with the facts. 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That give rise to the - to the conclusion we should 
10 
have an investigation or whether it was a question of saying, no.  So 
and so is a very good person. 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Look what he has done for the community.  You know.  
Maybe the Gupta family are employing a lot of South Africans and what, 
what, what, but not going to the issues. 
MR SHAIK:  Sure.  Sir and - and I think we should also be mindful that 
at that point in time the - President Zuma himself has come through a 
decade or possibly more than a decade of investigations in the 
unfortunate way this has happened.  So investigations into his friends.  
20 
I am sorry.  I just have to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR SHAIK:  A moment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR SHAIK:  A smile on this, but investigations into his friends. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 22 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  One of them having been Schabir Shaik. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Led - led to prosecution … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And successful prosecution as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  So I could understand sitting … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR SHAIK:  Outside of this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  His state of mind … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  When he hears his friends … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Are getting investigated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  It is so easy in his state of mind to move from is this 
another attempt to come towards prosecuting me. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  Etcetera. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  but that would be the very me trying to be incredibly … 
CHAIRPERSON:  To understand? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 23 of 185 
 
MR SHAIK:  To understand the state of mind. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  To put yourself in your - his position? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct.  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  In his.  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  But notwithstanding that and that is why I am saying that 
there came a point in his administration where he could not separate 
even in his state of mind the personal relationship with the Guptas from 
his responsibility as the Head of the National Executive with certain 
10 
constitutional obligations and requirements.  All things started to be 
seen through the same prism and created enormous complications. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I think it is - it is good you make the point that 
maybe if one puts oneself in his shoes.  It is to be expected that 
somebody in that position would think about the past.  What has 
happened to one of his friends and the fact that although charges 
against him had been withdrawn. 
There - there were still attempts in the courts to make sure 
that decision is reversed.  I would imagine that it is legitimate to think 
maybe all of those could be things that he could think - could have 
20 
thought about. 
MR SHAIK:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  The … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I - I have heard evidence from Mr Nxasana - who 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 24 of 185 
 
was NDPP at a certain stage - talking about how he or his departure 
from the Office of NDPP.  One of the things he said was that he had 
been told that some people had told President Zuma that he was 
contemplating reinstating the charges against him that had been 
withdrawn and one of the things that the Commission is looking at is 
why was he removed, because the settlement agreement made it clear 
as I recall. 
That he was fine for - for the job and there are all kinds of 
things.  So I just mention these things, because one has got to try and 
have a - a globular picture.  Thank you.  Mr Pretorius.  You may 
10 
proceed. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Well from legal team’s point of view I 
would like to comeback to a particular point … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  In relation to this … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Exchange.  You have had a discussion 
about the President’s apprehensions.  His friendships.  His history.  
What he feared might happened to him in relation to his own pending 
prosecution or perhaps it was pending at that time, but those go to 
20 
motivation and understanding his state of mind. 
If we may return to an objective assessment of the position.  
Whilst there may be explanations for why the former President acted in 
that meeting and subsequent thereto in the way that he did.  
Objectively speaking did he carry out his duties as Head - Executive 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 25 of 185 
 
Head accountable constitutionally for Intelligence? 
MR SHAIK:  Regrettably not. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  After that meeting did you continue 
working for the State Security Agency? 
MR SHAIK:  I did.  I did for a few more months. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And during the remaining period of your 
employment as SSA what happened to the developing or the not 
developing relationship? 
MR SHAIK:  Well the - my relationship in particular with Minister Cwele 
broke down completely.  He took to micromanaging the - the 
10 
organisation.  The - the foreign branch and he would have people in the 
organisation report directly to him.  If he wanted things to be done he 
will do it via them.  I was required to just sign off on - on matters. 
He put everyone in a very difficult position.  He put - there 
were some individuals who gloated in this, but there were others very 
capable people who felt that they were put in a very compromising 
position, because they respected me as the - the Head of the Service, 
but yet they were receiving instructions from the Minister’s Office to do 
certain things which required my signature and just my signature not - 
not an explanation. 
20 
Not the - a report to etcetera and this became a - an 
untenable situation for me and - and there were on - on different 
occasions the - the Minister took to let us say - let us say a - a 
particular feature that I have since discovered so in my other job.  Took 
to me having to write explanations on almost everything. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 26 of 185 
 
I needed to write explanations in relation to a friendship I 
had.  The person had died.  I had to explain that friendship.  I had to 
explain you know different things I did and he wanted this in writing and 
I would - I would duly oblige my - him and - and give such things in 
writing, but I think we were both coming to an understanding that the 
relationship - something needs to happen, because the relationship is - 
is not working. 
I appealed to and I do not know whether it was in this period 
or before.  I appealed to President Zuma to intervene in this - in this 
matter, but at some point I - I received a phone call to meet with the 
10 
Minister and … 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Was this around June 2011? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Okay. 
MR SHAIK:  And - and he asked - he expressed his unhappiness and 
asked whether I would consider a resignation from - from the 
department and get transferred to another department.  I said I would 
give serious consideration to this.  I would think about it and - and 
come back to him on - on the matter. 
However before - and I really did think of resigning.  I thought 
20 
that was the most elegant way out of the situation.  I must say by then 
and - and this - by then I was - I was thinking that the relationship it 
just - you know.  It is just not worth the energy anymore.  The job is not 
worth the energy. 
It is a great passionate wonderful futuristic job, but in the 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 27 of 185 
 
hands of this Minister it is only going to lead to frustration for me, but 
before I could tender my resignation he called me to meet him and I 
went to the meeting and I - I was really thinking that at this meeting I 
would be served my notice of termination, but to my surprise he made 
an offer to me. 
That was not for him to make, but nevertheless he made the 
offer and that offer was that he was going to appoint me as the South 
African Ambassador to Japan. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Pause there for a moment.  Your 
knowledge of where the power lay in relation to appointments of 
10 
Ambassadors.  What was it? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  At that point and again I do not want to be 
disrespectful to Minister Maita, but at that point I did get the sense that 
Minister Cwele was acting as the Shadow Foreign Minister, but even if 
he was acting as a Shadow Foreign Minister he had no power no 
constitutional authority to make the offer nor did he have the authority 
to make such appointment. 
The 
appointment 
of 
Ambassadors 
is 
a 
constitutional 
responsibility of the President and the fact that he could make this offer 
to me was engaging me in a discussion of - which I considered to be 
20 
unconstitutional and I did not want to be part of that discussion with 
him and - and I - I informed him accordingly that Ambassadorships is 
not for Ministers to - to appoint and please do not discuss this matter 
with me.  If he wants he could ask the President to discuss it with me 
who has the authority to appoint Ambassadors. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 28 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you certain that he put it to you in terms of him 
appointing you or it could be that he offered to make a recommendation 
to the President that you be appointed Ambassador of Japan? 
MR SHAIK:  Sir, I have - I have - in that meeting and I remember it very 
well, because it was a very - a meeting that was - I call my subsequent 
meeting with Mr Cwele very tense.  He said I want to appoint you as 
Ambassador and I think the use of the word “I” really sparked a - a 
flare in my - in my limbic brain and I really got angry, because I could 
not accept the level of unconstitutionality that Minister Cwele was now 
going through. 
10 
He did not say I will recommend.  In fact I said to him that he 
does not have this authority to appoint people as Ambassadors and 
then he said, but you know this is the way we speak in the ANC and I 
had to remind him even on the matters of the ANC I may have a little bit 
more knowledge than he has, but I did not want to push that matter 
further, because I was not there in my capacity as an ANC Member. 
I was there as the Head of the South African Secret Service 
and I then - then thanked him for his offer, but said it is not for him to 
offer and if the President wants to - to appoint me as an Ambassador 
the President is free to have that discussion with me and I think I - I 
20 
did say to him categorically that you and I both need to now agree that 
the relationship is irreversibly broken down between us and that I would 
want to discuss this matter now with the President and I sought his 
permission to - to go and see the President.  To discuss my exit from or 
my exit from the department. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 29 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  You mention in - you mention in your - 
may I Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  (No audible reply). 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  You mention in your statement that your 
reaction to the offer for want of a better word for the moment was not 
an attractive one in any event.  The offer to go to Japan. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes, because at - at that time unfortunately there was the - 
the nuclear - there was an earthquake in Japan and the - there was a 
nuclear meltdown in terms of the - the reactors and there was a bit of 
panic.  Even though that was a bit far from Tokyo.  There was a bit of 
10 
panic about what are the consequences, but - so Japan did not appear 
to me in that time to be a - an attractable offer. 
I knew its importance.  It is - it is a country in the G7.  Their - 
their relationships with Africa.  The relationship with South Africa.  So I 
knew it was an important posting, but it was not a - an attractive one 
for me at that time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then you said something about Minister Cwele 
being Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs.  Tell me more about what - 
what does that mean? 
MR SHAIK:  Well during my time as Head of the Secret Service and you 
20 
will understand sir that we are almost very parallel to - to the 
Department of Foreign Affairs or it is now called the Department of 
International Relations and … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  Corporation, but I did find the propensity of Minister Cwele 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 30 of 185 
 
travelling abroad to various countries often in - in the company of the 
President and often in the company of the Minister of International 
Relationships - International Relations.  I found that to be odd.  Odd in 
the sense that that is not the task of a Minister of Intelligence and 
again it - it was raising this concern in my own mind about what does a 
Minister of Intelligence do and - because at the time he was acting as a 
Special Envoy. 
As time he was involved in multilateral issues etcetera.  I am 
not - so I am not saying that he does - should not have done that.  I am 
just saying that the level and the amount of trips that were - were being 
10 
conducted and the engagements.  It came across to me as a Shadow 
Foreign Affairs Minister … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And it maybe.  So it is not … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  It is not - not a good thing or a bad thing.  I am not going 
putting it like that.  I am just saying … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  It maybe so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No.  No.  That - that is - that is fine.  I am just 
20 
thinking that the notion of a Shadow Minister … 
MR SHAIK:  Is that you are not … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it not - is it not always attached to the opposition 
party?  Okay.  Alright.  Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Did you subsequently meet with the 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 31 of 185 
 
President -b former President? 
MR SHAIK:  I - I did.  I - I met with former President Zuma. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And briefly what occurred at that 
meeting? 
MR SHAIK:  And I put - I put to Mr - I put to the President and I - and I 
must say that I put it in a way that did not open a discussion.  I put to 
the President that my relationship with Minister Cwele is - is done and 
dusted.  I am not willing to go back and the question and I then said to 
him in a jovial kind of way that you know and of all things he posted me 
- he wants to post to me to Japan.  You know. 
10 
The - so the President laughed on that and I said to the 
President you know.  He now wants to take your job you know.  So we 
had a light exchange about the matter and then said to the President 
that if there was another offer - if there was New York or Canada you 
know I would give serious consideration to it. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Why Canada? 
MR SHAIK:  Canada because my wonderful, beautiful soulmate my wife 
is Canadian and I thought that she has spent an enormous amount of 
time in South Africa and through all my trials and tribulations.  So the 
one good thing I could do for her is to take her and the kids to Canada 
20 
where at least the children could spend much more time with the 
grandparents.  So Canada was attractive in - in that regard. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you - you came up with that idea? 
MR SHAIK:  I came up with that idea. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 32 of 185 
 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay and what was the President’s reaction to that 
part? 
MR SHAIK:  The President smiled and in his very jovial way says leave 
it to me my brother.  I will see what I can do.  I will come back to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  What happened then?  Let us continue the 
storyline. 
MR SHAIK:  So about three hours later I remember I was just about to 
go to bed and I got a phone call from the Director-General of DIRCO.  
10 
Ambassador Jerry Matjila who is now the Ambassador in United 
Nations. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Just for record purposes.  DIRCO being? 
MR SHAIK:  Oh.  DIRCO being the Department of International 
Relations and Cooperation … 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right. 
MR SHAIK:  And the DG said to me and we shall refer to each other as 
Ambassadors.  So he was very polite.  He says Ambassador Shaik I 
would like to inform you that we have - we will be moving the 
Ambassador from Canada to Japan.  The Canadian post is now 
20 
available.  Would you give us your acceptance of the post? 
I - I put the phone down and - and I was in a state of shock 
and then I will tell you why, because it is now -this is the first direct 
indication to me that it is President Zuma who really wants me to leave 
the Intelligence Services.  I had that discussion with no one else, but 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 33 of 185 
 
President Zuma about either New York or - or Canada and within hours 
of that phone call things were put in place … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  For - for my leaving.  So I said I would come back to him 
the - my wife was very excited about it.  So we had a family discussion 
with the - with my wife’s parents.  So we could discuss whether we 
should take this offer up or not and after due consideration - after due 
consideration I declined. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   When the DG, Mr Jerry Matjila, spoke to 
you did he make any reference to the President, you have made the 
10 
point that the President was the only person to whom you had 
expressed this preference that if the offer was in relation to New York 
or Canada you could consider it and it seems that he – what he said to 
you seemed to be based on somebody telling him of part of your 
discussion with the President, whether it was the President or 
somebody else who got information from the President we don’t know, 
but did he in his conversation with you say I have been asked by the 
President to approach you following the discussion you have had with 
him or anything like that? 
MR SHAIK:   No he did not, Director General, DG Matjila at the time did 
20 
not make reference to any discussion with the President or in fact the 
Minister, but he did say to me he said Mo man you’ve got a lot of pull 
so ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  You have a lot of? 
MR SHAIK:   Pull, you know, so we joked about that, but no he didn’t 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 34 of 185 
 
mention it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But what he said to you if you didn’t think it was 
linked to the discussion you had with the President would have been 
coming out of the blue? 
MR SHAIK:   Yes it would have, ja, but I knew I had that so it was you 
know I was taken aback by the fact that this happened so soon, I would 
have expected a – the President to call me to say listen I’ve given it 
consideration etcetera, but it was now put in motion so to speak. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hmm, hmm, but you say after due consideration you 
declined? 
10 
MR SHAIK:   Yes.  And the consideration was very simple that at the 
time, the time it was an age thing, I think I must have been 52 or 53 
and if I took the posting I would have returned at the age of about 57.  
At the age of 57 to start a new career would be quite challenging, I am 
not saying is impossible.  So I then we evaluated it as a family from 
yes and we appreciated the benefit of it would have been in Canada but 
I for one wanted to move out of government now, or wanted to move out 
of the situation of insufferable ministers and to be put back in a 
position where you now as an ambassador will have to report to a 
minister and I did not have a good relationship with Minister 
20 
Mashabane, and I did not want to be in a situation where I would just 
be you know having to accept whatever is coming to me and not having 
options.   
 
So I evaluated it together with my wife and she was very 
gracious in accepting that okay we turn down the offer and we will start 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 35 of 185 
 
a new life. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   And I understand, it is not controversial, 
I can lead you on it I presume, that you resigned in February 2012? 
MR SHAIK:   Yes I did resign in February 2012 but let me just say on 
the resignation, because it was a negotiated matter, I felt the moment 
we took the decision to not accept the posting to Canada I had to 
inform President Zuma that I am declining the offer, I did not want to go 
through the back channels and so I did have a meeting with President 
Zuma and told him that I thank him very much for the offer but I will not 
10 
be taking it up and again gave him the reason that you know I want to 
go back into the private sector and build a career in the private sector. 
 
As luck would have it, and as the Universe would have it, an 
opportunity arose where I could play a role in the Development Bank.   
A new bank was being established and I was asked to consider playing 
a role in that bank, but one of the requirements was that I would have 
to upgrade my skills in management etcetera and it was suggested to 
me that I consider various institutions where I would be able to spend a 
short period and after consultation with Nick Binedell from Gordon 
Institute of Business it was decided that, he recommended that I should 
20 
go to Harvard for the Advance Management Program, which – but that 
was a very expensive affair and it then turned on the issue of how the 
length of the contract between that we signed when we first joined in 
2009. 
 
At that time Cabinet has taken a decision that all Director 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 36 of 185 
 
Generals serve for a period of five years, rather than a period of two or 
three years, and in light of the Constitution ruling I then approached 
President Zuma to say my understanding is that this contract is for five 
years rather than three years which is what Minister Cwele was 
insisting upon.   President Zuma was gracious, he agreed it is a five 
year contract, and then this allowed me to negotiate with Minister 
Cwele a settlement agreement in which I settled on a particular amount 
between three and the five year but that will allow monies to be paid to 
Harvard for my studies there.  I harboured under the illusion that if I 
applied as an individual to Harvard Business School that I may not get 
10 
accepted, subsequently I found that you could do that, so this is why 
the SSA paid, and it was incorrectly reported in the newspapers that – 
it was stated it was monies due to me which were administered by the 
SSA in respect of payment to Harvard Business School and on return 
from Harvard I applied for a job in the Development Bank of Southern 
Africa and I was successful in getting that job. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Before we go on in time Mr Shaik to 
complete the picture there will be direct evidence shortly in relation to 
Mr Njenje, did any similar offer emanate from the authorities in regard 
to an ambassador post for him? 
20 
MR SHAIK:   Yes, roundabout the same time, and I remember quite 
clearly that director Njenje was made a similar offer to a post in Africa 
as Ambassador to the post and Njenje, and I must say this because 
often it is considered that the three of us are in dynamic consultation 
with each other, a remarkable feature of the relationship between the 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 37 of 185 
 
three of us is how little we consult on decisions that we arrive at but 
yet we all seem to arrive at the same decision sir.   None of them have 
ever told me to accept or not accept the position and neither did I ever 
mention to – or discuss with Mr Njenje that he should not accept the 
post.  He arrived at his decision independent of me as independent of 
our DG Maqetuka as well. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   He refused the post? 
MR SHAIK:   He refused the post. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Before moving on there’s just one matter 
I need to deal with but this may eat into the short adjournment time.    
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe you are reacting to the fact that I was looking 
like I wanted to say something and you thought maybe I am about to 
say is it not teatime.  No, I think I wanted to ask something in relation 
to that last point.   
 
As far as you know – or let me put it this way, your departure 
from Intelligence in 2012, was it a consequence of your conclusion that 
you had lost or that your relationship with Minister Cwele had 
irretrievably broken down and that you had lost the confidence of the 
President or was it just the fact that your relationship with Minister 
Cwele had irretrievably broken down? 
20 
MR SHAIK:   I think it was both sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was both? 
MR SHAIK:   It was both, and I understand it, it is the nature of life in 
the Intelligence World, but it was both. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes, okay.  Thank you.    
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 38 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Is this a convenient time? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes let us take the tea adjournment, we will resume 
at half past eleven. 
 
We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us proceed. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  You have described this 
morning Mr Shaik how your services came to an end.  I hesitate to put 
10 
a legal label on how the law would regard the termination of your 
services.  It is not to the purpose of your evidence now.  But… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not know whether you should pull the microphone 
closer to you or you should raise your voice but … 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  My apologies Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  I hesitate to put a legal label on the 
termination of your services but I do wish to ask you in your own mind 
what was the cause of your dismissal or your resignation whatever 
label one wants to put on it? 
20 
MR SHAIK:  The – the – the – I think the correct label to put to my 
departure 
from 
the 
Intelligence 
Services 
was 
an 
irretrievable 
breakdown between Minister Cwele and myself. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right. 
MR SHAIK:  The origins of which lies in me being part of a decision to 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 39 of 185 
 
investigate the Gupta’s and for that I have no doubt.  The – and of 
course the exit was an elegant exit in terms of a negotiated settlement 
in respect of my rights in the contract and my insistence that the 
contract was for five years and not for three years. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And it is correct is it not that the 
three senior executives in the Intelligence Service at the time ended 
their employment around the same time? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Going back to your own departure from Intelligence in 
2012 you say the cause was the irretrievable breakdown of your 
10 
relationship with Minister Cwele and you say the origins of which were 
related to your having been part of the decision to investigate the 
Gupta’s? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that right?  Are you able to say what else the two 
of you could not agree upon that characterised this breakdown or that 
contributed to this breakdown or is it really that difference of opinion 
on the – on the investigation of the Gupta’s and whatever else came 
happened after that really was attached to that? 
MR SHAIK:  I think the – the investigation on the Gupta’s was a 
20 
significant matter.  There was a – a – a – a huge turning point in the 
relationship.  Because up until that point there was still a possibility of 
appeal to the President that Minister Cwele is not totally understanding 
of the – his portfolio and – but after the – the Gupta issue so to speak 
the – clearly it is Minister Cwele who had the confidence of the 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 40 of 185 
 
President and we and as consequence me did not have the confidence 
of the President.  So that was a significant turning point. But there 
were other issues as well and I would give a few of those.  One is there 
was an election in regard to Cote d’lvoire in which the election was 
contested between Gbagbo the incumbent President at the time and 
Quattara who was a President coming from the North. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Could you spell those names for the 
record please? Can you? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I know Gbagbo is quite difficult to spell. 
MR SHAIK:  Gbagbo is difficult given the language there and I think 
10 
Quattara is Quattara. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  So the first round of the elections. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think Gbagbo was I think it starts with a G. 
MR SHAIK:  It starts with a G 
CHAIRPERSON:  And a B. 
MR SHAIK:  Gbagbo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MR SHAIK:  So the first … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR SHAIK:  Was that a test?  So the first  
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  You passed. 
MR SHAIK:  Ja the – the first round of the elections Gbagbo lost – won 
the first round and Quattara lost and it was a – quite a close margin 
and then the second round of the elections were held in which Quattara 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 41 of 185 
 
won.  The information I received in my capacity as Head of the Secret 
Service was that notwithstanding the issues around the free and 
fairness of the election that the – the results generally is that Quattara 
won the election.  The UN came out in support of Quattara Equ Awas 
which is the – the West African  
CHAIRPERSON:  The regional. 
MR SHAIK:  The regional – regional body came out in support of 
Quattara and the question is what was South Africa’s position going to 
be?  The Minister was of the view together with others that Gbagbo won 
the election and not Quattara and I was of the view that together with 
10 
others that irrespective who won the election that the fact of the United 
Nations has expressed a view on it it is in our multilateral interest to go 
with the outcome of the – the Quattara election.  So that was one of the 
major – one of the disagreements.  The other concerns the – the 
appointment or the lobby for Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma to assume the 
chair or the African Union.  I and again with others were of the view 
that it may not be in South Africa’s medium to long term interest for us 
to – to lobby for that position given the kind of protocol that exists that 
we do consider ourselves as a significant power on the continent and it 
is not necessary for us to go for the position.  It will cause a – a kind of 
20 
divide along Francophonie and other lines.  And I was of the view that 
we should avoid that conflict.  The Minister and others were of the view 
that we should lobby for that position and that we should go for that 
position.  So that was another example where we disagreed on policy 
issues.  And there are a few others like that where we had significant 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 42 of 185 
 
disagreements and of course it just became clear to me that my views 
or my actions were increasingly brought under the microscope.  There 
is one issue that broke the camel’s back.  It is an allegation that the 
Minister made in respect of my own loyalty to the country.  He was 
spreading a rumour or disinformation about – that I work for another 
government secret services which is not true.  I am – and the reason 
why I am being a bit vague about it Sir and I am going to take the punt.  
I have written a book where most of this is there.  But for the purposes 
of this commission I would say that yes he – he also brought my loyalty 
to the country in question.  But I took comfort from the fact that the 
10 
people close to me and in particular my two colleagues were dismissive 
of that allegation and nothing – nothing came of it.   
CHAIRPERSON:  The reason why I asked that question was just to see 
whether this was simply a situation where maybe it could be argued 
that you were pushing for something to be done or things to be done 
that were lawful and that maybe his approach was different in regard to 
that.  Or whether it is a situation where maybe some things might fit 
into one person pushing for something that is lawful another one 
pushing for a different thing.  And other things which have got nothing 
to do with what is legal what is not legal but simply operational issues 
20 
and policy issues that might have divided the two of you. 
MR SHAIK:  Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No but from what you are saying it looks like there 
were – there may have been a number of issues relating to policy 
where you – the two of you might not have agreed.  Or maybe some 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 43 of 185 
 
operational issues as well, is that correct? 
MR SHAIK:  The – that is – that is correct.  On the policy issues policy 
dissonance or police contestation is an incredibly good thing in policy 
formulation.  So having different perspectives but of course given the – 
the very unique position of intelligence your policy posture must take 
into account all considerations and you have got to not only seek the 
short term benefit, you got to see the medium and long term 
consequences and I – I was increasingly getting a sense that Minister 
Cwele and then later on President Zuma was applying short termism 
and taking short term benefits without due consideration to the medium 
10 
and long term consequences of those benefits.   Because there is no 
free lunch as we have discovered from Saxonwold.  But the important 
thing is in intelligence you welcome disagreement, you welcome 
contestation, you welcome different perspectives because you are 
enriched by that process.  And this is why I say that Minister Cwele 
lack of experience in the intelligence world started to show and it 
started to have an effect because of the role he was playing so close to 
the President, so close to the foreign Ministry.  It started to have an 
effect on the choices we were making in the National Interest.  And of 
course that did not sit very well with me. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would you categorise your departure from intelligence 
in 2012 in the terms of you having been pushed out or in the terms of 
you having decided to withdraw in the light of the situation that you 
have described? 
MR SHAIK:  I was pushed out. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 44 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  You were pushed out? 
MR SHAIK:  But – I was pushed out but they – there is a wonderful – 
there is a wonderful saying the – I think Minister – Minister Cwele 
thought he could bury me.  He just did not understand that I am a seed, 
I grow.  I do not you know – so I grew and I grew out of that situation.  
I found an elegant exit and ja the – I am better off in the position that I 
am today than I was then. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Of course the manner in which you 
testified you were treated particularly by Minister Cwele may have been 
10 
a result of the breakdown rather than the cause of it, do you have any 
comment that possibility? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes again I would go back if I look at all the possible 
significant causes I would have to conclude that the – being party to 
the decision to investigate the Gupta’s was the significant cause.  
Everything that resulted from that moment was as a consequence of 
that because I think the trust levels were invariably broken on that 
level. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  At the time of you leaving the service, 
Intelligence Service did you have any communication with any of the 
20 
Gupta brothers? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  I did have a communication.  When the – I think it 
was just the media and I think it was the Mail and Guardian was going 
to write a story that the Gupta’s were behind my firing or our firing from 
the Intelligence Services.  I received a phone call from Mr Ajay Gupta. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 45 of 185 
 
He identified himself as Mr Ajay Gupta and said to me that the Mail and 
Guardian is going to be writing a story about – that he – or they were 
behind my firing and that he would like me – and of course he then said 
– and my brother you know we are family. So I had to correct Mr Gupta 
and say, I am sorry we are family.  He then said yes but you know what 
I mean. I had to correct him again says I really do not know what you 
mean.  And then he said, well you know I should tell the media that this 
is not true.  And I said Mr Gupta the difficulty I have with that is that I 
do not know whether it is not true and I do not know whether it is true.  
So all I am prepared to say to the media and which is what I did say 
10 
was no comment that I have no comment to make on the matter.  And 
that was it.  But he attempted to get me to agree or get me to say that 
he was not behind my firing.  Of course what he did not know at the 
time is that he had on various occasions to at least one person that I 
know alluded to the fact that you know they would really wanted to get 
me out of the Intelligence Services.   
CHAIRPERSON:  He had? 
MR SHAIK:  He had mentioned to a – a person in the Intelligence 
Services. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR SHAIK:  That I am part of a group of people who is planning to 
remove Zuma. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And they have got to remove me from the services. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 46 of 185 
 
MR SHAIK:  Of course at the time I did not pay much attention to it.  I 
was dismissive of it because I did not believe and I must – I must be 
quite honest I did not – I did not really believe at that time that the 
Gupta’s had that much influence on state of affairs. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  I always considered them not to be quite open about it.  I 
considered them to be hangers on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  That you normally get in – you know in the political 
processes etcetera. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  But I – I did not know of the enormous influence that they 
wielded. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Hm.  Do you know whether the person to whom 
that was said may be prepared to testify? 
MR SHAIK:  I will consult accordingly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You will consult.  Yes please thank you and then be in 
touch with the legal team of the commission. 
MR SHAIK:  Will do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
20 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  After your return from Harvard I 
understand that you were appointed as the Group Executive of the 
International Unit of the Development Bank of Southern Africa, is that 
correct? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 47 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  You occupied that post from August 2012 
until your early retirement in August 2017? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  In March 2016 were you aware of a 
memorandum that was submitted to the Secretary General of the ANC 
Mr Gwede Mantashe addressed to him and the ANC by senior 
commanders and commissars of the former Military wing of the ANC 
Nkonto Isizwe? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes I am aware of that. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  What was your involvement in relation to 
10 
that memorandum? 
MR SHAIK:  The – I was asked by General Siphiwe Nyanda to – to draft 
that memorandum and he provided the input and my task was to draft it 
up and send it to him for approval which – which I did.   
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Chair that memorandum has been 
dealt with in evidence at some length.  I am not sure that it is 
necessary unless you wish to go into any more detail in that regard? 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I do not think there is any – it is necessary unless 
the witness has anything he wants to highlight in [indistinct] but 
otherwise we have – I have heard evidence on it. 
20 
MR SHAIK:  No, no Sir. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  I presume as the drafter or one of the 
drafters of the memorandum you stand by its contents? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes I do. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  The memorandum made reference 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 48 of 185 
 
amongst other things to the removal of Minister Nene from his post of 
Finance Minister in December 2015 and his proposed redeployment to 
the BRICS New Development Bank. 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  What do you know from your involvement 
in the banking sector of the so called offer that was made to Minister 
Nene of a position in the BRICS bank? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  Chair just as a way of background.  In my capacity 
as a Group Executive of the Development Bank of Southern Africa I had 
reason to be made aware of the discussions in regard to the formation 
10 
of the New Development Bank.  It has a long history and the DBSA had 
played an instrumental role in all of the discussions and the 
construction and the debates about the bank itself, the New 
Development Bank.  So the New Development Bank has shareholders 
which sits at the level of the Presidents of the country and they are the 
shareholders of effect of the bank.  Then it is – its next governing body 
is the Board of Governance and in the Board of Governance is where 
the Ministers of Finance sit.   And below that then is the President of 
the bank and his management team.  So I wanted just to explain those 
three levels of governance to see where this is leading to.  So 
20 
Minister… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry I must just make sure I understand.  I 
sometimes get confused between what I believe is a bank that we have 
in South Africa that has got development as well and then the – what I 
refer to as the BRICS Bank. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 49 of 185 
 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we talking about the BRICS Bank now? 
MR SHAIK:  We talking about the same bank. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh it is the same. 
MR SHAIK:  It is called the New Development Bank or otherwise known 
as the BRICS Bank. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Okay. 
MR SHAIK:  So – for just to keep it on the same language we will refer 
it to as the BRICS Bank. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR SHAIK:  So the BRICS Bank has the shareholders, the first level.  
The second level is the Board of Governance which is constituted by 
the Ministers of Finance of the four – or the five countries.  Below that 
then is the President of the bank itself who is effectively the CEO of the 
bank and with his or her management team.  So this is how the bank 
was envisaged.  Its headquarters was going to be in Shanghai China. 
And during this negotiations about the BRICS Bank the question of a 
regional office – a regional office of the BRICS Bank to be established 
in Africa as a starting point.  And it took a lot of lobbying and 
eventually it was agreed that the Regional Bank will be set up in South 
20 
Africa.  Now the Regional Bank is precisely that.  It is a regional bank.  
It is a branch of the New Development Bank or of the BRICS Bank.  And 
the decision of who would be the person who heads that regional bank 
is a decision of the management of the bank itself.  Not even the 
governance.  It will of course all – all decisions of importance will go to 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 50 of 185 
 
the governance for ratification but the interviews, the choice etcetera 
will done by the management of the New Development Bank or the 
BRICS Bank. And it is not a separate bank.  It is not a separate bank.  
It is not a separate entity from the New Development Bank it is an 
office of the regional bank.  And as such the – the position was 
advertised and people – there is a process that the management of the 
New Development Bank appointed a head hunting team. They head 
hunted and people had to apply etcetera, etcetera. The – there was no 
way a shareholder could impose on the management of the bank a 
nominee for regional officer without violating the corporate governance 
10 
issues of the bank itself.  The – it is just not done and it is not good in 
terms of banking and it is not good in terms of the governance issues 
and that will affect – it would have affected the rating of the bank itself.  
If shareholders are making decisions about who the employees of the 
bank so to be quite clear the regional branch of the New Development 
Bank is an employee of the New Development Bank.   
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  The memorandum to which we have just 
referred the memorandum of March 2016 also made reference to the 
conduct of the Hawks and their investigation of the so called Rogue 
Unit and SARS.  Now again we do not need to go into that category of 
20 
issue but it does raise an issue with which the commission may be 
concerned at the end of the day to assess.  And that is the use of 
Intelligence Services or Quasi-Intelligence Services and disinformation.  
Do you have any comments on that?  You have mentioned it briefly 
before but … 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 51 of 185 
 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  If you have anything to add please do? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you do so please do not forget the question.  
Do not forget this question. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes [indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But before you deal with it I want to go back to the 
question of Mr Nene and the post that he was said to be deployed to in 
the BRICS Bank because that is what you were talking about. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  A few minutes ago, is it not?  Yes.  By the way do you 
10 
recall what the position was being called?  Was there a title of what the 
position was that he was said to? 
MR SHAIK:  I think it was the Head of Regional. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh just Head of  
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Now when you speak as you have done 
explaining the structure of the bank and the – who sits where you doing 
so now from certainly your knowledge as somebody from within? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The bank, is that right. 
20 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know the – that those are the structures. 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And so on and so on.  And you are familiar with the – 
with the regulations with whatever instruments must be followed in…. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 52 of 185 
 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The filling of positions including such a position.  So 
you are saying that the relevant instruments governing the appointment 
of personnel including somebody who would occupy that position of 
Head of the Regional Bank did not permit that a shareholder could say 
here is somebody who must be appointed without – and the bank 
agreeing to do that without being in breach of its own regulations or 
instruments.  Is that right? 
MR SHAIK:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So – so with your knowledge of the instruments 
10 
that govern appointments in the bank are you able to make sense of the 
announcement at the time that Minister Nene was not going to continue 
as Minister of Finance because he was going to be deployed in that 
position.  Or is it something that you are not able to understand how it 
would happen? 
MR SHAIK:  Ja. It did not make sense to me in my experience now no 
longer as Intelligence but as a banker.  It did not make sense to me at 
all that would – could firstly happen.  But secondly it did not make 
sense to me that Minister Nene would accept that.  Because he served 
as the – the – as a Governor on… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  On a higher position. 
MR SHAIK:  On the higher position and now he was going to be taking 
a considerably lower position. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And that would not make - would not have made sense to 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 53 of 185 
 
me … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  If I was in that position … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And I - I did not see how Minister Nene would have taken 
up that position in any event. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well he says in his statement which is submitted to 
the Commission.  I think also in your evidence.  He makes the same 
point that he was already serving in a higher position … 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  And this would - this was a lower position, but if I 
recall correctly.  Either at the time of that announcement or 
subsequently when the former President was answering questions in 
the National Assembly on the decision.  I seem to recall that the idea 
as he articulated it was - we need in that bank or in that position.  We 
need somebody.  One of our own and we need a good performer and 
that is why we are sending him there. 
MR SHAIK:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So - so you say, but in terms of the instruments of the 
bank you cannot see how it would happen quite apart from the fact that 
20 
it was a lower position for him? 
MR SHAIK:  That is my evidence, sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And - and just by the way we have - South Africa has the 
position for now of the Chief Financial Officer of the New Development 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 54 of 185 
 
Bank.  Who is also I think considered as a Vice President to the Bank 
who was nominated by Minister Nene.  His name is Mr Leslie Maasdorp 
and it is when in the formation of the bank Mr Maasdorp was appointed 
to that position through the proper processes and so forth. 
So it would have been incredibly odd for Minister Nene who in 
his capacity appointed through the regular process and an appropriate 
process a - an individual to the Chief Financial Officer post.  Then only 
to eventually report much lower down the line to that office.  It just did 
not make sense.  It did not make sense at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may not be able to answer this and I would 
10 
understand.  Do you - would you know whether the shareholders would 
appreciate or would have knowledge and appreciation of all of these 
things or is it possible that some of the shareholders thought you could 
just say here is our nominee and then the nominee would be appointed? 
MR SHAIK:  On a generous interpretation I have to conclude that our 
shareholders in particular did not have a thorough understanding of 
how this bank would work.  How it would be set up.  What are the 
instruments and how do you ensure that in the banking environment 
that there is separation between policy and management and 
implementation. 
20 
Especially because these banks get international ratings and 
the ratings determine the - the kind or the cost of money that you would 
be able to raise and if there is interference in - in the banking in 
governance issues.  It affects the ratings very badly.  The - so I think 
on the generous side on the interpretation I think our shareholders did 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 55 of 185 
 
not have a proper and due understanding of how the mechanism of the 
bank would actually work. 
CHAIRPERSON:  When you say our shareholders.  You mean our as 
South Africa’s? 
MR SHAIK:  South Africa, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Now at the time when Mr Nene was dropped 
from Cabinet which was 9 December 2015 were you already in the bank 
- working in the bank? 
MR SHAIK:  In - the - the year was 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  2015. 
10 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  I was - I was in the bank. I was in the DBSA from 
2012. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  August 2012. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  You were going to deal Mr Shaik with the 
issue of disinformation … 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And the use of disinformation by the 
possible use of disinformation by Intelligence Agencies. 
20 
MR SHAIK:  The - very briefly sir that we - our country does have a 
history of what is called disinformation and disinformation is the 
manufacturing of false intelligence for purposes of influencing the 
target.  The - and - and the country has a long history of this starting 
from the days of - of President Nelson Mandela all the way to 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 56 of 185 
 
President Zuma and I am sure even now President Ramaphosa may be 
the target of such disinformation campaigns and they take - they take a 
very unique form. 
Where you put pieces of information together that may appear 
to be true, but when you really go into the detail you will find that this 
is not the case and these disinformation campaigns you will recall way 
back in 1994 the Head of the then SANDF General Meiring presented a 
report to Nelson Mandela in which - to President Nelson Mandela in 
which it was alleged that there was a possible coup being planned 
against President Mandela. 
10 
That involved amongst others some other South African 
names and including the name of Michael Jackson and this report and I 
- I would understand that General Meiring may not know what to have 
done with it.  So he did pass it onto - to President Mandela who 
rejected the report, but like that report we have had many other 
reports. 
They are called browse mole.  They called spider web.  They 
are called a whole range of things where these reports emanate from - 
from sources that you quite cannot locate and brought together and the 
first tell-tale sign of that is - and just an example for you.  If someone 
20 
calls you and says I cannot discuss this over the phone with you. 
I need to meet you in person.  Just let an alarm bell ring in 
your head.  I mean if the person cannot discuss it over the phone with 
you.  He will not be able to discuss it in person as well.  So the - we 
were deeply concerned by this phenomena - deeply concerned.  So 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 57 of 185 
 
again under the leadership Ambassador Maqetuka in - in 2010 we 
invited a - a specialist in this matter and it happened to a Ghanaian by 
the name of Kofi Bentum Quantson.  He is an ex … 
CHAIRPERSON:  It might be helpful if you are able to spell that for the 
transcriber. 
MR SHAIK:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you are able to if you just … 
MR SHAIK:  Kofi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SHAIK:  K-O-F-I.  Bentum - B-E-N-T-U-M.  Quantson - Q-U-A-N-T-
10 
S-O-N.  So … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MR SHAIK:  So Kofi is a specialist on the matter and he has written 
books, because his country too was affected by - by this phenomenon 
of bogus informants, bogus reports etcetera.  So we invited him over 
and had an all-day seminar on - on our facilities.  Where we tried to 
grapple with this phenomenon of disinformation and how to - to be able 
to - to manage this information and to neutralise its very destructive 
effects, but often and it is something that I will spend my days really 
reflecting on. 
20 
Is what is it in our society that we lend ready ears to 
conspiracies etcetera and - and it just seems that we do have a society 
in which we reject modernity.  Where we do not embrace the proper 
signs of like is this possibly true or not true and subjected to the 
rigours of analysis and come to the conclusion that this is not true and 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 58 of 185 
 
therefore reject it and do not act on and if thereby minimising its 
destructive effects. 
I found that there is and this goes across administrations.  
That there has been a tendency to lend a ready ear to these 
disinformation 
campaigns 
and 
it 
has 
been 
a 
- 
a 
source 
of 
destabilisation of our Government through various epochs.  So again 
many of the examples browse mole, spider web. 
I just forget all the names now and they all come up with very 
interesting names.  Just - you know - it just - that happens when you do 
not rely on your Intelligence Services as your fact checking entity.  If 
10 
you have an Intelligence Service equip it, guide it, allow it to go 
through all the information and be able to tell you that this is not true. 
This is maybe reasonably true and reject it, but and you will 
notice that these reports emanate from out of the blue.  They - they just 
find their way in and make themselves - they appear in the media and 
go forward.  Now on the matter of disinformation sir I must also put on 
record that it is said - suggested and it has been suggested in - as a 
result of an allegation I made in respect of the previous National 
Director of Public Prosecutions in which and as a result of the 
allegations I made. 
20 
People have - have accused me of being a - a disinformation 
specialist etcetera.  So I want to put it on record that that is not the 
case.  The allegation which was dealt with in the Hefer Commission 
was not a whispering campaign I started or a  
CHAIRPERSON:  Is this a reference to the first National Director of 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 59 of 185 
 
Public Prosecutions? 
MR SHAIK:  It is correct, sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
MR SHAIK:  And I went through that process.  I openly said what I had 
to say.  I did not write funny reports etcetera.  I openly said the - 
Judge Hefer dealt with the matter.  He rejected the allegations that I 
made and I accepted the outcome of that report and I accordingly went 
to apologise to - to  
CHAIRPERSON:  The first Director of … 
MR SHAIK:  Advocate Bulelani Ngcuka … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  And his wife … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SHAIK:  And I think the matter between us is - is settled, because 
what I believed I did at the time.  I would rather classify it as 
whistleblowing.  I knew of certain information and I was of the view that 
the Office of the National Director of Public Prosecution was being 
used for political purposes and that in my mind represented an abuse of 
State power, but the media had a field day. 
It is - if you want to Google it.  I am still trying to get it 
20 
removed from Google.  It is all there and I have learnt with - with the 
passage of time the wisdom and the resilience to - to bear that and 
accept that it a cross that I - I would have to bear, but I am not 
involved in the game of disinformation and I am not and I never was 
part of dirty tricks so to speak. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 60 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  That allegation to which you have 
referred is reported in the publication by Jacques Pauw The President’s 
Keepers.  You are aware of that? 
MR SHAIK:  I am aware of this and I must say that I have a lot of 
respect for - for Jacques and I think in - in - the way he wrote what he 
wrote there.  He was taking what we call liberties so to speak, but there 
are elements in what he wrote there is true.  That I did in fact - I did in 
fact have a meeting with Arthur Fraser at the time and I did in fact 
mention to Arthur Fraser that I heard that he has these so called tapes 
and here is the important thing. 
10 
That I asked him to do the right thing and he asked me what 
is the right thing and said you have information in your possession that 
affects the innocence or otherwise of another person.  Take this 
information to the National Prosecuting Authority and he did.  He did.  
He did not take it anywhere else.  He took it the National Prosecuting 
Authority and that is what Jacques Pauw refers to and I accepted that 
that is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  If I may just put a brief excerpt from the 
book to you.  So that the air can be properly cleared and the matter is 
… 
20 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Thoroughly dealt with.  He says at page 
39 of his publication: 
“Mo Shaik was involved in the Zuma camps own 
dirty tricks campaign two weeks after the State had 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 61 of 185 
 
announced 
that the NPA 
was 
about 
to 
hurl 
Schabir Shaik before a Judge.  Mo Shaik identified 
prosecutions boss Bulelani Ngcuka as apartheid spy 
RS452.  He later said he had made the allegations 
in order to defend the honour of the Deputy 
President of this country Jacob Zuma.” 
Do you have any comment on that? 
MR SHAIK:  Well the - a, the - in my capacity as an Intelligence Officer 
way back in the 1980’s I had come across information that gave me 
reason to investigate Bulelani Ngcuka for possible association with the 
10 
apartheid Government.  That was communicated to Head Office and 
communicated to - to Lusaka and the matter for me rested there until 
much later when I received other information and then in light of - in 
light of the abuses that were taking place or the abuse of office of - of 
the Deputy President not necessarily Schabir, but the Deputy President 
in particular. 
Mac Maharaj the second.  I was of the view that - that there 
may be a link between the investigation that we did way back in the 
1980’s to what is happening now and I went public with that and then 
as a result the Hefer Commission resulted.  I did not consider that to 
20 
be dirty tricks.  I did not consider that to be part of a smear campaign. 
It was a very public, very open Commission and I willingly 
participated in it.  Subjected myself to the interrogation.  Made it clear 
that I would accept the outcome of the - the Judge’s report and which I 
did.  So I - I did not see that as - as dirty tricks.  However I must say 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 62 of 185 
 
that I know Jacques and when I read that I smiled and - and said this is 
the liberty he is taking as - as a novelist or a journalist and I am not 
going to make an issue of it. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  The agent code name RS452 was 
apparently later identified as a Vanessa Brereton.  Is that correct? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct.  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  We may move on then just to close off on 
the memorandum that we have spoken about just for completeness sake 
in that regard.  You were part of a delegation of signatories to that 
memorandum to the Office of the Secretary-General of the ANC 
10 
Mr Mantashe. 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  How were you received? 
MR SHAIK:  We were received very well.  Very well.  I could not 
remember all the names of the officials that were there, but it was - but 
we were received very well by the Secretary-General.  By Jesse Duarte 
and I think Jeff Radebe was also there.  So it was a - a good 
delegation. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  In relation to Intelligence documentation 
and access to Intelligence documentation in relation to the issue of 
20 
State Capture raised in that memorandum.  Did you make any 
suggestions to the ruling party at the time? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  We - we suggested that the Office of the 
Inspector-General be approached.  In which and knowing the - the laws 
and the regulations that govern the Inspector-General that the political 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 63 of 185 
 
party 
could 
approach 
the 
Inspector-General 
for 
access 
to 
documentation or information as maybe classified or declassified by the 
Inspector-General’s Office himself. 
I was not willing and I know that Ambassador Maqetuka was 
not willing to provide that documentation to the ANC, because then it 
would have been in violation of the very Constitution that we are 
furthering the aims of a political party and we did not want to get 
involved in that.  So we raised the issue and showed them the 
mechanism by which they could obtain the information. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  You have mentioned in paragraph 48 of 
10 
your statement or affidavit a disclosure that you thought prudent. 
MR SHAIK:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  To bring to the attention of the Chair.  
Would you do so please? 
MR SHAIK:  Chair, the - since leaving - since leaving - taking early 
retirement from the Development Bank.  My wife and I have opened our 
own consultancy and we in fact do provide and I in particular do 
provide services to one organisation that maybe or is implicated in the 
terms of your reference and I thought it prudent that I disclose that 
conflict to the extent that it is a conflict. 
20 
Although the matters are very separate and I have provided 
the name of that company to the evidence leader and my preference 
would be that that matter be discussed in chamber. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  It is not a conflict Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Okay.  Thank you.  Thank you. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 64 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  One last topic please.  The former 
President has given evidence in relation to Intelligence matters before 
the Commission and this matter has been raised with you - been able to 
assist in some regard to understand that evidence.  Firstly, you have 
said you had a relationship with the former President in the context of 
Intelligence or Security matters? 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Did he ever mention to you any 
conspiracy or plan on the behalf - on the part of Foreign Intelligence 
Agencies? 
10 
MR SHAIK:  In roundabout 1991 and I recall after he no longer 
occupied the position of Head of Intelligence in the ANC.  He did 
mention to me that he had been given information that there are two 
foreign agencies who want to stop him from assuming power in - in the 
country. 
I assumed at that point in time that what he was referring to, 
because in 1994 power was a bit vague in terms of what particular 
power are we talking about and I thought that he was referring to 
perhaps they do not want him to be the Head of the Intelligence 
Services or rise within the political ranks assuming a Ministerial post 
20 
etcetera, but he did mention that to me, but he did not - he did not give 
me the details of exactly that conversation. 
Who had said this to him etcetera, but he mentioned it to me 
and - and I on the other hand did not push to ask where is it coming 
from etcetera.  It is something that you do not do in - in the Intelligence 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 65 of 185 
 
game. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  The information that was given to you was 
it that he should not be Head of an Intelligence Agency or was it that 
there was a conspiracy that he should be prevented from assuming 
power in any capacity whatsoever? 
MR SHAIK:  I - I saw all of that in one - one package.  The - but I - I 
would - when I really think about it now I would assume that he was 
referring to political power in - in Government.  So to speak. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And maybe within the ANC as well. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Would there be any explanation why? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Pretorius.  Sorry.  Maybe within the 
ANC as a … 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  It may … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Political party itself as well? 
MR SHAIK:  Yes.  It may be within the ANC as - as the political party as 
well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, because they could - the two could go together. 
MR SHAIK:  Hand in … (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  The higher you rise in the political party - the ruling 
party - the higher you may rise in terms of Government positions. 
20 
MR SHAIK:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  What interest would a Foreign 
Intelligence Agency have in - let us just deal with the one aspect which 
I understood to be what you told us.  The interest in someone not 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 66 of 185 
 
assuming an intelligence position.  Someone of the background of the 
former President. 
MR SHAIK:  Well the - the possible reasons for that is we did - we did 
and remember the world at that time was just emerging out of 
essentially the Cold War era in which Intelligence Services were the 
front line of the war that existed between the various Intelligence 
Services and it is a possibility that these Intelligence Services may not 
want someone who has been trained in the East or trained in - in - by 
either the East Germans or the - the Russians to be the Head of the 
Intelligence Service here. 
10 
On the basis that ones in position of power the - the natural 
leaning will be towards the services from which they were trained and I 
think the possibilities that the Western Intelligence Services were trying 
to avoid that which is more a reflection on the thinking of Western 
Intelligence Services. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Apart from what you were told by the 
former President.  Do you have any of your own knowledge in this 
regard?  I do not want to cross the line into Intelligence matters 
unnecessarily. 
MR SHAIK:  Well I do not know that there is various training that does 
20 
occur by Intelligence Services across the world of each other and those 
relationships are - do in fact carry a degree of - of persuasion, but not 
necessarily to the extent they think it does, but we - we as a country 
has benefitted from that, because previous apartheid Intelligence 
Services were trained by Mossad and others. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 67 of 185 
 
So Western Intelligence Services in the main.  The liberatory 
forces were trained by the Eastern Intelligence Services in the main 
and when we all came together we had the benefit of all that training.  
So yes it is - training does have a level of influence on trainees 
subsequently. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  At the time this conversation between 
yourself and the former President took place or indeed at any other 
time.  Did the former President tell you that the reason that he - the 
former President - should not rise either in the Intelligence or in the 
governing party ranks was that he would somehow be able to reveal - 
10 
no reveal and block assumption of power by infiltrators? 
MR SHAIK:  No.  We did not - we did not have that kind of discussion 
… 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
MR SHAIK:  But I must say that in the - in discussions of intelligence 
often those things are assumed and - and applied, but we did not have 
a direct discussion on it. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Well given your knowledge of the 
Intelligence structures at the time and your participation in those 
Intelligence structures and given your knowledge of the position held 
20 
by yourself and others and the former President would he have had 
exclusive knowledge of the identity of infiltrators? 
MR SHAIK:  No.  I think he would have had a privileged access to that 
knowledge, but as a - in his capacity of the Head of the Intelligence 
Service he would not have the only access.  There were others like 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 68 of 185 
 
Sizakele Sigxashe, Joe Nhlanhla who - and of course … 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yourself? 
MR SHAIK:  To the sense I would - would have from - from the parts 
that I worked with.  Others who worked with it would have that 
knowledge.  So the knowledge would not be the purview of one person.  
So to speak and of course the - the Intelligence Services did not - the 
ANC Intelligence Service did not exist in isolation from the leadership 
of the ANC itself and there were reporting lines to the leadership and I 
think the leadership would also have been taken into confidence about 
suspicions or whatever. 
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  The former President also alluded to the 
fact that this plot or conspiracy continued to the very president - 
present.  Do you have any comment in that regard and in fact he went 
so far as to say that this Commission itself was the culmination of such 
a conspiracy.  Do you have any comment on the continuation nature of 
this conspiracy? 
MR SHAIK:  I have no knowledge of a - a - of a conspiracy to have 
toppled the previous President.  There was - not that I was aware of 
and the - if - if anything if our memorandum which was I think the first 
that called for a Commission was a desperate plea to the President to 
20 
hear the cries of South Africans who are saying all is not well in this 
land and that is not a conspiracy. 
That was a simply a plea for him to listen to rationale voices 
talking about things that are not going right in the country and it is 
unfortunate that he would have considered that to be a - a conspiracy. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 69 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Mr Shaik. 
MR SHAIK:  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Chair I have no further questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No.  Thank you very much Mr Shaik for your 
evidence.  We have taken much longer than we may all have thought 
we would, but I think it was all very important.  The evidence touched 
on very important issues which the Commission wanted to hear 
evidence on. 
Thank you very much for coming forward and I just hope that 
your coming forward and the fact that your colleagues - two other 
10 
colleagues are also - have made themselves available will encourage a 
lot of other former and current DGs and Deputy DGs nationally and in 
various provinces who know a lot of things that should be shared with 
the Commission in order to enable the Commission to have a full 
picture of what the situation is in our country that it has gone through 
and to enable the Commission to make recommendations that hopefully 
can help to make sure that the future of the country is better than the 
past. 
So I hope that your having come to the Commission will 
assist and encourage and inspire others, but thank you very much for 
20 
coming forward and if a need arises that we ask you to come back I 
have no doubt that you will be agreeable to coming back.  Thank you 
very much. 
MR SHAIK:  Thank you, sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 70 of 185 
 
MR SHAIK:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you are excused. 
MR SHAIK:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  The next witness is 
Mr Njenje. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  I see we would need five or so minutes to 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  To start to … 
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Facilitate the turnover … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  But I wonder whether an early break … 
(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  So that we do not break twice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We could take the lunch break now and then maybe 
resume at quarter to two. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  That would avoid two breaks.  Break 
once. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but of course if we took just five minutes if that 
is all you would need.  We could cover the preliminary issues before 1 
o’ clock and when we come back at 2 o’ clock maybe we are going to 
the meat of the evidence.  If you know what I mean.  So your 
preference is - would be that we take the break now?  It is just that if 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 71 of 185 
 
we kept to the 1 o’ clock/2 o’ clock arrangement for lunch.  It might help 
with certain things and so. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Happy that we take five minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Five minutes and then … 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And we will go for  
CHAIRPERSON:  You - you will use the 15 minutes before 1 o’ clock to 
take care of preliminary issues or whatever introductory parts and then 
we come back at 2 o’ clock we go into the real issues. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  We will take - it is 20 to.  We will resume at 
10 
five - at quarter to one. 
MR SHAIK:   
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   [Inaudible mic off]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes please administer the oath. 
20 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
WITNESS:   Lizo Njenje. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection to taking the prescribed 
oath? 
WITNESS:   No. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 72 of 185 
 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath to be binding on your 
conscience? 
WITNESS:   Yes. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you swear that the evidence you will give will be the 
truth the whole truth and nothing but the truth, if so please raise your 
right hand and say so help me God. 
WITNESS:   So help me God. 
LIZO NJENJE: (duly sworn, states) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, is it, General Njenje or what is 
the correct…[intervenes]. 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  The designation Chair is Director. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Director oh okay alright thank you.  Before Mr 
Pretorius begins to ask you questions, I just want to thank you for 
coming forward to assist the Commission we appreciate it, the same 
sentiments I’ve expressed to Mr Shaik apply to you.  We appreciate 
that people who occupied senior positions in various government 
departments who have something to share with the Commission and 
with the nation in an attempt to assist the Commission to assist the 
nation come forward and share that information with us, thank you very 
much. 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, yes Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Director Njenje you have before you 
Exhibit PP2. 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 73 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Perhaps we should admit that then. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We already did for all of them including the next 
witness, yesterday.  Well I don’t know Director Njenje where I got the 
General part from but ja, okay thank you. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   You signed your statement…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry Mr Pretorius, it’s hot, I feel hot maybe the 
aircon a little bit, I know that I keep on confusing you, sometimes I say 
switch it off, sometimes I say put it on but maybe it shouldn’t be too 
much because sometimes it affects the hearing but Mr Pretorius looks 
at me as if he doesn’t know what I’m talking about, he’s not feeling hot. 
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   No I’m not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So maybe it’s just me but…[intervenes]. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Chair I take no responsibility for the air-
conditioning, I’m prepared to assist. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright let’s continue. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Njenje it appears from page eight of 
Exhibit PP2 that you signed a statement on the 26 t h of November 2018, 
is that correct? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Did you then attest to this statement 
20 
before a Commissioner of oaths? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Was that on the 20 t h of August 2019? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   The…[intervenes]. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 74 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well it’s a – this may have nothing to do with you, 
it’s rather unusual in the sense that it doesn’t have what we call the 
Commission of Oath certificate at the end or at least I don’t see it, I 
don’t know whether the fine print on the stamp is – reads like a 
certificate of the Commissioner of Oaths but also because at the 
beginning I don’t think it does what normally an affidavit does namely, I 
do hereby swear or make an oath…[intervenes]. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Yes it doesn’t, the introduction doesn’t 
do that and we can fix it up but the fine print at the stamp on page 
eight does contain the requisite wording for…[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   For the certificate? 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Njenje or Director Njenje tell the 
Court please as you do in paragraph two and three of your statement or 
affidavit of your background. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Can you repeat please? 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph two and three of your 
statement – I’ll refer to it for the moment as a statement you record 
some of your own personal background would you tell that to the 
20 
Commissioner please? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I left the country 1977 and joined the ANC I 
joined the military wing Umkhonto we Sizwe and I went to military 
training and a few years later I went to specialise in Intelligence in 
Russia or Soviet Union at the time and after completing training I 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 75 of 185 
 
returned to Africa and applied the Intelligence trade for Umkhonto we 
Sizwe in the department of Intelligence and Security of the ANC. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Did you do so from 1979 until 1994? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   What was your role in the Department of 
Intelligence and Security of the ANC party? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I played various roles and responsibilities in the 
Department of Intelligence and Security starting off with the vetting of 
people who were coming through Mozambique, joining the ANC and 
those would be [indistinct] of the ANC, whether they were going to join 
10 
Umkhonto we Sizwe or they were going to school they had to go 
through the process of vetting – security vetting and I did that until 
1980/1981 where I was then the administrator for the office in Maputo, 
the office – the DIS office in Maputo and that meant now working on 
intelligence information including all the biographies that would have 
been collected by the field workers where I had been before and 
receiving reports from Swaziland, from Lesotho and from South Africa 
and those would include very sensitive intelligence reports.  Those 
reports I would compile and consolidate and send to Lusaka every 
week. 
20 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Director Njenje in the course of your 
work as an official of the Department of Intelligence Security of the 
ANC between 1979 and 1994, would you have come to know of threats 
of infiltration into the ANC? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 76 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Was it part of your duty to know the 
identity of such persons? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   And from whom would you receive such 
information and to whom would you give such information? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That information would be – from where I was 
sitting at the time I would provide that to the leadership of the 
Department who I knew would then pass on to the leadership of the 
ANC specifically the President of the ANC. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the information that you say you would receive, 
10 
you receive weekly from Mozambique would be information about 
individuals who were joining the ANC as well as simply reports about 
the situation in the country, in other words just intelligence information 
about, maybe certain parts of the country or the country quite apart 
from intelligence information about individuals? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct Chair it would be information that 
we would have received from the interviews that were conducted on 
individuals who were joining.  It would be information that we would 
have received from open source newspapers, the media.  It would be 
information that would be received from agents of the department and 
20 
the ANC as well as a membership or underground people who were 
working for the ANC providing information as well as information that 
would be coming from – within the former enemy ranks people would be 
working for the ANC and the Department of Intelligence and Security. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja but what I want to establish is whether you were 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 77 of 185 
 
focusing or specialising on intelligence information relating to people 
who were joining the ANC, in other words, focusing on people as such 
getting information about those people or whether it was also getting 
intelligence information generally about the country or certain parts of 
the country apart from the individuals who were joining? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   It is both the people as well as general 
information and across the country. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Is it a convenient time Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes let’s take the lunch adjournment and we’ll 
10 
resume at 2 o’clock, we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNED 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  You may proceed. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you.  Director Njenje I understand 
that you played some role.  You describe it as a major role in the 
Codesa negotiations in the early 90’s.  What was your function then? 
What role did you play? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think that answer should be articulated the nodding 
of the head will not be captured by the recording. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Excuse me I cannot hear Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I cannot hear Chair sorry. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 78 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you cannot hear. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am saying that it is better if you articulate your 
answer rather than nod because when you nod that will not be in the 
transcript.  You understand? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I do understand okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I was still listening. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hey? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I was still listening to the question. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Alright.  Okay what is your answer?  He – I 
think Mr Pretorius said he understands that you played a role in Codesa 
negotiations.  He referred to a major role. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair.  Some of the – the duties 
we were performing includes what a director – Ambassador Shaik 
described here.  Issues of looking at the laws that were to govern the 
new dispensation.  A – Issues of the security of the leadership 
especially of the ANC including President Mandela and a – the issues 
of the setting up of the working committees of intelligence. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Did you play any role in the 
20 
creation of a new intelligence dispensation? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And in the negotiations producing the 
constitutional provisions? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  We were inputting into – into the people who 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 79 of 185 
 
were working on the constitutional arrangement. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  In 1995 then did you join the new 
intelligence structures or did you go elsewhere? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  In December 1994 I tendered my resignation from 
the DIS because it was anticipated at the time that the amalgamation of 
the forces would start happening around January of 1995.  I chose not 
to join the government I chose to go private.  
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And what happened then in 2002? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  In about 2002 I was head hunted and was asked 
to serve as the Deputy Director General for the South African Secret 
10 
Service in the Operations Section. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You referred to DIS was that the Department of – was 
that a department in the ANC? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair Department of Intelligence 
and Security. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh Department of Intelligence and Security okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And that was between the years 1979 and 
1994? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And in 2003 did you transfer once again? 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes I was transferred from the South African 
Secret Service to become the Deputy Director General Operations of 
the National Intelligence Agency. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Did you resign from the NIA late in 2005? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 80 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  You say in your statement because 
of certain developments which had political implications.  Is there 
anything relevant to our terms of reference there?  You know what 
matters we are dealing with. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I do not think there is a direct reference to the 
terms but in the main it is also what Director Shaik said here with the 
commission the problem that arose between President Thabo Mbeki and 
the Director General at the time Billie Masetla – Director General of 
National Intelligence Agency. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were you Mr Masetla’s deputy at the time? 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Excuse me. 
CHAIRPERSON: Were you Mr Masetla’s deputy at the time? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  I understand that between 2006 and 2009 
you returned to the private sector? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  What happened in 2009? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  In 2009 I was approach by Doctor Cwele who 
informed me as Minister of State Security at the time that he had been 
20 
asked by the President to – to talk to me among others to join the 
government as Heads of the Intelligence Services. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And what decision did you make when 
that approach was made to you? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  When the approach was made I agreed that I 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 81 of 185 
 
would join the South African – the State Security Agency. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And to which position were you 
appointed? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I was appointed the Director for Domestic Branch 
which is the National Intelligence Agency. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes we know that Mr Shaik was appointed 
Head of the Foreign Branch formerly the SASS and Ambassador 
Maqetuka was he known as the Super DG? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  To whom you would have reported? 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  What were your duties as Head of the 
Domestic Branch? 
DIRECTOR 
NJENJE: 
 
As 
Head 
of 
the 
Domestic 
Branch 
my 
responsibilities included counter – performing counterintelligence 
services and generally looking after the security of the country in terms 
of intelligence. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  For those of us not steeped in 
your world Director what is counterintelligence? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Counterintelligence are measures that are 
20 
employed to prevent threats from happening.  To be able to predict and 
to be able to mitigate. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Did you receive any instruction 
from Minister Cwele on your appointment as to the matter that you 
should investigate? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 82 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes I did. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  What was that matter? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  The first issue that Doctor Cwele raised with me 
when he came to brief me after my appointment was an interest in what 
he called the – the PAN program which was supposed to be a Principle 
Agent Network that was established within the agency. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Director I wonder if you would just 
speak up a little. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  You speak very softly sometimes.  What 
10 
was the Principle Agent Network? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  The Principle Agent Network was described to us 
as a Corvette Collection Structure which was supposed to be 
established outside the agency and composing of people and 
infrastructure that was not linked to the agency. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  You were present when we were 
taken at some length and in some detail through the Constitutional 
Provisions governing Intelligence Agencies. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Are you able to comment on whether an 
20 
Intelligence Agency may be established outside of the Provisions of 
Legislation and the Constitution? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  This was not an agency per se. It was supposed 
to be an extension of what is – what is happening and under the control 
of – of the DDG then.  The Director General Operations. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 83 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Well following your investigations was the 
Principle Agent Network indeed under the control of the officials in the 
Intelligence Department? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It was not. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Who… 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so it – so did you find that it was outside of the 
– of the official agency? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That was the purpose of the investigation in the 
first place that Mr Cwele explained to me that the suspicion is that this 
structure has been established outside the legal framework. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but I thought you just gave an answer to a 
question as to what your finding was and I am just wanting to establish 
whether your finding was that indeed it was outside of the official 
agency? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I thought he would get to that point but yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that was not the ques – Mr Pretorius I thought is 
the question he had asked you.  So I must have – okay. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes it was indeed Chair. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Oh you were correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I will wait.  Oh okay was that the – was that the 
20 
question Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes it was. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Alright. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  But perhaps I am going ahead. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 84 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Under whose auspices was the Principle 
Agent Network established? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It was established under Deputy Director General 
Operations Mr Arthur Fraser. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And so as I understand it you were 
directed by Minister Cwele to investigate the establishment of this 
network? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Did you then setup an investigation? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes I did. 
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And did those investigators report to you 
from time to time? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Did you then report to the Minister? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes I did. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  While the investigation into let us refer to 
it as PAN – P-A-N, was ongoing were any members of the Intelligence 
Services suspended? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  You do not need to name them all but who 
20 
was suspended in the main? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  In the main it was Mr Arthur Fraser and a 
gentleman who was responsible for what was called the Corvette 
Support Unit. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Did Arthur Fraser later resign? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 85 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes he did. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  What were the allegations against Mr 
Fraser and the others who were suspended generally speaking? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Generally speaking what was being investigated 
was the acquisition of properties, of vehicles, employment of people 
who were either members or non-members but employed as part of this 
PAN Program. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Is it fair to summarise the allegations as 
an abuse of funding? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  If you would bear with me a moment.  We 
will come back to that investigation and the fate of that investigation 
later on in your statement.  Let us just go if we may to paragraph 13 to 
keep the timeline.  During 2009 we understand from Mr Shaik’s 
evidence there were certain structural changes in the structure of the 
Intelligence Services? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  What was your role and the role of you 
two colleagues in that? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  My role was to primarily look at how we were 
20 
restructuring the domestic branch from what was then known as NIA.  
And as well we had to synchronise and together – sit together as the 
three of us to see that – to see to it that all structures were talking to – 
to one another including that of foreign and domestic, the academy and 
all of those. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 86 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Did you have the support of Minister 
Cwele in your efforts of restructuring? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  At the beginning yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And after the beginning? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  After the beginning some problems developed. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Did those relate to the work that you were 
doing in the restructuring or were there other reasons? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  They related to the work that we were doing. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  In the restructuring process? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  In the restructuring process. 
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Did you discuss these issues or problems 
as you refer to them with Minister Cwele? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes indeed we did discuss the issues. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And what was the outcome of those 
discussions? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I think the outcome of the discussions was that 
the Minister promised that he would lift his tempo – he would raise his 
tempo a bit in terms of delivery.  Because we would make submissions 
because we could not implement structures without his authorisation.  
So we needed that authority for us to – to continue to do the work that 
20 
we were supposed to. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And were there delays in his responses to 
your proposals? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is to our submissions, correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And did this assist or hamper your 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 87 of 185 
 
work? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It did hamper our work. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Was there a decision then to approach the 
President? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Excuse me. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Was there a decision at that stage to 
approach the President about the problems you were facing in the 
Intelligence Services? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  At a point yes a decision was made that we 
should meet – we should see the President. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  The issues which gave rise to the problems are they 
issues that you may be able to tell me about or are they the types of 
issues that preferably you should not tell me about because of 
intelligence? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I think it is issues that I can declare. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ja.  Can you please tell me – give me an idea 
what those issues were? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I think basically it were administrative issues 
where the Minister will sit on submissions for long periods of time.  
Issues of personal relations I think we were starting to develop as well.  
20 
And I think the issues of him wanting to take part in the work that we 
were supposed to be doing.  
CHAIRPERSON:  They related to administrative and operational 
issues? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 88 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And in part they related to him wanting to get 
involved in operational issues which you believed should be left to you? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that right?  And that caused some tension? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It did cause frictions and tension Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Did you come to know during 2010 
of an investigation or proposed investigation into the activities of the 
Gupta family? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  How did you come to know of that?  Was 
it something that was happening within your department as it were? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It was happening in my department and it was 
also happening here form the foreign branch point of view. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And did you receive information 
from your operatives in relation to this investigation? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well do you want to tell me what information precisely 
you were informed of that gave rise to the idea that there should be an 
investigation? 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  The had been a what is called an information 
exchange between our service and foreign services where they were 
enquiring and asking for assistance from us with regards to – to certain 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 89 of 185 
 
issues that – that gave rise for concern to them. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Is that Uranium Mine – the Uranium Mine? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is one of them yes.  And of course our 
protocol allows that we do those exchanges and that – that was going 
on.  When I – when I arrived in 2009 there were already some – those 
investigations were – were going on. So at the point where Advocate 
Pretorius is enquiring it was a report back from structures about work 
that they were doing in regards with – with regards to those 
investigations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh so – so the investigation – when you arrived in the 
10 
department the invest – there was already an investigation that was 
ongoing. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But as far as you know at that time the Minister was 
unaware of the investigation at that time when you arrived?  When you 
got to know about it were you told that he – he was not aware? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I do not think that he was aware Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not think he was aware? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I do not think so Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And at a certain stage you thought it should be 
20 
– it was necessary that – oh no I think from what Mr Shaik said it was 
not your decision that he should know.  He – he called – he called you 
but that comes later. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Chair the fact of the matter is the Minister heard 
from somebody who was at the meeting that the issue was raised and 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 90 of 185 
 
discussed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes no.  It is just that earlier on I was thinking 
whether having arrived in the department and found this investigation 
going on and being of the view that he had not – he was unaware.  I 
was thinking whether you might have decided that he should know but 
then I remembered that in terms of Mr Shaik’s evidence it does not look 
like you decided that he should know but he got wind of it and then 
called you. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Chair remember these are two independent 
structures. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I have – I run my management and Ambassador 
Chair was running his management. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The foreign? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  The foreign – the foreign branch. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The foreign branch. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I am running. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I am running the Domestic. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Domestic yes. 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  So we – we – although we did exchange 
information at the top. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  At the level of operations we were running 
independent operation. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 91 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Okay. Alright.  Mr Pretorius I interrupted. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes as I understand your evidence and 
that of Mr Shaik there was a meeting to discuss this investigation? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct.  After… 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And Mr Maqetuka was there, you were 
there and Shaik was there amongst others? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And as – do I understand your evidence 
correctly that someone from that meeting informed the Minister of the 
investigation?  That is your supposition? 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  From our – from our meeting the one that I am 
saying the Domestic Branch had the management meeting there was a 
report that we received that the investigation is at this point and it is 
going on.  From my own team somebody went to talk to the Minister to 
say that there is an investigation of this nature. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And then … 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It gave rise then to the meeting that we had with 
the Minister. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  With the three colleagues? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
20 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And that is the meeting to which Mr Shaik 
referred?  You were here when he did that, is that correct? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Sir. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And subsequent to that I understand there 
was a meeting with Minister Cwele at the Minister’s instance? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 92 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Sir. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Before we get there did you 
received reports or did you hear what Minister Cwele was saying about 
your involvement in this investigation and why the investigation was 
allegedly taking place under your command? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes I did hear. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  What was he saying? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I heard he was saying that I have got personal 
interests that are conflicting to those of the Gupta family.  And these 
were business related.  I think at the meeting that we had I tried to 
10 
establish from him where he got this and what evidence he had.  If he 
could provide me with that because he was making my work to be 
difficult.  Especially because he started off by talking not directly to 
me.  He never came to me.  He never called me in and said, but I 
understand there is this – is this situation you have – you are conflicted 
and therefore that whatever maybe you should be doing whether you 
recuse or whatever.  Nothing of the sort happened. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Well that is quite important.  It appears 
that from what you say prior to the meeting to which Mr Shaik has 
testified and you will testify in a moment.  You say that the Minister 
20 
never approach you to raise any issue about conflicting business 
interests in relation to the Gupta investigation? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  No Chair. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Did anyone else raise the issue with you? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  No Chair other than just the rumour that was just 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 93 of 185 
 
taking rounds.   
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  What was the true position?  Were there 
business interests you held in competition or in conflict with the Gupta 
business interests? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I have got no – no clue.  I do not know.  I do not 
know what other business interests they were doing.  I mean what other 
businesses they were involved in.  But I – I was not involved in any 
business when I was – I was working for the state.   All my business 
interests I had to – to cease operating and therefore that I did not have 
anything that was active.  I was not actively involved in business. 
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Well it is – I understand it would be 
difficult for you to speculate but has anyone since then ever pointed out 
to you that this business interest or that business interest might be 
what was termed as the conflicting business interest? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  No.  Not even the President raised that at the 
meeting that Mr Shaik referred to. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  From your point of view Director what was 
the reason for the Intelligence Service to investigate the Gupta family? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  There were many disturbing things that – that 
were happening at the time.  Especially in the year – in the circles – in 
20 
political circles where people were talking about the influence of the 
family on our President.  And that concerned us greatly.  The 
association of the President’s children with the family was also a matter 
of grave concern to Intelligence.   
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Any other reason? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 94 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  The other reasons were that they should not be – 
they should not put our country at jeopardy in terms of dealing with the 
rogue elements in terms of businesses that they were running, using 
natural resources of the country. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  You have heard the evidence of 
Mr Shaik in relation to two meetings.  In your statement you deal in 
some detail with the latter meeting with the former President.  But in 
relation to the meeting with Mr Cwele do you agree with the 
recollections of Mr Shaik?  Do you have any other recollections or any 
different recollections? 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I do recall Chair that it was the first time that he 
was raising the issue of my - my personal interests directly in my - in 
my presence directly with me.  Of course talking to all of us at the 
same time.  I think that did not sound good to me and I - I reacted to 
that.  I said, but I mean if you - you are a Minister. 
I think you - you should - you should be doing better than 
this.  You are the Minister.  You are responsible here.  If you have got 
issues why do you not - why do you not raise them properly.  We have 
got regulations.  We have got policies.  We have got everything in 
place which you can use as your instruments for your oversight on us.  
20 
Why is it that you are - you are deciding with the mater in the manner?  
So I - I was not happy personally. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I do not if my recollection is correct, but I think 
Mr Shaik may have said something along the lines that you were - he 
had never seen you so unhappy or angry.  I am not sure what the - I 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 95 of 185 
 
cannot remember, but I got the impression that he felt that you - you 
were - you were very extremely unhappy to say the least, but maybe 
even angry.  I am not sure at hearing this accusation being levelled 
against you.  Would - would that be a fair reflection? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I - I think so Chair, because … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I felt like being personally assaulted at the time 
that this was happening and - and the fact that he could not show me 
any piece of thing to say this is what I am talking about. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And did he give details such as you are involved in 
10 
this business or this business.  You have an interest in this company or 
this company.  This is what this company does.  The Guptas have got 
this company which does the same.  These two or whatever companies 
are competing.  That is the conflict of interest I am talking about.  Did 
he give details such as those? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  There was nothing of that nature Chair.  There 
was no illustration of - of any sort to say this is - this is why I am 
saying you have got this and you see I had not even applied for the job 
of coming through in 2009.  He - he approached me to say that I must 
join and he knew what I was doing. 
20 
That I was in business and he - and as I came in I declared 
those interests to say this is what I am involved in and - and resigned 
in all of those interests that - that would - that would cause anyone to 
say there is a conflict of interest. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 96 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  We will come back to that sequence of 
events.  Your statement is constructed on the basis of a timeline and I 
would like to deal with the incident that you referred to in paragraph 
17.  You received a call from a long-time friend of yours.  Is that 
correct? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Who was that? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It is Mr … (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Pretorius.  Were you saying you will 
come back to the issue of that meeting or are you done with that 
10 
meeting? 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  The meeting with the President … 
CHAIRPERSON:  No.  No.  With - with the Minister. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  I will come back, but I have done with the 
- the meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With - with the meeting.  Okay.  Now did 
Minister Cwele say that the investigation must be stopped in express - 
in - in expressed terms? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I think what was coming out of the meeting here 
with Minister Cwele was that in effect we will be investigating the 
20 
President if we continue with this investigation and therefore that he 
did not think that it was proper that we should be investigating the 
President.  Our point was simple that no.  We are not investigating the 
President. 
We are trying to help the President from this relationship 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 97 of 185 
 
here and the more we know about what is going on the better we are to 
advise the Executives as to what they should be doing with this - with 
this family. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As I understand the position from Mr Shaik’s evidence 
there was a concern expressed that it could be that the - the funding - 
if I am not mistaken - for the Shiva Uranium was obtained from 
(indistinct)? 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  (Indistinct) and you - what was sought to be 
investigated was whether there was truth to that.  There might have 
10 
been much more to be investigated than just that, but that was part of.  
Is that right? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Are you able to say whether there was 
something else other than that that you wanted to - that was being 
investigated? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Chair what I can say in addition is that it was not 
only the Guptas that were falling in that for - in that type of 
investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  There were other investigations that were - that 
were being carried out … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And they also affected people like from India and 
Pakistan … 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 98 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And - and there were - there were court cases 
that followed … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Those investigations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Where some of South Africa’s technology was 
being sold illegally to - to some of those countries. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But as far as the Guptas were concerned particularly 
with regard to Shiva Uranium was that the main thing that was to be 
10 
investigated? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  No.  More than that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There - it was more than that? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did - did it include the question of what influenced 
the Guptas had … 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  On the family. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is correct. 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That included that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that what Minister Cwele was talking about when 
he said you would be investigating the President if you continue with 
this investigation?  In - in other words because the investigation 
included what influence the Guptas had on him.  As you understood … 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 99 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  At the time … 
CHAIRPERSON:  What was your understanding of what he was saying? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  At the time - at the time Chair I - I think I took it 
at face value that he meant if we did more into these people I will find - 
we may find something on the President, but I did not link it to issues 
of the people trying to unseat the President and all of those. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But - well you have confirmed that part of what the 
investigation was to look at was what influence or what level of 
10 
influence the Gupta family had on the President.  Is that right? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I may add that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It was an assumption on our part as well that it is 
possible that they are just employees of another Intelligence Agency 
and the aim of course is to influence the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Yes.  So that - that was the angle from which 
you were coming? 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  We were looking at all angles. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At all angles, but that was one? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Including that.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay, but you say that when Minister Cwele 
said if you continue with this investigation in effect you would be 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 100 of 185 
 
investigating the President or it will be like you are investigating the 
President. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You say your understanding was that he was saying if 
you investigate you might come across things that relate to the 
President.  Maybe that you should not - as far as the President is or as 
far as he was concerned he thought you should not go to. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Did he - and he expressed a view that was 
against continuing with the investigation? 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He did Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you able to tell me how he expressed his view in 
this regard?  Was he quite forceful?  Was he quite adamant?  Was he - 
was he just expressing them in a very calm manner? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Chair he was forceful. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He was forceful? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He was forceful that you know that is issue of 
private interests come into plan and - and then - and that you - you are 
20 
- it is like ganging up and that is the - the colleagues ganging up with 
me … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  To achieve personal interests. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh.  Huh-uh. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 101 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He was forceful on that and - but of course he 
could not lay on the table to us and say these are the reasons why I am 
saying this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Did - did you get the impression that he had an 
understanding and an appreciation of the National Security Risk that 
you were concerned about? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I think I am going to say something in the course 
of my - my statement … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  But he seems to have other interests other than 
10 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Other than national interest. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  Okay and did he deal with - did he deal 
pertinently with your reasons that you articulated as to why the three of 
you believed that the investigation should continue?  Did he deal 
pertinently with your reasons in terms of why you thought it was 
necessary that the investigation should continue? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He did not Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He did not? 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was his main point simply that in effect you people 
cannot investigate the President?  This will amount to investigating the 
President. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 102 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Are you able to remember other points that he 
put forward to try and say in going on with this investigation?  It is not 
a good idea or … (intervenes). 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Chair he did not - he did not have - he did not 
have something like a rationale … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Argument and … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  We sat and spoke around that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He - he did - it was just that you guys all that you 
are doing now is to investigate the President effectively. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  As I understand the position and summary 
then Director.  The three colleagues Maqetuka, yourself and Mr Shaik 
were called into a meeting by the Minister - Minister Cwele? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  At that meeting the topic of discussion 
was the investigation into at least the Gupta family? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
20 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  It was motivated by you in the terms that 
you have outlined and do you recall Mr Shaik’s evidence?  Was he 
correct in relation to his motivation? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It is correct Chair.  This was an ongoing matter 
that we were looking at and the manner in which the Minister 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 103 of 185 
 
approached us was also a little - a little shocking in - in the manner 
that he - he expressed himself and - and on top of that him not having 
anything that he could put on the table and say you people for these 
reasons I want you to stop this.  Other than you know effectively you - 
you are - you are investigating the President. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And for … 
CHAIRPERSON:  And - and that you in particular are pursuing your 
business interests? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That was - well that - that may have been another 
additional thing that he had to say. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ja. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  The meeting then involved Minister Cwele 
raising the issue of the investigation into the Gupta family.  Your own 
and your colleagues own motivation for the investigation.  The matters 
raised in opposition to the investigation by Minister Cwele.  Is that a 
fair summary? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is - that is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  The two matters you refer to are the 
20 
affective investigation into the conduct of the President - former 
President and your alleged conflict of interest? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  What was the outcome of the meeting?  
Did either side budge? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 104 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  What happened is that we - we categorically 
stated to Minister Cwele that we were not convinced that we should 
stop the investigation and that we would go on with the investigation. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Did he change his mind?  Was he 
persuaded by your representations? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  No.  He was not. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And we know that subsequent to that 
there was a meeting with the former President. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  We will come to that in a moment, 
10 
but if we may go back to the timeline. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before that I think I asked this question earlier on, 
but I am not sure that I got a clear answer.  Are you able to say 
Minister Cwele instructed you to stop the investigation - the three of 
you or is the position that you are not able to say he instructed you to 
do so to stop, but he simply made his position very clear. 
That he thought the investigation should be stopped.  He was 
against it, but you would stop at that and not say he gave an 
instruction. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I think the effect had we - had we yielded in 
20 
effect he would have been telling us to stop.  We did, but we did not 
yield, but yes the effect of what he was saying is that stop the 
investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you say he might not have put it in so many 
words, but as far as you are concerned that was the effect of what he 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 105 of 185 
 
was saying? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  In paragraph 17 you deal with a different 
set of facts in the timeline that you have set out in your statement.  You 
say you received a call from a long-time friend and comrade and this 
was during 2010. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Who was that? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It was Mr Archie Luhlabo. 
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Is that L-U-H-L-A-B-O? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  What did he say to you? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He asked that a - I was driving from the airport 
Chair.  Just arriving on a Sunday - afternoon from outside 
Johannesburg and he asked that I urgently see him.  He was in - in 
Saxon … (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Saxonwold. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  In Sandton. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In Sandton? 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He was a together with Ms Gugu Mtshali.  Mtshali 
then, but now she is Gugu Motlanthe.  Ms Motlanthe and that we 
needed to consult urgently. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 106 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Where was this consultation to take 
place? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It - it took place as a - at the - at the former - 
former Deputy - former President’s place Motlanthe - residence - 
private residence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Roundabout when was this?  What - 2010?  Was it 
2010? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay and you are unable to give an indication in 
terms of month?  Whereabouts. 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I - I am unable to do now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but somewhere during 2010. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is … (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe during the first half of 2010, second half? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Maybe first half. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe first half, but you are not sure? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I am not sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  When you arrived there who did you find? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I found Ms Gugu Mtshali and Mr Luhlabo. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you therefor after getting this call did you drive 
straightaway to where he wanted to meet you - Mr Luhlabo? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes Chair.  I did.  I - I drove from the airport to 
Sandton. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  Did you say you or you said Mr Luhlabo 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 107 of 185 
 
was a long-time friend of yours? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Who else was there - if anybody? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It was just the - the three of us finally. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  What was the topic of the meeting 
that ensued? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  When I arrived there they were fuming. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They were? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  They were very angry.  They were fuming. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And … 
CHAIRPERSON:  The two of them? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  The two of them.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  They - they informed me that they has just been 
to a meeting and I think after - after the meeting they phoned 
Advocate Nongxina who then said they must call me and talk to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who was he at the - at the time?  Is he a DG? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He was DG at DME. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  At the Department of Mineral Resources? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes.  DMR. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  They had been to a certain meeting.  After that 
meeting they called Mr Nongxina? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 108 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  They were now telling you this? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Continue. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I called Mr Nongxina and checked with him as to 
what is this and he said please do whatever you can to - to calm the 
situation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well maybe take us through the conversation.  You 
come there.  You find that there are two people.  Mr Luhlabo and 
Ms Mtshali at the time. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Right. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  You greet obviously.  I am - or maybe you did not 
greet if people were too angry, but anyway you talked.  Tell us the 
conversation leading to your calling Mr Nongxina.  Put me in the picture 
as to … 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What the issues were?  Why were they angry and all 
of that? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  The … 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Chair … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
20 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  If I may there is certain background facts 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  That are necessary. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 109 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Of which the witness has knowledge … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  But unless we put those backgrounds 
before you nobody will understand what … (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I - I need to otherwise the story sounds very 
incomplete and incoherent.  I read the statement and I was saying there 
is a lot that I am not hearing.  You know.  It is like it jumps from one to 
another and I thought well maybe it is because of Intelligence issues.  
So, but I - I do want to hear the story as it happens if another witness 
will come and confirm what he has said.  I think that should be fine. 
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  The Director will tell you the story 
Chair, but … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  The story cannot be understood without 
reference to some background facts which I need to put to him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.  Those background facts I am fine.  
Unless you say those background facts are matters that should not be 
told here, because of Intelligence. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  No, they - they commercial dealings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Which are the back - form the background 
to what this conversation was all about. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  So it is necessary to know them and … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No.  I want to know them.  Ja. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 110 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I definitely want to know them. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Director tell us. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  The - well if I may just - may I just lead 
the witness in respect of them.  Otherwise we are going to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No.  No.  That is fine. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Confuse everybody. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You can lead him.  Ja. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  I can assure you of that Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Arcelor Mittal the mining company. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Had a 21 percent state in Sishen Mine.  Is 
that correct? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC: 
 And 
its 
mining 
rights 
expired 
on 
30 April 2009.  Is that correct? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  When they expired two other companies 
20 
applied for the rights of Arcelor Mittal? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  The one was the Sishen Iron Ore 
Company a subsidiary of Kumba? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Right. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 111 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And the other was Imperial Crown 
Trading? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  ICT. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  ICT. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  The Director and/or a Director and 
Shareholder in ICT was the very Ms Gugu Mtshali to whom you have 
just referred? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And Archie Luhlabo.  Correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes and Mr Luhlabo. 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Luhlabo.  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  The two were Directors in ICT.  Is that 
what you are saying? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is what I am saying Chair.  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  Okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And ICT were obviously seeking to obtain 
the grant of mining rights that had expired in the hands of Arcelor Mittal 
on 30 April 2009? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
20 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  But in this venture they were competing 
with Sishen Iron Ore? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Is it correct that in November 2009 ICT 
was awarded these mining rights? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 112 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  So I was told. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Now we know - well perhaps we do 
not know, but there was in fact a dispute about the legalities of the 
award of mining rights to ICT? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And there was litigation between Sishen 
on the one hand - Kumba? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Right.  Correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And ICT and the Department of Mineral 
Resources on the other hand? 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  That litigation took up some time in the 
courts.  Correct? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Now we know that in March 2010 and 
please confirm if this in accordance with your own knowledge.  ICT sold 
a 50 percent stake to an entity related to the Guptas and to 
Duduzane Zuma? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  What was that entity? 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I do not think I - I have got the … 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Can I remind you was it DIC?  This - all 
this evidence can be given separately Chair.  It is background. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but just so that we understand. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Was that JIC Mining Services? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 113 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I think so.  That is correct.  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  An entity in which the Guptas and 
Duduzane Zuma had an interest? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct.  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And ICT having acquired the rights that 
had expired in the hands of Arcelor Mittal now sold a 50% stake in ICT 
to an entity related to the Guptas and Duduzane Zuma.  Correct? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Subsequent to that the litigation resulted 
in Sishen and Kumba affectively securing those mining rights, but we 
10 
need not go into that for the moment. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  But your evidence now deals with the 
surrender by ICT of a 50 percent stake to the Guptas and 
Duduzane Zuma.  Am I correct? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  That was the dispute that was raised at 
that meeting in 2010? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  You can take it from there then. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Let me understand the dispute.  It is ICT.  
There is Kumba/Sishen.  There was - I know there was Arcelor Mittal as 
well and then there is another company/entity DI - that you mentioned. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  JIC … 
CHAIRPERSON:  JIC. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 114 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Mining Services. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So just tell me what you were told at this 
meeting then in connection with these issues that seem to have … 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Okay.  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To have been connected with this anger that you saw. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes.  So they - they are angry.  They are very 
angry and they say that they - they were called to Saxonwold by 
Ajay Gupta and Ajay Gupta told them that he wants 90 percent of that - 
of ICT … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of ICT? 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  We must give him 90 percent of ICT, because he 
is the only person who has the financial muscle and the political 
backing to get that award granted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think it was a prospecting right? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes.  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Well I happen to - to know because I  
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  You presided. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sat in the High Court. 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  You presided.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  So they wanted 90 percent of the company.  That 
was the discussion they had - they had had earlier with Ajay at - at his 
residence … 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 115 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And they phoned Advocate Nongxina … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And Advocate Nongxina I think was in London at 
the time … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Because there was a trip by President Zuma - an 
official trip to the UK by President Zuma … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And Ms Nongxina was in the company of the 
10 
President … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  On that trip. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  So they said - Ms Nongxina said that they must - 
they must call me so that I can assist to - to talk about this thing. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  What role were you to play? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  When I asked - I had to ask him as to what is it 
that - because I do not work at DMR.  I have got - I have got no - I 
have got no clue of this.  Of what is going on here. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay.  Mr - I am trying to follow this quite 
properly, because the facts can be quite complicated. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So what made Ms Mtshali and Mr Luhlabo angry was 
that Mr Ajay Gupta had demanded that they should give him or his 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 116 of 185 
 
entity 90 percent shares in I - in ICT? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which means they would have had to share the 
remaining 10% and they were unhappy about that, but more than that 
he had said to them according to what they told you he had said he was 
the only one with the financial muster necessary for this prospecting 
right and he was the only one who had the right political backing, am I 
putting it correctly? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And they had then called Mr Nogxina who was 
10 
Director General of the Department of Mineral Resources at the time. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who happened to be on an overseas trip with former 
President Zuma. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct, one of the people on that trip. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And he had suggested that they should talk to you to 
discuss the matter? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I am not sure what he said to them, but 
ultimately he asked that they must call me and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, ja, okay, but at this stage you heard this did you 
20 
have an idea how you would come in, why anybody would want you to 
be called to have – to take part in that discussion? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I asked him, I asked, when I phoned I said but 
what do you expect me to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 117 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   And he said come on man, I think you are the 
guy who can assist here, because at that time I was working for State 
Security Agency. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   He said I think these guys will listen when you 
move in the Gupta’s. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mmm. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Because the problem was not with these people 
the problem was the pressure he said he was getting to get these 
people agree that they must surrender their shares to the Gupta’s. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So as you understood the position from Mr Nogxina 
he himself was getting pressure from the Gupta family, is that what you 
are saying? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He himself was getting pressure? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   He said he was getting pressure and Chair he 
was in London as well with the President at that time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   When these people were phoning.  So I’m not – I 
didn’t ask if the pressure was not from the President. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   You didn’t ask where the pressure was coming from? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   No I did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But he said he was under pressure? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes to attend to the issue of – to the demand or 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 118 of 185 
 
request made by the Gupta family? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright, I think continue then, you had had this 
discussion with Mr Nogxina and how did it end? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I agreed that – I sat down with them and I asked 
them so what is your position, they said no, this is now Mtshali and 
Luhlabo, they said no we are not going to do that but I said, guys 
Sandile is telling me that he is under pressure what can we do, what 
can be done because I’m here now.  So finally we agreed that we would 
go to Saxonwold…[intervenes]. 
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Before you go to Saxonwold let’s just 
summarise, there is a factual background which may be put before you 
in due course Chair but the essential fact is that ICT had or had a 
prospective interest in mining rights. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  At cession Correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Yes and that was in cession. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Ja. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Right so they have this, let’s call it for 
want of a better word, asset or prospective asset in their company. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Correct. 
20 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   From what you say is the Gupta’s wanted 
90% of that company now, of ICT? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   And Ms Mtshali and Mr Luhlabo were 
angered by this claim? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 119 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   And there was a dispute therefore 
between the Gupta’s on the one hand who wanted a large slice of the 
ICT cake and the owners of that cake Ms Mtshali on the one hand and 
Luhlabo on the other.   
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Right so there’s a dispute and you are 
asked to assist.   
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   So what did you do pursuant to your – 
10 
well it wasn’t a mandate, pursuant to the request made to you? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   We then agreed that we would go to the Gupta’s 
but the lady Ms Mtshali called Ajay on his cell to say that I am coming 
with Gibson Njenje, Sandile suggested that we come and talk to you – 
Sandile Nogxina. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So at this stage did you see your role as mediating 
between the parties? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct Chair that is how I saw my role. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Just one thing if I may, it’s perhaps not 
20 
too relevant given the facts that you’ve outlined but in your statement 
you say that when you got to the house of former President Motlanthe 
in Sandton, Mr Nogxina was there? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   No. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   He wasn’t? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 120 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   No he was not, he was…[intervenes]. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   [Indistinct] your statement insofar as it 
says here. 
DIRECTOR 
NJENJE: 
 
 
That’s 
incorrect, 
he 
was 
in 
London 
when…[intervenes]. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Okay he telephoned? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, now we’re off to Saxonwold as I 
understand it? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Correct. 
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Take up the story from there please? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Before going to Saxonwold Ms Mtshali called 
Ajay Gupta and told him that they were coming with me to discuss the 
issue…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before you go there let’s go back to Mr Nogxina’s 
suggestion that you should be involved.  Do you know why Mr Nogxina 
would have picked you out of all people to say you should be involved 
and mediate, if mediate is the right word? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   We are friends Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   We are close friends. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   And I don’t know what made him to think of me 
when he was in that position. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 121 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   But of course as I say, he knew that I am 
working for State Security at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay so maybe for whatever reason he might have 
thought that, that background might assist? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I think so Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I think that was his rationale. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay so maybe he just knew that you have some 
10 
skills in mediation do you have any experience of mediation? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Well I can make people talk – I can make people 
get together and talk. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Yes Mr Shaik was polite you are modest 
it seems. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright yes so as you understood the position 
when Ms Mtshali and Mr Luhlabo explained to you at the meeting why 
did Mr Ajay Gupta make this demand to them and why did he make a 
20 
demand for such a high percentage of their company or did that not 
transpire in the discussion, even before you met Mr Ajay Gupta 
because obviously to go and mediate you need to understand the actual 
dispute and the basis for the dispute or the grounds for the various 
positions of the parties? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 122 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Chair I thought it was a very unfair situation in 
the first place and I mean, after they explained to me that this is – how 
far we are coming with this situation, their project, this is how far we 
are coming they were nowhere we didn’t have anything to do with them, 
we have nothing to do with them even now but when they come they 
establish from wherever that they are the holders of this 21% and they 
were just king of bullying, I think. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As you understood the position, now that you 
mention 21% I think I seem to recall that, that whole litigation was 
about 21% of the prospecting right.  At that time of your being involved 
10 
in the discussions ICT had already been granted the prospecting right? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh so they had been doing a lot of work and then 
after they got this then Mr Ajay Gupta was saying I want 90% of that? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay alright. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   As we know from the litigation and the 
outcome of the litigation, ICT lost those prospecting rights but that was 
later. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   That was later yes. 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   At the time the approach was made by Mr Gupta, 
those rights were held by ICT subject to the claim that was made 
against them. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And as you understood the position at the time of 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 123 of 185 
 
that meeting were Ms Mtshali and Mr Luhlabo the only Directors of – in 
ICT? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   They said they were not the only Directors. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They said they were not the only…[intervenes]. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   They were the Directors who were in town, I 
think the other Director was in the Northern Cape. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay alright, thank you. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   So did you then take up your mission as 
mediator or? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I did Chair. 
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   And what did you do? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Ms Mtshali told me that she called him on the 
phone and he said, no it’s fine they can bring me along so we went and 
they opened the doors and greeted and we sat there.  He was like, 
sizing me up as we were chatting and making jokes – he was making 
jokes…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sizing you up like what? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Like looking me up and down. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You mean he was looking at you? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes I felt like that. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so it was now the three of you plus him. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Plus him, correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   So I introduced myself, I told him that I’m 
Gibson Njenje…[intervenes]. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 124 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were you meeting him for the first time?  
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That’s the very first time Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes, and he said no, I know your name I know 
where you are working, I say, ja okay and then we started the 
discussion.  I wanted to know but these guys are complaining that you 
are taking their company, he said, no I’m not taking the company, we 
are going to help them otherwise as they are they will walk away with 
nothing, so 10% is better than nothing and that they are not greedy, the 
point is there are just too many on their side who are going to share 
10 
from that 90%. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just repeat that. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I say Chair, he explained to me that the reason 
why they wanted 90% is not because they are greedy, he is not greedy 
he has got many people that he has got to look after in that 90%. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that what he said? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is what he said Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Before you go on when he said to you 
that – this is Mr Gupta, when he said to you I know who you are and I 
20 
know where you work, what did you gather from that, why did he say 
that, do you think? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I think – I couldn’t make out why he was saying 
so at the time but at a subsequent meeting he then told me why he 
knows about me. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 125 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   In any event what was the outcome of 
that meeting? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well maybe before the outcome I do want to hear the 
content of the discussion up to the outcome. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Well Chair the other two – the other party, Ms 
Mtshali and Luhlabo they were very adamant that no, this is not going 
to happen you can’t – I mean they were raising even political issues, 
that you guys, you are just foreigners here and you just want to bully 
us like this it’s not going to happen.  So I had to calm them down and 
say, guys remember I was talking to the DG and I don’t know what the 
10 
DG knows, let’s just see what it is that we can come out with here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But was the position simply that Mr Ajay Gupta was 
simply demanding something from them for which he had no basis 
really? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Chair as I said…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was that the position? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is the position Chair, that was the position. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The only – was the only basis that he said he has got 
the financial muscle and he has got political backing? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct Chair and as I’m saying I knew at 
20 
that time that Sandile is in London and he is with the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   So I wasn’t sure whether he is – the pressure is 
not from that side. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  So you have the situation here where 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 126 of 185 
 
somebody just decides to say, I know your company has got some 
prospecting rights or mining rights I want 90% of it and that’s what I 
want and there is no basis, it’s not like I made any contribution or 
anything? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I think the other thing Chair, he was adding 
was…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   He was adding to his argument was that he is in 
touch with Isometal, I think the Chairman of Isometal and they were 
going to work out some mechanisms, some structure that would not 
10 
make Isometal to compete again to go to Court and litigate that would 
be handled by him and his team, I think that was an additional issue 
that he was putting in as what they are offering in the matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes continue with the discussion, anything else 
important in the discussion that was said? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   So the discussion went on to say, no, no I think 
the two fellows were also now starting to concede that, you know, this 
is going to be difficult.  Then I said guys, what are you offering, I asked 
them what are you offering to this person and he said, no if anything 
they must buy, I said yes you’re right they must buy their share and the 
20 
risk and follow whatever it is that they say they can do but if they want 
to participate they must buy.  So Ajay said, no, no, no we’re not going 
to do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I mean is the position that Mr Ajay Gupta was 
demanding to be given this 90% for free? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 127 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   No he said it was not for free Chair.  He said – 
the input that they were going to make was more than that 90%. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But he was not going to pay any cash? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   He was not going to put in any money no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So he said he will make an input into how the 
company would run, the business and so on and negotiations with 
Isometal whatever…[intervenes]. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   He would make…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was not going to buy these shares? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   No he was not going to buy the shares but he 
10 
was going to make all manner of problems go away because of his 
influence and because he’s got the money, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   So as I understand it, Mr Gupta in effect 
demanded 90% of ICT? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That’s correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   He said that although he would not pay 
for the shares he would, through his own influence and financial 
backing assist ICT to overcome its problems in amongst other things, 
the litigation that was current? 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was the litigation pending at that time as you 
understood the position or was it not there yet or was it still coming, 
what was your understanding as at that time? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I don’t think the litigation was pending at the 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 128 of 185 
 
time, I’m not sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Well that can be established. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   But we know that at the time ICT enjoyed 
the 21,4% share or in the prospecting rights that claim was challenged. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Can you repeat please? 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   At the time those prospecting rights were 
held to the extent of 21% by ICT that claim or interest was under 
challenge? 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now did Ms Mtshali and Mr Luhlabo ask Mr Gupta on 
what basis he thought he could just get 90% from them or maybe that’s 
something they may have asked in the previous meeting but didn’t ask 
when you were there? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Chair they did and they were not just asking 
they were also shouting at him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They were shouting at him? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes what right do you have, you are just a 
foreigner you come in here you’re coming to grab and you know, yes 
20 
that was the type of language that was employed at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but you say at a certain stage of the meeting 
they began to warm up to concede in something? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   They did Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe warm up is the wrong word but they seemed 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 129 of 185 
 
to be prepared to make some concessions? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   They did make concessions Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ultimately what concession did they make? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   The final concession was a 50/50. 
CHAIRPERSON:   50/50? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And was he still not going to pay anything for the 
50%? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No? 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It must be quite tough to work for – your company 
work hard and then have, to just give 50% away.  On your 
understanding what is it that was making them decide that it was fine – 
maybe fine is the wrong word that they should nevertheless give him 
this 50% share? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I’ll have to move then forward into my statement 
to answer the question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay well if you are able to answer it now, answer 
it now, later on you can…[intervenes]. 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes, I met Ajay Gupta subsequent to this 
meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I met him at my request, I said I wanted to see 
him, I wanted to talk to him. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 130 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   And when we sat he told me that – well he 
agreed that I should come to that mediating meeting – to that meeting 
that I mediated in.  He agreed that I should be the one to come in 
because after Gugu called him, when we were still at Gugu Mtshali’s 
house he checked with the President whether or not I’m the right 
person and the President said to him, that’s a good old friend, he’ll sort 
things out, don’t worry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm, so effectively he checked with the President 
whether you would be the right person to mediate so to speak in this 
10 
dispute? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but from the point of view of Ms Mtshali and Mr 
Luhlabo as at that meeting what was your understanding of what they 
thought they would lose if they didn’t agree to give this man 50% share 
for free? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Chair I think at that time people knew that these 
were friends of the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:   These were friends of the President? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so they – your understanding would be that they 
must have thought about what appeared to be closeness to the 
President that he had? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that the way he was insisting they might end up 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 131 of 185 
 
getting nothing, maybe they should concede something, would that be 
the kind of thinking that you had, I’m just looking at what you thought? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Even the mere mention Chair that they have got 
more people it was suggestive. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   During the meeting at Saxonwold where 
the demand of Mr Gupta for an interest in ICT was discussed and dealt 
with as you have told the Chair it was dealt with, did the name of the 
10 
former President come up? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Not at the meeting, not when I was there with 
Archie and Gugu. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   So in that respect if you look at the last 
sentence of paragraph 19, your statement would need to be corrected, 
am I correct? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I think that is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   The statement? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes, the statement as it is reflecting here. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Right can you recall now the context in 
20 
which the name of the President was mentioned? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes I can. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Tell the Chair please? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Chair as I said here, he mentioned that they 
have got the money to do the deal because the deal is going to be very 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 132 of 185 
 
expensive for anyone who comes in for that 21%, to finance that 21%, 
secondly that they were talking to Khumba and Khumba knew that they 
have got this interest.  Isometal they were in control of because 
Isometal had lost their right and then that with the support of the 
President they were going to get the deal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He said this – Mr Ajay Gupta said this at the meeting 
which you attended together with Ms Mtshali and Mr Luhlabo? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   You referred, a moment ago, Director to 
10 
a further meeting with Mr Ajay Gupta. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Was that in 2010? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That’s still in 2010 correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   At whose instance was this meeting 
arranged? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   At my instance. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Why did you do so? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Chair the issue of the family as we have testified 
here was getting the better of us and…[intervenes]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Us being? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   State Security Agency. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   And myself as the head of Counter Intelligence 
in the country.  I …[intervenes]. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 133 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   This meeting now which you requested this would 
have been round about when, I just want to have a sense of time and 
year? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Maybe a few weeks after. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh it was still 2010? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   A few weeks after the first, the initial meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but just to round off that meeting, so the – an 
agreement was reached in that meeting in terms of which Ms Mtshali 
10 
and Mr Luhlabo agreed to give Ajay Gupta or whatever entity he might 
have used 50% shares of ICT? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That’s correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that right? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That’s correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes do you remember what entity was going to be 
used or that was left for later to be sorted out, that will come later? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   He has reminded me it was called JIC I think. 
CHAIRPERSON:   JYC or JIC? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   JIC. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   JIC okay, alright that was the one to be used by Ajay 
Gupta? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay and the meeting ended on that basis and that 
was it for that time? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 134 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes they were still very angry and…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They were still very angry? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja and I assume – did you report back to Mr 
Nogxina? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I told him, I said, hey you put me on the spot 
here and – but this is what came out finally. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes I guess you eased the pressure on him? 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Excuse me? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I guess you eased the pressure on him? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Well he thanked me, he did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay alright, so let’s go back to this meeting that 
you requested with Mr Ajay Gupta a few weeks later. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Did you meet? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Correct we did meet. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Where? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   We met at Saxonwold. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   At the Gupta residence? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   At the Gupta residence yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And your purpose in requesting the 
meeting? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 135 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Chair as I say we were – I was worried as well 
about the influence of these people on the President of the country.  
And that was the sole purpose of the meeting.  It was to address – I 
addressed to him our concerns as State Security Agency.  Basically I – 
when he said to me he held me as well when he said to me that he 
agreed to meet at the initial meeting because the President said I am a 
good old friend.  I said now you say you hear the President say I am a 
good old friend and indeed I am a good old friend.  What is your role in 
this?  Because you guys are putting the President and the governing 
party in problems.  Every day there is bad publicity. There is Duduzane 
10 
Zuma mentioned all day long why are you not protecting?  If you say he 
is your friend why are you not protecting your friend?  He said Mr 
Gibson you – you are right.  I have got no issue.  I do not go about 
talking about the President.  He is – he is a family friend.  He is my 
friend. I will have to talk to my brother because he is the one who is – 
who goes about harassing people and this and that.  But I will do that.  
I am so happy that you came and spoke to us. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Do you know which brother he was 
referring to? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I – I assumed.  I assumed Chair that he was – 
20 
because I have not – I have never met him but I have heard that is a 
rough character who can use colourful language with people. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Who is that? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  This is Atul. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Atul?  Was anything further discussed?  I 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 136 of 185 
 
am sure lots was discussed but on the theme that you talking about was 
anything further discussed? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Chair we did not discuss for a long time.  I 
wanted to convey a message and to say that we are worried as State 
Security Agency.  And he agreed.  He readily agreed he said, no I 
understand what you mean.   
CHAIRPERSON:  So you were – you were meeting him in an official 
capacity as part of your – what you believed was your job to do? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ja. 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes Chair.  Insofar as I was concerned I was 
doing that and I reported back to my colleagues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  At the top three that had made the meeting and I 
made the points to Mr Ajay Gupta. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And what you got from him was that he said he 
agreed you were right there should – they should protect the President? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He said so Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is what he said? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He agreed. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He agreed that it is not good for the President to 
be receiving bad publicity and all of this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Did he at any stage attempt to justify or 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 137 of 185 
 
explain his family’s relationship with the President, the former 
President? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Similar to what the President says.  He says we 
have met my brother has met – the brother who came in first met 
Mandela and he met Mbeki and so they are also meeting Zuma.  They 
met Zuma even when he was in trouble where he did not have any 
position in government.  They still continued to meet.  They still 
continued to look after Duduzane.  That was the end of that he was 
taken. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Did Minister Cwele’s name crop up 
10 
in the conversation? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It did indeed. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Please tell the Chair about that? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Chair Ajay Gupta then turned and looked at me 
and said, can you tell me what is the interest of Mr Cwele or Doctor 
Cwele in the family – in his family? 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the Gupta family? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  But he was asking you? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He was asking me. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And I said I have got no idea what do you mean 
he has got an interest in your family?  He then related a story to say 
that there had been an ANC – a fund raiser in Durban which was held at 
the Hilton Hotel.  I could faintly remember.  I could vaguely remember 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 138 of 185 
 
that.  And I said, oh okay.  He said at that fund raising dinner his family 
they bought a table and Ministers were deployed – different Ministers 
were deployed at different tables. And another Minister was deployed at 
their table.  But Cwele came to removed – to remove that Minister and 
ask him to go and sit where he was supposed to sit and him joining the 
Gupta family.  I said to him, no I do not know.  And frankly I did not 
know what it is – what the Minister Cwele was interested in.   
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  You then in paragraph 21 refer to a 
meeting between what you refer to as the top three.  I take it that is 
yourself, Mr Shaik and Ambassador Maqetuka? 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is how we were called at the farm. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  What was the purpose of this meeting? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  The purpose of the meeting was to - to raise our 
concerns about Minister Cwele with President Zuma. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Was – was this the meeting to which Mr 
Shaik referred as having occurred immediately after the meeting with 
Minister Cwele where he raised his views on the investigation and to 
the Gupta family? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Same meeting? 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  What do you recollect of that meeting 
then? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I can remember that President Zuma addressed 
us on the issue of the relationship between himself and the Gupta 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 139 of 185 
 
family.  It was a long narration that he gave of the relationship.  But the 
main characteristics being the same as what Gupta was saying that 
they are coming from a good family in India. Brought up by the – by a 
good father.  How they took Duduzane and Duduzile into their company 
and how they helped them through.  And especially at the time that 
President Zuma – at the time Deputy President was removed.  And how 
the children were growing out without a mother and all of those issues.  
Basically he was explaining that it was a clean relationship that he was 
having.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Including how good the Gupta family had been to – 
10 
had been to… 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  To his children. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To his children ja. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  As I understand the evidence of Mr Shaik 
one of the purposes this meeting was to raise with the President issues 
around the investigation into the Gupta family? 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Am I correct? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And Mr Shaik gave lengthy evidence in 
that regard.  Did you at the meeting raise your concerns as the top 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 140 of 185 
 
three in relation to whether or not the investigation into the Gupta 
family should continue? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I think we started by making our presentation to 
the President to say that we are coming to raise our concerns as well 
about that – about that issue. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And what was the – besides 
speaking about his relationship with the Gupta family, explaining it and 
seems justifying it, what was the President’s response to the 
investigation in particular? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I do not think he – he reacted to the issue of the 
10 
investigation. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  What was your conclusion in relation to 
whether or not you should continue the investigation after that 
meeting? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I think he was telling us that these are good 
people and therefore that maybe we should just leave them. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Was that your conclusion? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That was my conclusion yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And in relation to your relationship and I 
am talking about the top three – relationship with Minister Cwele?  
20 
What was the conclusion there as far as the former President was 
concerned? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I think I had more than one meeting on the issue 
of the relationship of the – with Doctor Cwele with the President.  And I 
can recall this one meeting where – I thought – I thought he was – he 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 141 of 185 
 
was not happy with us raising this thing.  And… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry you thought he was? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He was not happy with us raising the matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the President? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  The President yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And that is why I suspect that it may not – it may 
have not been the first time we are raising the matter with him.  
Because at the end of that meeting the President said, you are all 
senior people why can you not just sit down and resolve issues?   
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Let us move on then back into the 
timeline. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Pretorius.  You did say when we were 
talking about your meeting with Minister Cwele that the investigation 
into the Gupta’s or the Shiva Uranimum to the Gupta’s included the 
question of their influence on the President – on the President.  Their 
influence. Was Minister Cwele aware that that was part of what you 
wanted to investigate?  What the investigation sought to do? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes he was. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He was? 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He was Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What about the President when you met – met him?  
Was he aware of that part as well or not really? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  We made him aware Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You made him aware? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 142 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  We did make him aware … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That part of what you.   
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is our concerns. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Part of the investigation is to look at the influence of 
the family on him? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  And his attitude was there is nothing 
wrong with the family they are good people? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And as I understand finally your 
conclusion at least the other two of the top three can testify to their 
conclusion but your conclusion was that you should desist with the 
investigation? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct and I must mention that – that 
really had a negative effect on our – on our – on my moral especially 
and interest in the work. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You were quite clear that in terms of the National 
Security there was a risk and an investigation was necessary in order 
to deal with that risk, that potential risk?  Is that right? 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And it was not the first time that we would go or 
in my experience that I would go to a President and say, President 
there are these things that Intelligence is – is observing on these 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 143 of 185 
 
issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And President would say, bring me a report.  Go 
investigate and bring me a report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is – that would be the normal thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  The normal interaction between Intelligence and 
the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who would ask for a report? 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He would say, please go and do your work and 
bring me a report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  On your investigations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And on other occasions he would read the 
report and say it is fine? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  On many occasions the President would say 
thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, ja okay.  But on this occasion. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  The President.  President had a long explanation 
20 
to give to us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And clearly he was not interested in us 
continuing with the investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I asked you earlier on when we were dealing 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 144 of 185 
 
with the meeting between yourselves and the Minister whether the 
Minister was addressing himself to the pertinent reasons which you 
gave for saying the investigation should continue.  When it comes to 
the President did he address himself to the pertinent reasons you 
advanced for saying the investigation should continue or should – or 
did he also not address those? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He acknowledging that – I know that this – I know 
that this is your job but this is the real story.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He acknowledged but he – he did not say, oh 
10 
guys please go ahead and continue with the investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  And he did not say anything like you are wrong 
on your assessment of the security aspects that influence your 
decision.  It was simply – there is nothing wrong with this family. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It was simply that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That there is nothing wrong with the family, they 
are good people. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He did not say. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  The fact of the matter is however as I 
understand your evidence that you did desist from the investigation? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 145 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes we did Chair. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  If we may go back to the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before that you were explaining earlier on and I do 
not know whether I interrupted you what the effect was of this reality 
that you were facing that the investigation had to stop on your morale 
and everything – and whatever else.  Had you finished addressing that 
or was there something else? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  No I did not finish Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How did you view this situate – this development? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Chair it was – it was draining on us.  We had a 
10 
difficult situation of having to run a new organisation – try and run to a 
better thing than it was – that what we inherited.  Try and get people to 
do the right things and all of that.  But then – you know – especially as 
a result of the relationship with the Minister – you know – I think you 
would feel like dragging your feet when you are going to work and I 
think the last straw was when the President was – was also a not siding 
or at least addressing issues with us and say, guys these are the things 
and this is how we are going to deal with them.  He says you are senior 
people, all of you, why can you not just go sit down and resolve.   So 
that really had a negative impact on us and especially myself. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  What did you understand to have been your options 
faced with this situation if there were any options for you to deal with 
this situation?  Was there an option of pursuing the investigation 
despite what the President said?   Was that not an option?  Or what 
was the position? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 146 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  The position Chair was that we were being 
blocked from doing our work and – and indeed one being not sure 
whether to get – come back to work or not.  I was – I was one of the – 
the guys that – and I was thinking that I was reading the situation well.  
I think I was reading the Minister well that you know.  When – when a 
Minister starts behaving in this way I suspect that our welcome may 
just be over here and – we kept trying to get through to the President 
and I was like I do not think the President wants to see us guys.  And 
finally the President really did not want to see us.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you the last sentence you say as if something 
10 
happened that makes you feel sure that he did not want to see you? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  W are not getting appointments Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you asked for appointments and you were not 
getting them. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  We are not getting appointments. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  In his position as the Executive Officer 
accountable for Intelligence would you expect to have general access 
20 
to the former President? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And if he does not meet with you what 
does that mean for the working relationship? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I think in general in Intelligence when that 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 147 of 185 
 
happens it means the relationship is not good or it is not there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were there – were there proper grounds for the 
President to say, do not continue with the investigation as far as you 
were concerned? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  There were no proper grounds Chair insofar we 
were concerned. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  You have had time to reflect on the events of 
that day and you may have the benefit of hindsight. Are you able to say 
what your analysis suggests was why the President said continuing the 
investigation was a bad idea, was not a good idea? 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Chair I have had a lot of time to – to ponder and 
worry about these issues and especially about the President.  I have 
even tried – even when I was out tried to make contact so we can meet 
and I get to get a better understanding as to what – what is going on.  I 
mean even when I was out and he knew that I was out of the system he 
has never – he has never granted me that opportunity to go and – and 
sit and talk to him.  Other than that there were better influences than 
us.  I cannot – I cannot call – I cannot make any further call. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you had been allowed to continue with the 
investigation including the investigation on the influence that the Gupta 
20 
family had on him and assumed that you – the investigation had 
revealed that the Gupta family had a very strong but bad influence on 
him what are the kinds of recommendations of steps that could possibly 
have been recommended by yourself or taken by yourselves which 
might have dealt with the situation? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 148 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Chair we – we did look at those issues and said, 
but what else can we do if the President does not listen to us?  Where 
else can we go?  I can tell you that we have been to your standing 
committee on Intelligence – Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence.  
Made presentations and said these are the issues.  Beyond that – and 
of course we knew of the limitations that they also had because they 
are back benchers in the main.  But ja – we could not think of anything 
else but as Ambassador Shaik was saying maybe the – which is not our 
– which we did not want to do is to whistle blow and we did not want to 
do that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so you have been to the standing committee on 
Intelligence and – and brought issues that were of concern to you 
before them that related to the Gupta’s and their influence on the 
President, is that right? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But other than that you are not sure what you 
might have done if you had continued with the investigation and found 
that the Gupta family had a very strong but bad influence on the 
President, is that what you are saying? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I am saying so Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But you – I guess you would have prepared a 
report that would probably have been given to the President himself 
and maybe the standing committee on Intelligence as well? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I do not think we would have been able to 
continue. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 149 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I do not think that we would have been able to 
continue with the investigation Chair because all the work that we do 
we – we are regulated that all our operations must be reportable 
operations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And if the President has indicated – discouraged 
from continuing with the investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  We – we did not have – we did have any – any – 
10 
any ground to stand on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Well let us assume the President had allowed 
you to proceed – to continue the – with the investigation that is what I 
am talking about? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Oh okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja if he had – if he had said, no that is fine continue 
investigate. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the investigation had revealed that the Gupta 
family had a very strong influence of him – on him but that influence 
20 
was for him and for the country and maybe for the ruling party.  What 
would you have done with that outcome? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  We would have presented it to the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And to the standing committee maybe as well on 
Intelligence, Parliamentary Committee or not? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 150 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I think it would depend. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It would have depended. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  But the President would be our ultimate client. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  Hm.  Okay thank you. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Chair I see it is four o’clock.  I have an 
important meeting at 4:30 I could perhaps go to quarter past four.  I 
could attempt to postpone the meeting to five o’clock because we are 
almost finished but I do have somewhere to go. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am quite happy that we try and finish from my side.  
If you can postpone the meeting ja then Diretor Njenje would that be 
fine with you if we continue and try and finish? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is fine.  That is fine Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  One the matters that is of interest 
perhaps more than interest to the commission Director is the question 
of Parliamentary Oversight over various bodies in our body politic.  
What role does the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence play in 
respect of the operations of intelligence?  You say you took the matter 
20 
to the Joint Standing Committee.  What was its role?  What is its role? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Maybe the caucus in the GSCI are the people we 
went to see. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Oh I see.   
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Ja. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 151 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  The caucus is? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  The ruling party’s caucus. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  The ruling party’s caucus. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  In Parliament? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Not the … 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Not the standing.. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Multiparty. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Not the joint – not the joint. 
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  I understand and that is the body to which 
you referred this matter? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is the body that we referred the matter to – 
for them to try and exert their own pressure. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  But no change resulted? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Nothing happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me try and understand that.  I thought – I thought 
you said you took your issues of concern to the Standing Parliamentary 
Committee on Intelligence.  Did I misunderstand that? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Chair, I - I miss - I misrepresented the - the fact. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  The fact is we took it to the Chairperson who - 
who is a member of the ruling party - who is the Chair of the Joint 
Standing Committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  You took it to him. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 152 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  To - to the Chair specifically. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But what was the idea?  Was he idea that you were 
approaching him as Chairperson of that Committee - the Standing 
Committee so that could then see whether to place the issues before 
the Standing Committee or were you approaching him on the basis of 
his other capacity maybe within - within the ruling party? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  As Chair of the Standing Committee we are 
approaching him to say … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  You were approaching him as … 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  As Chair.  As Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As Chairperson of the Standing Committee? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes.  To say that we have got these issues … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And of course … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  If he could take them and our - our interest was 
more for him to represent us … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  To Minister and the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Oh.  At - at that level what you had in mind is 
not necessarily that … 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  The Committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You would take it to the Committee … 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 153 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
But 
that 
you 
could 
talk 
to 
the 
Minister 
- 
Minister Cwele and talk to the President. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Correct.  That is called … 
CHAIRPERSON:  And who - yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It was a - Dr Burgess. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Burgess? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay.  Thank you, but you - maybe let us 
finalise.  You put these issues to him.  Did he promise anything to do 
10 
anything about them or did he tell you there is nothing I can do or what 
- what happened? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  No.  No.  He took - he took Chair - he took the 
matters and said he was going to - he would see how to handle them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But did he come back to you to tell you how far he 
had been able go with the issues? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I do not think so Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not think so? 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Director let us move on then to paragraph 
22 of your statement and go back to the issue of the Principle Agency 
Network Investigation - Principle Agents Network Investigation.  You 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 154 of 185 
 
said that that investigation involved Mr Arthur Fraser.  You spoke about 
certain suspensions, but that investigation I understand was ongoing. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And by 2011 what progress had been 
made? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Significant project - progress had been made.  I 
think we covered almost everything that had - that needed to be done. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And as a result of that stage being 
reached did you approach Law Enforcement Agencies? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  What did you do? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  We approached the SIU and - and the NPA and 
we sat had a consultation over the information that was here that we 
had prepared and a - they were happy to receive it and - and we agreed 
that we - we were then handing over the investigation and - and they 
were going to prepare for prosecution. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Was the documentation pertaining to your 
investigation then handed over or not? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It was handed over.  Correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  To whom? 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It was handed over to the SIU. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And what was the state of play as far as 
you were concerned in regard to whether a prosecution could proceed 
or not? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It was clear Chair that prosecution was - was now 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 155 of 185 
 
possible. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was … 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  There were … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was going to proceed? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  They were going to proceed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  They were - they were just going to fill up … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Some gaps … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And then we were going to proceed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Did you then receive a call at around this 
time from Minister Cwele? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe before that - that - that was the PAN 
Programme Investigation.  Is that right? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you able to say what types of crimes the 
investigation had revealed may have been committed or are you not 
able to - to say? 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  There were various - there were various … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Fraud? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Fraud included. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Corruption? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And corruption. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 156 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Those were some of the crimes that is … 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were unearthed by the investigation? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And if you could give the Chair some idea 
of the gravity of the offences that had been alleged. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  There were houses that were bought - properties 
10 
and bought with ulterior motives and the properties ending up with 
individuals.  There were people who were employed without any 
security clearances.  Hundreds of cars that were bought and parked.  
There were 300 cars.  Computers, laptops and - that were just bought 
and stacked away. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And maybe I missed this earlier on.  On your 
understanding what was that PAN Programme about?  What was its 
objective?  What was sought to be achieved through it? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  As I was trying to understand Chair this structure 
was supposed to be an extension of the official structures. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of Intelligence? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Of Intelligence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Especially National Intelligence Agency.  The 
domestic branch. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 157 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the cars that you say were - had been bought 
who would have been - parked some - where some were or were they 
just given to people? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  They were parked in a - warehouses Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They were in warehouses? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  There were different - different warehouses … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Around Gauteng. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and this was - the funds used were from the 
Official Intelligence structures? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair.  They were - they were 
funds that were taken from operating structures … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And - and therefore starving those operation - 
operating structures … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  With funds … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And - and spending out there for - for this … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes sir. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  I understand that here were an excess of 
700 cars that were so bought.  Is that correct? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 158 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  There were 300. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  300? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes.  From the PAN - from the PAN Programme. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At - at the time of the conclusion of that investigation 
was your understanding that there were a lot of people who were using 
some of those cars? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Not a lot Chair … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  But there were some people who were using 
some of the cars and - and properties. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  And properties? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You mentioned earlier on I think the figure of 300 
cars.  Mr Pretorius mentioned 700 cars.  What kind of numbers do you 
recall? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  300 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  300? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And in terms of houses are you able to recall any 
number or properties? 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I - I cannot recall off hand Chair, but it was quite 
a number of properties. 
CHAIRPERSON:  A substantial number? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  A substantial number.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Around Gauteng or all over the country? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 159 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Around Gauteng. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Especially. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay and - and these - these would have been 
registered under the name of - under whose name? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Some people’s names. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  Oh. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Some people were used.  Others are children. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh people as opposed to legal entities.  So it would 
be individuals or not particular - not the official structure and not PAN 
… (intervenes). 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Not the official structure Chair, because what he 
was called the Covet Support Unit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Which was used some - with some … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  In some cases they were used. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  In some cases private individuals were used. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright.  Thank you.  So - so a lot of money 
had into the buying of those cars and houses.  Are you able to give an 
estimate of how much money - taxpayers money had been used … 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 160 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  We … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or this program … 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  We … 
CHAIRPERSON:  By the time you handed over the files to the NPA to 
prosecute? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  We had estimate 600. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Six … 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  R600 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  600 - about R600 million. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes.  Correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  That was the estimate? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  There will be further evidence on the 
detail Chair … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  But the point of this evidence is what is to 
come now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC: 
 
You 
- 
did 
you 
get 
a 
call 
from 
20 
Minister Cwele at around this time - at the time of the conclusion of the 
investigation? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Tell the Chair about that please. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I received a call that - from Dr Cwele that I need 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 161 of 185 
 
to meet with him at Oliver Tambo International Airport. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was this after you had handed over the files to the 
NPA for prosecution or before? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  After? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  After. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And I went up - I went up to Oliver Tambo and 
met the Minister at the Government lounges there and he told me that 
we needed to stop the investigation - the investigation and prosecution 
10 
of Mr Fraser and others of the PAN - PAN Programme.  I wanted to 
know why. 
He said no it is like we need to stop it and this and that, but I 
said Minister - I was shocked.  I said, but after - we started this thing in 
2009.  Now it is in 2011 and you - we are saying and we spent so much 
of our time, our energy and - and of course your Government money.  
Ja.  No.  We cannot continue with the project. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is what he said? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is what he said and I said, but you need to 
tell me why you cannot. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He said no.  It is the President.  The President’s 
decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He said - he said it was the President’s decision? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It is the President’s decision. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 162 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  That it should not be continued? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That we stop.  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I said, but why.  He said the President thinks that 
this is going to compromise National Security if we go ahead and 
prosecute.  This is going to compromise National Security.  I said no.  
Minister we are dealing with criminality here not National Security. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Okay.  Okay.  Alright.  Yes continue.  He 
said the President had said that pursuing the investigation would 
compromise National Security? 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and what did you say in response? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I said no, but these are - we are dealing with 
straight criminality.  There is no National Security issue here.  He - he 
was adamant that it is the President’s decision.  I should just see to it 
that SIU and - and everyone else do not proceed with - with their 
actions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So, but you - you say by the time he spoke to you.  
You had handed over the files to the NPA? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and did you tell him it is out - it was out of your 
hands by then or something … 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  No.  He knew. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To that effect? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He knew Chairman. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 163 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  He knew that you handed this over? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct.  We briefed - we were briefing 
him about all the steps. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Up to the point when we handed over we said.  
The thing is now out of our hands. 
CHAIRPERSON:  After all he was the one who had asked you to 
investigate this program.  Is it not? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is true.  That is true Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And therefore well quite apart from the fact that he 
10 
had made it - he had asked you to investigate it.  You kept him 
informed throughout the investigation. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How far the investigation was going? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you told him you were about to hand over to the 
NPA and did you - and then you handed over and … 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then he came and said stop? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So - so did you think that the decision that it must - 
did you think that what he told you namely that the President had made 
the decision that this investigation must not continue.  Must have been 
right, because all along he wanted the investigation to happen himself? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 164 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is what you -you thought?  That is what you 
thought that he must have been right that it was somebody else who 
made the decision.  Not him, because along he wanted you to 
investigate? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Did you then report back to your 
investigators how had been involved in this investigation? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes.  I did.  I - I went back to the team.  I called 
them in and I told them that fellows we have an instruction to cease 
10 
this - and - and call this thing off.  We have got to go and - and inform 
whoever our - our partners are at SIU and - and NPA.  That we have an 
instruction. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Was this an easy task? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Certainly not.  It was not an easy task.  Chair 
people had worked for months.  Long hours.  Painstakingly and at times 
there was even risk to their lives when they were busy performing. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  In paragraph 24 of your statement 
Director you talk of an Intelligence Operation involving relations 
between Pretoria and Kigali and the Caribbean’s.  It is not necessary to 
20 
go into the details there, but at a stage were you summonsed to Cape 
Town to report on this matter or matters related to this? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me just finish on the other one Mr Pretorius 
before we move onto that one.  So, but did you not tell Minister Cwele 
in regard to the PAN Programme investigation that well Minister maybe 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 165 of 185 
 
if you had told me before we handed the files over to the NPA I would 
stop - would stop the investigation, but it is with the NPA now. 
The files are with the NPA the dockets.  Only the NPA can 
decide whether to prosecutor or not to prosecute.  We are done with 
the investigation.  We have handed over everything.  There is nothing 
we can do.  Did you not tell them? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Maybe I did not use the same words Chair, but I - 
I said that so much has gone into this here and - and we have 
submitted.  It is now with the NPA.  He said well it is the President’s 
instruction.  It is not my instruction.  It is the President who says that 
10 
this is going to cause problems for National Security if this goes on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But what I am looking at is whether your answer 
should not been.  I have no power to tell the NPA not to prosecute if 
they believe that the material we have handed over to them is enough 
for them to prosecute. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I am not sure what he was going to say Chair.  If 
he was not going to say you gave those people the documents.  Go get 
them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, but I am just thinking you are not going to - you 
are not going to agree to do something.  You have got no power to do.  
20 
Is it not? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So all you would be telling him is the reality or the 
fact that you have power on the investigation while the investigation is 
not complete. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 166 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Once you have handed over the - the files it is up to 
the NPA to decide or am I mistaken on - on your power? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Well Chair as I say I - I had these advocates as 
well advising me those investigators.  When I told them that this is the 
situation and that the President has decided that we call this thing off.  
Everyone was gobsmacked, but they went out and - and got the 
documentation back from the NPA and they brought it back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the NPA then did not prosecute? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  No prosecution. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and they too were told that it is because the 
President has decided that there should be no further investigation or 
prosecution in this matter? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I - I told my team.  I am not sure what they said 
when they went to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  To interact. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But that is what you told your team? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I told them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you were not the one who would interact with the 
NPA. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was somebody within your team? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 167 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It was somebody in the team. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, but your understanding would be that he 
probably would have relayed what you relayed to him and others. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  The … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well maybe I should just say it would be good if we 
were to get the case numbers and whatever relating to this particular … 
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  We will deal with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Matter.  Ja. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  You did say that the documentation was 
handled - handed to the SIU? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Correct.  I did say Chair. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And to - you said to whom was the 
documentation handed? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  To the SIU. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  To the SIU? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Correct. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the NPA or only the SIU? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  The SIU … 
CHAIRPERSON:  The SIU. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  The SIU was going to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Being part of … 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 168 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Because Chair at that time they were looking at 
seizures. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  It is not necessary to go into the detail of 
our investigations into the relationship with Kigali - between Pretoria 
and the Caribbean.  Those issues, but as I understand it you were 
summoned to Cape Town by the Minister to report on related matters in 
a meeting with the President? 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Did that meeting ever happen? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  It never happened. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  What did you conclude from the fact that 
you were summoned to report on a matter, but the meeting never 
happened? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  I thought - I just need to refresh my memory. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Sure.  Well it is in paragraph 24. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  24. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Middle of the page. 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes.  When we - when the meeting with the 
President was not materialising.  I said to the Minister that maybe I 
should - I should return to Pretoria, because I had stayed there for 
about two days and I was - I was the -the DG for domestic branch.  I 
have got work to do.  He then told me here in a meeting - we are sitting 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 169 of 185 
 
there.  He says that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your mic. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Sorry.  He told me that he had recommended to 
the President that he appoints me as Ambassador for South Africa in 
Rwanda.  I - I responded to - to the Minister.  I said to the Minister that 
- that I never came here to become a - to be - to be told that I should 
be an Ambassador. 
I said I came here, because I - I was asked to - to come in 
here and now you are telling me that you - you have recommended.  I - 
I cannot understand that and then I left.  I - I returned to Pretoria after 
10 
that short meeting. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Were you then called to the Office of the 
Minister a few days later? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And what happened at that meeting? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  At the meeting the Minister asked if I had 
considered his - his recommend - the recommendation that he was 
going to make to the President.  By that time I had already prepared my 
resignation letter when I went to see him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Roundabout when was this?  2012? 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  This is about September or so in 2011. 
CHAIRPERSON:  2011? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  So - this was in November 2011.  I told him that 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 170 of 185 
 
he is no Minister of Foreign Affairs and in any event those 
appointments are Presidential … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Appointments? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Appointments.  It is not - it is not his - it is not 
his job.  His job is Intelligence.  He should be focused on building 
Intelligence.  I - I gave him the - the resignation letter to say that I had 
not come here to ask for a job.  He - he approached me.  Did not 
approach me to become an Ambassador.  Approached me to become 
Head of Intelligence for domestic branch. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well before Mr Pretorius moves on.  I just do not want 
10 
to forget this part.  I am taking you back to what the Minister told you I 
think you said at the airport about the PAN Programme Investigation.  
He said it was the President decision that the investigation should not 
be pursued, because something along the lines that it was a threat to 
National Security or because of National Security.  Is that right? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is what he said.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now did he disclose to you any details on National 
Security bearing in mind that from your very position as I understand it.  
You deal with issues of National Security and I therefore I would expect 
that he could feel free to tell you what that was about. 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He did not and I think he could not, because he 
knew that I would know what is National Security. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Actually the very breach itself that we - we were 
in … 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 171 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Was - was National Security compromised … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  And the people just spent money as they were 
doing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So in your job in Intelligence you dealt with 
issues of National Security.  If there was anything in the investigation 
that you were doing which could pose a threat to National Security.  
You would have picked it up or your team would have picked it up? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct, sir. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So you - you are able to say as far as you are 
concerned it is highly unlikely that there was any issue of National 
Security that was raised by the investigation or are you not able to 
say?  Okay.  Let me rephrase that. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  There was - there was no - there was no issue of 
National Security. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  There was no such consideration. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And is there - is there no possibility that the 
President being President he might know that there some National 
Security issues that even the Intelligence will not know about? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He is advised by us … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 172 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  On National Security issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  The President gets - gets his advice from us.  We 
are - we are his experts on National Security. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are the ones who look what is threatening 
National Security and then you advise him? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And here you are able to say there was no issue of 
National Security? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  None whatsoever Chair.  Maybe I - I can just add 
10 
here to say that about three years thereafter Mr Fraser was reappoint - 
was appointed now the DG of SSA as - by President Zuma. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Who was appointed? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Mr Arthur Fraser the one that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  He was appointed some three years later. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Yes.  By - by President Zuma. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and - okay.  Alright.  Thank you. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Two matters Chair and very close to the 
20 
line, but if I may deal with them before we adjourn. In paragraph 26 you 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well - well we said 5 o’ clock.  We are half past four 
or has something changed? 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  No.  I hope that in the next 20 minutes … 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 173 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  Okay.  No.  That is fine. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Otherwise I am … (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  No.  I - I was thinking maybe we are not on the same 
page.  I was thinking maybe you are thinking about finishing at half 
past four. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  So what I am saying is.  I hope that 
in the next 20 minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  I can finish the next two issues … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And I will try my best Chair.  In paragraph 
26 you relate an incident that occurred in 2011 which incident began at 
the Cabinet Lekgotla.  What happened? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:  Before lunch at Cabinet Lekgotla which was held 
at Bryntirion Estate, Advocate Nogxina walked up to me, or we were 
walking out together to – for lunch. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   That is N-o-g-x-i-n-a? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That’s correct.  He told me that the Minister, his 
Minister, Miss, Minister Shabangu, Susan Shabangu, was going to meet 
with the Gupta’s and both were feeling uncomfortable but they were 
20 
going to meet Ajay Gupta and they were going to meet him at the 
Sheraton Hotel, which is not far from where we were.   He asked if I 
would want to join, I said I have got no problem, he said because we 
want you to kind of come and block us, to block these guys off us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry, just repeat that. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 174 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I said he asked me to accompany, he asked if I 
had a problem to accompany him and her and his Minister so that I 
could provide some security. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To the meeting with Ajay Gupta? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Ajay Gupta correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, at the Sheraton Hotel? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   At the Sheraton Hotel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, and what was your response? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I said I have got no issue, if your Minister 
agrees I will come along. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  But did you say something about what Mr Nogxina 
said, what role you would play? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes they had been under some pressure, him 
and the Minister from the Gupta’s, and he wanted me to come in so that 
I could minimise that bullying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, so other people were under pressure again, ja, 
right.   So you agreed you said if the Minister agrees? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I said if his Minister agrees I will accompany 
them.   So after we – after eating we saw the Minister walk, the 
Minister agreed, when we were dishing up we spoke to her, she said 
20 
no, no, she is happy that I must come. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Sorry just before you go on Director I 
don’t know, I might have missed it, but did Mr Nogxina tell you what the 
concerns of Minister Shabangu were? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes he said something like these guys are 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 175 of 185 
 
pressuring, they are pushing, they are pushing for something, I think it 
was some rights that they wanted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Some rights? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Mineral rights. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mineral rights? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Correct sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, right. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   These guys being? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   This Ajay Gupta. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  So you then – oh you were saying you 
10 
saw the Minister ...[intervenes]  
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   We saw the Minister talk here, whispering 
something in the President’s ear, he was still sitting at the table and he 
spoke for a short while and she came over, and when she came over 
she said you guys don’t know, we are not meeting at Sheraton, so 
Nogxina asked so where are we meeting, oh we are meeting at the 
President’s place at Mahlamba Ndlopfu, the President knows that guy is 
waiting for us, Ajay Gupta is waiting for her there at Mahlamba Ndlopfu. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, hmm.  So she said the meeting was going to take 
place at the President’s official residence, Mahlamba Ndlopfu? 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is what the President told her.   When she 
went to inform the President that she has got a meeting, she was 
requesting for leave to attend a meeting the President said I know 
about the meeting and then he further told her that actually the meeting 
is Mahlamba Ndlopfu. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 176 of 185 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh so she heard from the President that the venue is 
Mahlamba Ndlopfu. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And not the Sheraton Hotel? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That’s correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay so she was telling, the Minister was telling you 
and Mr Nogxina. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   So we walked, there was no need for us to get a 
10 
car now to Sheraton, we walked to Mahlamba Ndlopfu which is just 
around the corner. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   When we got there the door was opened and 
here came Ajay here in the passage to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  So you were received by Mr Ajay Gupta? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At the official residence of the President. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hmm. 
20 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   And he led us to the President’s study. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To the President’s study? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hmm. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   And that is where the meeting was held. 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 177 of 185 
 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Before we go on was there any 
representative of the President that ushered you into the study who 
ushered you into the study? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   It was Mr Ajay Gupta. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was he with anybody – was he in the company of 
anybody as he received you at the President’s official residence and 
took you to the study or was he all by himself? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   The person who opened the door is the 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Was Mr Ajay Gupta? 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   No it is the butler, it is somebody who is staying 
at the Presidency. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay, yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Ajay came and fetched us to the study. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   There was nobody else in the study. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There was nobody else. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, yes? 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   What happened at the meeting in the 
20 
study? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   The meeting started and Ajay started to make 
these demands that Minister I have been waiting on these things and 
you know – and he was changing his voice was like talking – talking 
down on the Minister, this is what I said I need and I don’t know why 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 178 of 185 
 
things are taking so long for you guys to do this.  So I felt like no man 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  What was the seating arrangement in – this was the 
President’s study? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That’s correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were you sitting on couches? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   We sat on the couches, at lease no one sat on 
the President’s chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mmm? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I say Chair at least no one sat on the 
10 
President’s Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No one sat on the President’s Chair? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   No we sat on the couches. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, yes.  Okay so he started speaking and you say 
he was speaking down on the Minister 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   He was, he was and I interjected I said Ajay 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. Did you understand the subject of the discussion, 
was it the mineral rights, what mineral rights were it and so on? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I did not follow the subject of discussion Chair I 
20 
was just watching what was going to go on and of course when he was 
talking down on the Minister I interjected I said Ajay this is a 
government minister, she represents the people of South Africa, I think 
you should have a way of addressing yourself.   He said sorry sir, sorry 
sir, but he then continued to nag and nag and nag and Nogxina said we 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 179 of 185 
 
have got to rush back to the Legotla we will get back to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the meeting did not last long? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   It did not last long Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what was the response of the Minister and/or Mr 
Nogxina to whatever he had to say? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Nogxina said there are processes and Minister 
cannot take short cuts and Minister said we will get back to you when 
we have done our work properly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But he was saying he did not understand why 
whatever he wanted was taking long. 
10 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   He felt like things were taking long and he 
wanted them to be done immediately. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So but it looks like Mr Nogxina knew that you would 
be needed at that meeting.  Yes Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   In summary it appears that in the 
President’s study and with the knowledge of the President according to 
our evidence, at least with the knowledge of the President that you 
were at his residence Mr Gupta was demanding certain concessions at 
20 
least from Minister Shabangu? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That’s correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Relating to mineral rights. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hmm.   Did you get to understand why the meeting 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 180 of 185 
 
was held at the President’s residence when the President was not there 
and well I don’t know whether there was something special about 
holding it in the study as well.   I’m sure the President has got some 
meeting rooms and so on. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I think Chair it was a manner of showing how 
powerful they are. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hmm, hmm. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Showing to a Minister of Government that she 
can be called to the President’s study without, in the absence of the 
President. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hmm, hmm. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you Chair.  We should just place 
on record that the planned investigation was later resuscitated. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   And you were involved to an extent in 
that? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, I don’t want to go into any detail at 
the 
moment 
because 
that 
must 
be 
the 
subject 
matter 
of 
a 
supplementary statement because it implicates others to whom notices 
20 
have not been issued, but I take it you will assist us in the future if 
necessary. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   One more topic please ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well what I can ask is when was it resuscitated? 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 181 of 185 
 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   In 2018. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In 2018? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Midyear, towards the end of the year, are you able to 
say? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   It was – it started I think mid-year, actually it 
was also part of the high level panel review, high level review panel 
that was led by Dr Mofamate, but State Security also did a – they 
resuscitated that which was closed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay, thank you. 
10 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Just briefly Mr Njenje can we deal with 
another topic, from 1979 to 1994 you say that you worked for the ANC 
Intelligence Operation. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Information relevant to the work of 
Intelligence in the ANC in your capacity as an operative would that 
have come to your knowledge? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Please repeat the question. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Information relating to the operations of 
the ANC would you have received knowledge of that?  In your capacity 
20 
as an operative during that period? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Yes especially Chair when I became the Deputy 
of Dr Sizakele Siglashe who was the Head of Information and 
Processing of the ANC. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Information regarding threats to the ANC 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 182 of 185 
 
Intelligence Operation and in particular infiltrators or enemy agents for 
want of a better phrase would that have been within your scope of 
knowledge? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Knowledge of these threats both to 
personnel in the ANC, as a result of infiltration, and knowledge of 
infiltrators and information about infiltrators would that knowledge have 
been confined to the former President. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   No. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Did you ever come to learn of a plot or 
10 
conspiracy by three intelligence agencies, including a South African 
one, and this is prior to 1995, that targeted the former President? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   No. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Had such a operational plot existed 
would you in the course of your duties have expected to come to learn 
of it? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   I think so yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Your relationship with the former 
President at the time personnel returned from exile and took up 
activities in South Africa what was our relationship with the former 
20 
President? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   It was a good relationship Chair, I started to 
know the President closely from about 1980, and in 1990 when the ANC 
decided on a team to come and check if there was good chances for a 
negotiated settlement I was part of the three that the ANC sent to the 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 183 of 185 
 
country, we were led by Jacob Zuma and the two accessories was 
myself and Penno Maduna. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Did your work, I think you mentioned it, 
involve the provision of security to the ANC leadership, including 
former President Zuma? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   That is correct. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Knowledge of any threats to the 
leadership was that essential to your work? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   It was. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Had President Zuma received information 
10 
about threats what was his duty in relation to you and your tasks?  
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   He would have had to inform us that there was a 
threat to his life and we would then take counter measures to assist. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Did he ever inform you of that? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   No, not that I can remember. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Is there any reason at the time that he 
would not have told you of any threats? 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   There is no reason. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you Chair, that is all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much Director Njenje we appreciate 
20 
the fact that you came to give evidence to share what you know with 
the Commission, we appreciate it very much.   
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As I said in regard to – as I said to Mr Shaik I hope 
that your decision to come forward to help the Commission and share 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 184 of 185 
 
what you know with the Nation will inspire other current and former 
Directors General, Deputy Directors, Generals and other senior officials 
and Ministers to come forward who have knowledge of various matters 
that may be important to be placed before the Commission. 
 
I appreciate that you came, thank you very much. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are excused. 
DIRECTOR NJENJE:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Pretorius, you had a third witness lined up 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, as discussed in chambers Chair he 
10 
will not be giving evidence, at least this week, but I will discuss it with 
you perhaps tomorrow or the following day, and certain administrative 
matters that must be attended to.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, but he will be testifying in due course? 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   In due course he will testify certainly 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   The only question is when these for want 
of a better word, I’m using Euphemism, the administrative matters can 
be attended to, but I will talk to you a bit later. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, now that’s fine.   Alright, we are going to 
adjourn then for the day, tomorrow I will hear evidence from an expert 
who will give evidence ...[intervenes]   
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Chabi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Chabi concerning certain actuarial and financial 
26 NOVEMBER 2019 – DAY 193 
 
Page 185 of 185 
 
matters relating to Transnet about transactions that happened at 
Transnet about which I have been told, so he will give evidence 
tomorrow. 
 
As for today we will adjourn now.  We adjourn. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you Chair. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 27 NOVEMBER 2019 
 
 
 
10 
 
