 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 
 
 
 
DAY 30 
FINAL 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 2 of 147 
 
PROCEEDINGS HELD ON 26 NOVEMBER 2018  
CHAIRPERSON:  Good 
morning 
Mr 
Pretorius, 
good 
morning 
everybody.  
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Good morning DCJ.  The programme for today Chair 
will be the witness from Treasury Ms Macanda the last of the three Treasury 
witnesses for present purposes at least.  She will be led by Advocate Mokoena and 
then Advocate Maleka will question Mr Manyi thereafter.     
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Morning DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Mokoena.  Before you proceed, I just want to 
announce that tomorrow morning when we commence I will address some of the 
10 
issues that have arisen recently relating to the Commission and some of the 
witnesses appearing before the Commission.  Thank you.   
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Ms Macanda, unlike Mr Maleka and Mr Fuzile we did 
consult prior to you having to adduce your evidence today. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes we did. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Mr Chair we are leading the evidence of 
Ms Macanda, we will avoid any repetition of ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry, I missed that.  Whatever you said and the witness 
responded I did not hear. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  At all Mr Chair? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  You did not hear at all? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay I did not hear at all.  I heard that you were saying 
something and that the witness said something, but I did not hear what you were 
saying. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 3 of 147 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  We were just confirming that we did consult with one 
another. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Unlike Mr – unlike ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you not want to ask that after she has been sworn in? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  No Mr Chair it was just an introductory remark that I 
have made, conversed to the one ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not want her to say that under oath? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  She will in time Mr Chair.  Mr Chair the evidence of 
Ms Macanda when we lead it, we will avoid any repetitions of the evidence that has 
10 
been led already by the two witnesses from Treasury.  We will use her evidence to 
simply corroborate and highlight some of the important aspects of the testimony that 
has already been adduced by the witnesses that were led by Mr Maleka. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you saying you are going to try and avoid getting her to repeat 
that evidence?   
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  You believe you have been of corroboration? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  We believe – but we will put what we believe it is 
necessary to corroborate and to highlight those aspects that might not have been 
much more clearer. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And which relates to her.  But we will avoid, you 
know to repeat the same evidence that is already before you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright thank you.   
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Ms Macanda the Commission is currently addressing 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 4 of 147 
 
issues relevant to term of reference 1.8, are you aware? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes I am aware. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on, hang on Mr Mokoena.  No the witness must be sworn in.  
Registrar swear the witness in please before we can proceed or affirmation whatever 
the witness prefers.   
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Phumza Macanda.   
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection with taking the prescribed oath? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  No I do not. 
10 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on your conscience? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give will be the truth, the 
whole truth and nothing but the truth?  If so, please raise your right hand and say, so 
help me God? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.  You may continue Mr Mokoena. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Thank you Mr Chair and in order to assist the 
Commission to properly ventilate those issues, you did provide a written statement? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes I did. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  May I refer you to Exhibit P, P for Phillip.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Mokoena.  Have you covered who she works, where 
she comes from? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  No it arises from the statement itself Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay thank you. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 5 of 147 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now that ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that P? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  It is P, P for Phillip. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what page in P? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  That document commences from page 22 
Ms Macanda and it goes up until page 39.  Are you there? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes I am. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Is that your statement? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes it is. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  If you turn to page 39, there is a signature, is that 
10 
your signature? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes that is my signature. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Do you confirm the contents of your statement under 
oath? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes I confirm the contents of the statement. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now in paragraph 2 page 23 of your witness 
statement you neatly captures the term of reference which the Commission it is 
currently investigating.  You set out saying in the following terms, you say that: 
"I was subsequently advised on the 8th November 2018 that my 
statement should only cover the issues relating to paragraph 1.8 of 
20 
the Commission's terms of reference." 
 
Paragraph 1.8 concerns and you quote it: 
"Whether any Advisors in the Ministry of Finance were appointed 
without proper procedures, in particular and as alleged in the 
complaint to the Public Protector, whether two senior Advisors who 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 6 of 147 
 
were appointed by Minister Des van Rooyen to the National Treasury 
who were so appointed without proper procedures." 
 
You proceed: 
"That I therefore confine this statement to the knowledge that I have 
in relation to the two Advisors and my interaction with them." 
 
That is the reason Ms Macanda you are here today. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes it is. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Could you please share with us your 
qualifications? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I am a journalist by profession, I graduated from Rhodes 
10 
University in 1996.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry Ms Macanda please raise your voice a bit and try and look 
towards me not him.   
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Okay.  I am a journalist by profession Chair.  I graduated 
from Rhodes University in 1996 majoring in Journalism and Politics.  I subsequently 
in 2006 did a certificate in Basic Economics from Wits University.   
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Where are you employed currently? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I am currently employed by ABSA Group Limited. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say ABSA Group? 
20 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  ABSA Group Limited yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  When did you leave Treasury – National Treasury? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I left the National Treasury at the end of August 2016. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Then was the first time when you joined 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 7 of 147 
 
National Treasury? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I joined Treasury in March 2012. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  In March 2012, which position did you occupy? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  When I joined Treasury in March 2012, I was the Director 
of Media Relations and Communications.   
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  To whom did you report at the time? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I reported to Mr Jabulani Sikhakhane. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  In that capacity what were your responsibilities? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  My job as the Director of Media Relations and 
Communications at Treasury was to assist in protecting, maintaining and enhancing 
10 
the reputation of the National Treasury.  It was to help build understanding and 
support for National Treasury Policies.  My job included disseminating information 
about Treasury activities and to ensure that in as far as the work of the Treasury, the 
Treasury was the primary source of information.  It was also to make sure that the 
Treasury messages and narrative were always consistent, were always clear, the 
kind of the messages that build credibility of the institution. 
 
In that capacity, therefore, I worked with journalists.  I was the person who 
would receive inquiries from journalists, work with the Treasury Officials to craft 
responses to those questions.  I was the person who was responsible for working 
with journalists, especially around key calendar events of the Treasury, in particular 
20 
the budget, organising the lock-up that you would have and making sure that we get 
journalists to come to the lock-up and get the documents and understand what we 
are doing in that regard. 
 
My job also included advising Treasury Officials and the Minister of Finance 
on which communication, platforms and media platforms to use to disseminate 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 8 of 147 
 
information and to ensure that such messages were always in alignment with 
broader Government messages. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now around March 2015, which position did you 
occupy within Treasury? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  In March 2015 Mr Jabulani Sikhakhane to whom I 
reported left the employ of the Treasury.  I was then appointed in his position on an 
acting capacity and therefore I assumed his position as Chief Director of 
Communications in an acting capacity. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Until when did you occupy that position? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I was in an acting capacity until I was appointed 
10 
permanently in October 2015. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now in that new role what were your 
responsibilities? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Generally my responsibilities were the same, save in the 
new position, I was part of the Executive Committee of the National Treasury, I was 
part of senior management.  I was also responsible for the administration of the 
Communications Unit and everyone who worked in the Communications Unit 
reported to me.  I also was the spokesperson for that department and the Minister of 
Finance. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now from page 25 paragraph 6 of your witness 
20 
statement to paragraph 11, you are canvassing a meeting with the General Director 
at the time Mr Lugisa Fuzile.  You preface that meeting with the dismissal of Mr Nene 
on the 9th of December 2015.  Could you please in your own words simply take us 
through those events? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I learned about the firing of Minister Nene late on 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 9 of 147 
 
Wednesday the 9th of December.  I was on sick leave and I learned about his firing 
quite late on that day.  The next morning when I went into the office, I sought out the 
Director General of the National Treasury Mr Lugisa Fuzile.  The reason I sought him 
out was because the market reaction to the axing of Minister Nene was quite 
negative.  The Stock Exchange was down quite significantly.  The Rand currency 
had depreciated in a similar manner and my phone was ringing constantly, because 
journalists wanted to know whether the National Treasury was going to release a 
statement about the Minister of – about the firing of Minister Nene and what would 
we say, would we say anything about what it meant. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Before you proceed any further.  In your 
10 
statement you captures that on paragraph 6.  You say that the markets were going 
crazy and the Rand had tumbled.  The Stock Exchange was in a mess.  Now before 
you proceed, I just want to ask to unpack that statement in relation to the events 
known to you.  What exactly were the indicators that you know you are attributing to 
the markets going crazy?  Are you able to share with the Chairperson those 
specifics? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I think in that regard Chair, I would like to refer to the 
statement of Minister Gordhan who testified previously, where he outlines the 
negative market reaction. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Mr Chair the witness is referring to Exhibit N1 A with 
20 
particular reference to page 30 and paragraph 79.   
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  In his submission Minister Gordhan says that the 
devastating impact of this unexpected announcement on the South African economy 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 10 of 147 
 
is expected to be approximately R500 billion.  He refers to market analysts who 
described that over the two days the market value of the country's 17 biggest 
financial and property shares fell by R290 billion.  The figure excludes the remainder 
of the equities market that was also hard hit by the decision.  South African Bonds 
lost 12% of their capital value.  The Rand depreciated sharply from R13.40 to 
R15.40 overnight. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  What Mr Gordhan is conveying in that statement, 
does it accord with your recollection at the time? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes, yes it does. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Mr Gordhan also, for completeness, in order to 
10 
link your evidence with him in relation to the Rand having taken a knock.  He states, 
if you may turn to Exhibit N2.  Mr Chair you do not have to do any gymnastics 
exercise, we will simply read those relevant passages to the record.  It is Exhibit N2, 
if you go to page 140, are you there? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Paragraph number, I am afraid not, I do not think I will be 
able ...(intervenes). 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Exhibit N2 it is a separate file of Mr Gordhan.  If you 
go to page 140 you will see the status of the Rand/Dollar exchange as at 
December 2015.  You do not have to read it on the record, it was read by 
Mr Gordhan.  When you look at those figures from Wednesday the 9th up until Friday 
20 
the 11th of December 2015, would that also accord to your experience at the time? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes I would say it is correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now you may proceed to discuss in detail the 
meeting which you were dealing with between yourself and the Director General.   
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I went into the Director General's office to consult with 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 11 of 147 
 
him about the statement that we both agreed would need to be released and we both 
understood that such a statement would need the approval of the Minister who was 
announced the previous night.  The Director General then phoned the Minister in my 
presence.  He put the Minister on speaker phone and explained to the Minister that I 
was also on the line and explained to the Minister why I was on the line.   
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  That was Minister van Rooyen? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  That was Minister van Rooyen. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  The Director General proceeded to congratulate the 
Minister and I will not repeat some of the things that he said, as he has testified to 
10 
them.  But part of the conversation that I was particularly interested in was the one 
that concerned what statement we would release to the public.  The Director General 
then talked to the Minister about the negative market reaction and explained to the 
Minister that there was need for the National Treasury to respond.  He offered the 
services of National Treasury Officials to draft such a statement. 
 
I should explain that the process of drafting a statement is a consultative 
one and one you – it is impossible to do it within an hour. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Can you explain what does it entail to draft such a 
statement? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes in this case it would entail – and this is what the 
20 
Director General was suggesting to the Minister.  He was suggesting that he was 
offering the services of the Senior Treasury Officials to draft such a statement which 
the Minister would then approve and the plan was that shortly after his swearing in, 
that statement would be released to the public. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  What was the Minister's reaction during the 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 12 of 147 
 
telephone? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  The Minister told the DG that there was a statement that 
was already drafted and that the National Treasury did not need to worry about such 
a statement.  He said he would provide the statement to the DG later.   
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now according to you, was that telephone call, you 
know, helpful at all in relation to what was happening in the markets at the time? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  No it was not.  It was not for the reason that I have given 
earlier that preparing a statement is a consultative process and we wanted such a 
statement to be released shortly after his swearing in ceremony.  But also it was not 
helpful because we did not know what was in the statement that the Minister had told 
10 
us had been prepared.   
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  What were you hoping to achieve with the DG 
when you called the Minister?  What were your expectations? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Our expectations was that the Minister would work with 
us, the Minister would give us his approval to start drafting a statement, but more 
importantly that the Minister would give us guidance on what he thinks should be 
said publically about the developments of the previous night. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now during that period how was the staff moral? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  We were in shock.  There was almost a sense of 
mourning within Treasury that morning.  A lot of us did not know what to make sense 
20 
of the developments and we really were in shock, we were just standing around 
talking to each other and we were in shock. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Did the DG, you know, address the staff around the 
issues that were happening at the time? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  We discussed the DG addressing staff and the concern 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 13 of 147 
 
was that it was important for that to happen in the presence of the Minister.  But in 
the phone call, one of the things that we discussed by the DG and the Minister was 
the Minister coming to the office and the Minister had indicated that he would not be 
able to come to the office and that he would meet us at the Union Buildings at the 
swearing ceremony. 
 
So given the shock that the staff was in and we discussed with the DG the 
idea of going to address staff and we decided that it was a good idea for the DG to 
address staff.  He then went downstairs and the room was packed to the rafters, 
everyone wanted to hear what he said.  He made few comments to the staff the 
essence of which was that, as National Treasury Officials, our main responsibility is 
10 
to serve the nation.  No matter what the developments of the day were, we should be 
less concerned about that and more concerned about going back to our desks and 
doing our job.  He has already testified here about the fact that there was a lot of 
work that needed to be done on the budget.  He encouraged the staff to go back to 
their desks and focus on that.   
 
One of the things that he said was that we needed to remember that we 
serve the administration of the day, whoever that is and we are the link between the 
administration and the stability of the Department was the most important thing. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Mr Chair that is captured from page 27 paragraph 11 
of the witness statement.  Now you go on from page 27 paragraph 12 to deal with 
20 
the meeting with Minister van Rooyen and Mr Mohammed Bobat at the Union 
Building, but you do so first by dealing with how you met with Mr Bobat.  Can you 
please take us through those events? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry, before she proceeds.  Can I take you back 
Ms Macanda 
to 
the 
telephone 
conversation 
that 
the 
DG 
had 
with 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 14 of 147 
 
Minister van Rooyen on the morning of the 10th where he put the Minister on speaker 
phone and introduced you, you remember that? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes I do Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  As I understand it, your evidence is that when Mr Fuzile 
suggested to Minister van Rooyen that the Treasury staff could prepare a statement 
– a media statement for the Minister's approval, you say the Minister said that there 
was already a statement.  Is that right? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  He said there was already a statement that had been 
prepared and we did not need to worry about that.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  What else transpired in that conversation, if you can 
10 
remember, what else transpired in that conversation if you can remember? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I think the DG already referred to his conversation with 
the Minister in as far as the invitation to come to the office and perhaps meet with 
Minister Nene who had come to the office that morning and to clear his office.  That 
was something else that came up in that conversation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  What was the Minister's attitude to that? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I did not find the Minister's attitude to be that of listening 
and being welcoming to the request and the invitation that the DG was making. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Is there anything else of importance that the Minister said to 
Mr Fuzile that you can remember that you can share with us? 
20 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Not that I recall specifically, no not that I recall.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you form any view about whether the Minister might have 
certain preconceived ideas about National Treasury based on the conversation? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I certainly did.  As I said, the Minister said to the DG in a 
manner that I found to be almost dismissive of the DG's suggestions.  I certainly – I 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 15 of 147 
 
came out of the conversation thinking this is going to be an interesting and perhaps 
half working relationship for all of us.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I do not see in your statement something that Mr Fuzile said.  
One of the things that Mr Fuzile said the Minister said during that conversation, was 
that the Minister said to him something along the lines that the National Treasury, or 
you people, or the National Treasury must – I think, must stop this tendency of 
issuing statements.  I do not see anything like that in your statement.  Is that 
because you did not hear it? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  It is because I do not recall it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Thank you Mr Chair.  You were at the point where 
you were going to tell the Chair about your first interaction with Mr Bobat at the 
Union Building.  You may proceed to do so. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  So when I got to the Union Buildings ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry again, and I may have missed this because 
Mr Mokoena you are now at or beyond paragraph 27. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Paragraph 12 Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Paragraph 12. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that is fine, then you may continue, I think I may be aHead 
20 
ofyou.  Thank you. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  When I got to the Union Buildings I asked the people 
from the Presidency that were waiting for us, I introduced myself and told them 
that I was here for Minister van Rooyen.  I had previously been invited the 
previous night to come to the Union Buildings for the swearing in ceremony, and I 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 16 of 147 
 
asked them where I should go.  They pointed me to a waiting room and told me 
that Minister van Rooyen would be coming and would be waiting there, and that is 
the room in which I would meet with him.  While I was standing there waiting for 
Minister van Rooyen, I noticed the people from the Presidency standing with this 
tall gentleman of Indian origin, and they pointed towards me.  They pointed 
towards me.  The gentleman then walked towards me and he informed me that he 
was the Advisor to the new Minister.  I did not think anything about that and he 
introduced himself and he told me that his name was Mohamed Bobat. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  During your telephone call that you related to the 
Chairperson earlier on, did Minister van Rooyen indicate to you and the DG that 
10 
he has already appointed Advisors or that he wanted the DG to assist him in 
appointing any Advisors? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  No I do not – the Minister did not say anything about 
having appointed Advisors already.  Conversation about Advisors actually did not 
take place in that conversation with the DG. 
MR MOKOENA:  Were you aware of any contracts that could have been 
concluded by the DG and any Advisors on behalf of the Minister? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I would not say I was specifically aware at this time but 
I was surprised that the Minister, who was just announced, had already appointed 
Advisors. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Alright there is Mr Bobat coming to you now, 
introducing himself and what happens thereafter? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  So he came, he introduced himself and he said to me 
– he asked me what is your job, and I explained to him what my job was, and he 
says are you the one who releases statements for National Treasury, and I 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 17 of 147 
 
responded in the affirmative.  He then said to me from now on no statement goes 
out without my approval.  Every statement must be approved by me and the 
Minister.  I was very puzzled and taken aback by this for two reasons; firstly he 
was a little aggressive with me.  It was not that there were no pleasantries that 
were exchanged but his manner was quite aggressive and almost hostile.  It felt to 
me that it was important for him to assert his authority quite quickly with him, and 
also I was puzzled before, it just is part of practice and policy that every statement 
goes out be approved by the Minister and the DG.  So that was not something that 
needed to be pointed out with me by someone who understands how the system 
works.  I then said to him yes, yes, you know every statement that goes out is 
10 
approved by the Minister, that is how we do things. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Did he tell you as to what his role was going to be 
as an Advisor now that he was giving you instructions no longer to issue any 
statements? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  He did not explain to me what his role was, that 
discussion did not come up, but he just told me that he was an Advisor, and I 
must say as I understood the role of Advisor, I did not understand it to include 
being part of approving statements, to the extent that they are Advisors to the 
Minister, they are privy to discussions they were in but certainly not in approving 
statements. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now during this interaction between yourself and 
Mr Bobat where was the DG? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  At this point the DG had not arrived.  We had travelled 
separately to the Union Buildings, but at some point he did arrive.  So the DG was 
not witness to this exchange in my – ja in my recollection. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 18 of 147 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes, and then you met with – you had your first 
interaction with the Minister van Rooyen, can you tell the Chairperson about that 
interaction or your meeting with him? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I then stepped into the room that we were told to wait 
in and I was waiting there, and at some point the Minister did come.  He arrived, 
and he arrived with his family.  He left his family in the other room and then came 
to join us in the room, and in the room was myself, the DG, Mr Bobat and of 
course the Minister.  And once the Minister arrived the DG then once again spoke 
to the Minister, and he spoke to the Minister about events that had transpired at 
the Treasury that morning.  He explained to Minister that he addressed staff.  He 
10 
explained to Minister, I summarised for the Minister what it is that he said, and 
then he once again talked to the Minister about the need for us to be releasing a 
statement as the Treasury, and explained that that was the reason I was there to 
assist with that specific task.  And it was the second time that he was doing it 
because I was bothering him.  Even though I had heard the earlier conversation, I 
was worried as I say, because the journalists were calling me.  So I understood 
the importance of this.  So he then explained to the Minister once again about us 
talking and agreeing about releasing a statement. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now what was the Minister's reaction to that 
request? 
20 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  The Minister took out a piece of paper and he gave it 
to the DG.  The DG read the piece of paper, he gave it to me, I read the piece of 
paper and in essence what the piece of paper was an introduction of the Minister, 
and generally it just – it was just an introduction to the Minister, and one of the 
key messages that were in that statement was that he would open up access to 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 19 of 147 
 
the Treasury.  After reading the statement I felt that the statement lacked in the 
key messages that we needed to have in a statement that the DG had already 
explained to the Minister.  Key messages for instance that would talk about policy 
trajectory, policy stability and the importance of the Treasury sticking to the fiscal 
targets and sticking to all of those policy that have been announced.  This was the 
main thing that people were asking, what does this appointment mean for policy.  
Does it mean that – does it signal a change in policy?  I then said to the Minister, 
at that point the DG was – it almost – it felt to me that he was in that meeting but 
he was not there, because the interaction with the Minister did not yield fruit but 
also it was very difficult.  So I explained to the Minister that the statement was a 
10 
good start.  I then offered to enhance it with the messaging that we use in the 
Treasury.  I brought with me some of the documents that were previously 
published to assist in that regard.  The Minister was non committal, he would not 
give his approval for me to enhance the statement with the kind of messages that 
we had discussed with him. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now what I fail to understand is the following, 
during that meeting that you are now relating to the Chairperson, was the Minister 
aware of the adverse ramifications which resulted flowing from him appointment 
and the removal of Mr Nene.  I mean that removal of Mr Nene, the ramification to 
the economy itself, was he able to appreciate those factors at the time? 
20 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I cannot speak to his state of mind but I can say that 
that was explained to him twice by the DG, first in the telephone conversation that 
took place that morning and secondly while we were sitting there. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Was he aware of the fact that the Rand was taking 
a knock at the time and there was a need for him to release a statement that 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 20 of 147 
 
would calm the market or at least you know, give some assurance of his plans to 
deal with those severe economic factors. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  That is exactly what the DG was explaining to him.  He 
was explaining about the negative market reaction on the Stock Exchange and in 
the currency market and in the bond market.  He was explaining to him about the 
fact that we needed to assure the market.  We needed to assure the market that 
the appointment was not a signal for policy change, and he was explaining to the 
Minister all of these things while he was explaining why we needed to release a 
statement. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And you say that despite that – all that, the 
10 
statement that he took out from his pocket did not even begin to address those 
issues? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  No it did not. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now on page 30, from paragraph 22 to 24 of your 
statement you canvass what you refer to as the bizarre interaction between Mr 
Bobat and Minister van Rooyen.  Could you please share with us those events? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  So at some point during the meeting once we had 
moved from discussing the statement and not getting the approval that we were 
hoping for from the Minister, Mr Bobat said to the Minister I called you, why did 
you not return my call, and his tone was the same authoritative one that he had 
20 
used with me.  It lacked the hostility that he had shown towards me earlier but it 
certainly was contemptuous, I thought it was contemptuous.  The Minister then 
said oh, I have been getting a lot of phone calls from people congratulating me, 
and the thing is I do not have your number so I could not return your call. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  So the Minister did not have the number of his 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 21 of 147 
 
own Advisor? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  That is what the Minister said, I do not have your 
number so I could not return your call. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes, and then what happened? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I was flabbergasted to say the least, I quite was 
shocked because I was thinking to myself firstly I was shocked by this manner 
towards the Minister, as I say he was quite contemptuous and he was quite 
dismissive, but also one thing that I thought about was if he does not have the 
number then do these people know each other, and if they do not know each other 
how does he become the Minister's Advisor. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now may I link that part of your evidence, if you 
may refer to page 58, and that is the witness statement of Mr Fuzile.  If you go to 
paragraph 18 simply to see that this is exactly what you also witnessed, he relate 
that bizarre situation in different terms when he was told as to the new Minister 
that he was going to get.  He says that: 
"I asked him to elaborate what he meant.  He said I should watch it, 
my new Minister, it is likely to come with Advisors he does not 
know." 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  So Ms Macanda you also gained that impression 
at the time when you saw this interaction, that the Minister might not be knowing 
20 
his own Advisor Mr Bobat. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I certainly was left with the impression that they did not 
know each other and if they did, they did not know each other very well. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes, now you also did attend the swearing in 
ceremony. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 22 of 147 
 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes I did. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Can you tell us about what transpired there? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  So the ceremony took place ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Mokoena, I may have missed this.  You did get 
her to confirm the last two sentences of paragraph 24 right? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They are important, you did? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes, she testified on those things Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR MOKOENA:  But for emphasis she can still read paragraph 24 into the record, 
10 
on page 30. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, but if she did it is fine, I may have missed it but I leave it 
to you, if you want her to emphasise.  I just ...(intervenes). 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  I do not want to lose it Chair, rather we err on the 
side of caution.  I know that she have done it but turn to page 30. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  30, and if you may read paragraph 24 into the 
records. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  “What I was thinking was these people do not 
know each other.  If they do not know each other how does Mr 
20 
Bobat becomes Minister's Advisor.  I then witnessed Mr Bobat and 
the Minister exchanging phone numbers in our presence.  I was left 
with the impression that they did not know each other.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And that is what we have canvassed earlier on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you are quite clear that you witnessed them exchanging 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 23 of 147 
 
their numbers? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Thank you Chair.  Yes, you were just about to 
relate the swearing in ceremony events? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  So ...(intervenes). 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Your mic. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  So at some point the swearing in ceremony started.  
The Minister went into a different entrance, I went into the entrance and sat with 
the journalists and the journalists were eager to interview the Minister.  They had 
10 
been asking me whether the Minister would grant interviews after his swearing in 
ceremony.  I had also explained this to the Minister, that I was getting a lot of 
requests for interviews, and he explained to me that he would not be doing 
interviews at ...(intervenes). 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now up until that point the Minister has not as yet 
been interviewed by journalists? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  No, no. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Proceed. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  The swearing in ceremony went ahead, and after it 
was – the Minister, I should point out the Minister took out the piece of paper that 
20 
he had given to myself and the DG to read.  He took out the piece of paper.  He 
read from the piece of paper after he was sworn in and after the swearing in 
ceremony I followed the Minister and the President as they were leaving in a 
different entrance.  He gave me the piece of paper because I needed to take it 
back to the office and type it up so that we can release the statement. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 24 of 147 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And what happened to the piece of paper? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I am sorry? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  What happened to that piece of paper? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I do not know.  Once I typed the statement I probably 
disposed of it but I typed up the statement because I did not have an electronic 
copy so I needed the hard copy. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  May I refer you to page 40, Mr Chair, it is 
Annexure PM1.  You can also relate it to PM2, can you identify the document on 
page 40, PM1. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And the purpose of that document. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  So in page 41 it is a copy of the statement that I typed 
up, that I then consulted with Mr Bobat as had been previously directed to, for the 
approval of the statement.  In page 40 it is an e-mail I sent to Mr Bobat with the 
attachment of the statement, asking him to approve. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And the statement on page 41 is the statement 
which was issued by the Minister at the time when you say that the markets were 
crazy and that the Rand was tumbling. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes it is. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And as you have said that having read the 
20 
statement it does not even begin to address those fundamental economic 
concerns at the time? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  No, the statement did not address the concerns. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now this statement, I take it that at some point it 
was published in the website? 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 25 of 147 
 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes the statement was published on the website once 
approved by Mr Bobat. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  How was it – how was the reaction locally and 
internationally about that statement? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  The statement was benign in as far addressing some 
of the concerns that had already been raised and it – the reaction to it was really – 
in fact some people were quite angry, and I recall receiving a phone call from one 
London based analyst, his name is Peter Attard Montalto, at the time he worked 
for Nomura International, and Peter said to me what the hell kind of statement is 
this, what are you guys saying here.  And I explained to Mr Montalto that my job 
10 
was to communicate on behalf of the Minister of Finance and this statement was 
the communication from the Minister of Finance.  He really expressed frustration 
and he said you guys are not saying anything there.  And you know he then hung 
up on me. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now did you get any other reactions from a 
journalist after this statement was released? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I got a lot of reaction from journalists in terms of 
continuing to ask for interviews with the Minister, one of whom was CNN, Eleni 
Jeokos, she sent me e-mail and she was phoning me constantly because she was 
saying you know we need to talk to the Minister, we need to talk to the Minister.  
20 
But certainly not the kind of reaction where people were calmer after we released 
the statement because it addressed some of the concerns. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  In your statement you deal with Mr Bobat 
and his – and the manner in which he asserted his power.  You do so by referring 
to an incident about a fake Twitter account.  Can you please share with us as to 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 26 of 147 
 
what transpired between yourself and Mr Bobat in that regard? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  So by the time that the Minister was sworn in there 
was already a fake Twitter account that was created in his name.  It was not our 
first experience with fake Twitter accounts.  We had previously had such with 
Minister Nene, with the Deputy Minister of Finance Mr Mcebisi Jonas and these 
fake Twitter accounts generally were used by people that wanted to swindle 
people out of their money.  So what we would normally do as the Treasury, we 
would release an Advisory to the public, saying this is a fake Twitter account, 
please be cautious and make sure that you are not taken in by the scams.  So late 
on the evening of the 10th I got a phone call from Mr Bobat and he was demanding 
10 
that I deal with the Twitter account of the Minister, and he said to me I want you to 
close the account and I want you to write a report for me in the morning.  I want a 
report from you in the morning.  Once again I found his tone to be very 
aggressive, and I explained to Mr Bobat that to be able to close an account one 
would need to have the administrative login details of the account, which we did 
not have because we did not create the account.  And I explained to him that we 
would not be able to close the account.  The least that we can do is to alert the 
public to the fact that the account was fake.  And you know he was abusive, I felt, 
and intimidating.  And I wrote him an e-mail that evening and I explained to him 
what I would do in the morning and I explained to him also that I was on sick leave 
20 
and I would not be coming into the office. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  May I refer you to page 42. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  42? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  42, paragraph – Annexure PM3. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 27 of 147 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Is that the e-mail that you said you ultimately 
wrote to Mr Bobat? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes, this is the e-mail I wrote to Mr Bobat. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And the contents, it is what you have already 
related to the Chairperson, as to what transpired. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes, yes, they are. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now can you deal with the meeting of the 11th of 
December 2015, and before you do that may I premise those – your evidence by 
asking a few questions in order to place it into its proper context?  That meeting, 
you said it took place on the 11th of December 2015 am I correct? 
10 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes, the morning after.  The morning after.  It was a 
Friday. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And who arranged that meeting? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I received a call that morning from Mr Marlon Geswint, 
who was the Chief of Staff of Minister Nene.  I was not planning to come to the 
office.  So I imagine Marlon arranged the meeting. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And do you know who else attended the meeting, 
from your recollection? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  So 
my 
recollection, 
Momo 
was 
there, 
Mr Ismail Momoniat, who is the Head of Tax and Tax Policy at the National 
20 
Treasury.  I do recall Ms Kay Brown, who was in the meeting.  She was acting on 
behalf of Mr Michael Sachs, who was the Head of the Budget Office.  Mr Sachs 
was already on leave.  I do recall Mr Monale Ratsoma being in the meeting and 
there was list that was provided with people that were in the meeting.  But in my 
recollection I do not recall everyone there. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 28 of 147 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  But these were the people that were in the meeting. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And the Deputy Minister at the time, Mr Jonas, 
was he – did he attend the meeting? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  No, that was strange; he was not in the meeting. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  You have recorded this meeting as one of the 
important meetings that you had to attend and that is the reason you even had to 
cut short your sick leave to attend that meeting.  Do you know why did the Deputy 
Minister not attend the meeting? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  So I debated with myself about going to the office to 
10 
attend the meeting but I felt that I could not be absent in a meeting, the very first 
meeting that the Minister of Finance has with senior Treasury Officials.  So out of 
respect for the Minister I went to the office.  I asked my brother to drive me to the 
office and I went to the office, and the reason why I felt the meeting as important 
was because I thought that the Minister was going to talk to us about what was 
important in his agenda.  I thought he was going to talk to us about some of the 
budget processes, things that still needed to be concluded so we would be able to 
table the budget in February.  I thought the Minister was going to talk to us about 
what his agenda was going to focus on in the short term, things that we need to 
know.  So I went to the meeting with a pen and paper to take notes so that I get to 
20 
understand what was important to the Minister. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And you say that – but Mr Jonas was not in that 
meeting? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  No, the Minister came in and the Deputy Minister was 
not there, and I found that to be very strange.  In fact I did not know whether the 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 29 of 147 
 
Deputy Minister was in the office or not.  I had not seen him that morning before I 
went into the meeting. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Alright, and then what happened during the 
meeting? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  So the meeting started, started a little bit late and the 
Minister came in with two gentlemen, one of whom I recognised, I had previously 
been introduced to him the previous day, Mr Bobat.  He came into the meeting 
with Mr Bobat and another gentleman I did not recognise, and he then introduced 
the two gentlemen, and he introduced Mr Ian Whitley as his Chief of Staff and 
Mr Mohamed Bobat as his Advisor.  The Minister said that – he informed the 
10 
meeting that whatever needed to come to his office, had to go through his Advisor 
and his Chief of Staff. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  But what did you understand him to mean when 
he said that, that everything that had to happen must go through the Chief of 
Staff? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  The Minister did say that everything that we did had to 
be done with the approval of the two gentlemen.  So what I understood him to 
mean was the introduction was important because these were the people that we 
would need to work with.  These were the people that almost were in charge so 
we needed to know who they were. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Did he say anything about the role of the DG, as 
to what is going to happen with the role of the DG if now the two gentlemen are 
going to be in charge? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Not at that point, no. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes, then what happened in the meeting? 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 30 of 147 
 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  So after the Minster introduced the two gentlemen he 
then, you know, sat back and was looking at Mr Bobat as if to hand over the meeting 
to Mr Bobat at which point the DG said "okay now wait a minute, hold on" and then 
the DG said "I think it is important that I introduce the people that I am with."  The 
manner of the DG was quite angry I thought and this was surprising to me because 
he is a very even tempered man.  I got to know him as a very sober and even 
tempered person, but in that meeting he was quite angry.  In fact he was pointing his 
fingers at, towards the Minister and his Advisor. 
 
He then went around the room introducing each and every person that was in 
the meeting and explaining what their role in the Treasury was and then he said, he 
10 
pointed his finger and said "here we do everything by the book.  If I say to you no it 
is not going to be done it is not because I do not like your face it is because it is not 
right by regulations.  If it is not according to the book, (and the book that he was 
referring to was the Minister's handbook), he said if it not according to the book it is 
not going to be done."  I found that exchange to be puzzling as I say because I did 
not think there was something that had happened in this meeting that explained his 
angry reaction.  So I surmised that it was almost as if I was witnessing act two of a 
play without having seen act one because he was angry. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now do you recall if I take you back to the events of 
that meeting, if I take you back to the events of that meeting do you recall how the 
20 
Minister introduced both Mr Bobat and Mr Whitley in terms of their titles or their 
portfolios that they are going to be holding at Treasury from that time? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I do not have a specific recollection of this and I am 
aware that the other witnesses have testified to the Minister confusing the names.  I 
have wracked my brain trying to recall that memory.  I do not have a recollection of 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 31 of 147 
 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry I did not get that.  What is it that you do not recall? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I am saying that, I am sorry, I am saying that I am aware 
that other witnesses have testified that during the introduction the Minister confused 
the names of the Advisors.  That is not something specifically that I have a 
recollection of. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And in that meeting the Minister did not proceed to 
deal with the economic situation or to give or outline his plan as to how was he going 
to address the negative impact on the Rand and other important issues regarding the 
10 
economy? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  No not at all.  Once he had done with his introductions he 
was done and he was signalling, handing over the Minister to Mr Bobat and it almost 
seems that that was the conclusion of the meeting at which point the Minister said 
"no, no just hold on." 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And had a pen in the book, the book I take it that it 
was still empty, nothing to record? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I had nothing to record.  I had no notes to take because 
nothing of substance was discussed in the meeting. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  You told the Chair earlier on that Mr Bobat was this 
20 
person that was quite aggressive going around issuing instructions and in your 
statement you relayed an incident whereby he even had to stop a recruitment 
process, do you recall? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes.  So after this meeting ended, the one that we had 
with the Minister Mr Bobat had previously told me that he wanted to meet with me 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 32 of 147 
 
and he said to me he wanted to discuss the Communications Unit and I took with me 
the organogram of the Communications Unit and a few documents and I was 
explaining to him the structure of the Communications Unit.  My appointment as 
Chief Director of Communications in October had occasioned a vacancy for the 
position that I previously held.  So I was explaining these things to Mr Bobat and I 
was explaining to him that we had just started with the recruitment process for the 
Director of Media Relations and Communications at which point he said to me "no, 
no, no you need to stop that, you need to stop that" and I said to him "why" and he 
said "we do not need to worry about that recruitment process."  I explained to Mr 
Bobat that, you know, he was having a conversation with the wrong person in this 
10 
because he needed to have this conversation with the Director General of the 
National Treasury and the Deputy Director General who was responsible for 
Corporate Services.  They would be people that could – that he could discuss it with. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now at the time when he said you must stop with the 
recruitment process how far was the process itself? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I was appointed in October.  So we had already 
advertised and I think at this point we had closed the advertisements and we had 
received CV's.  So the next step in the process would be for me to go through the 
CV's and do a shortlist.  So that is the state at which we were. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And despite all that he said that you must stop the 
20 
process? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  He said, he said "no you need to stop that." 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And then what happened? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Well I mean as I say I explained to him that I was not 
authorised to make that decision.  That authority rested with the DG of National 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 33 of 147 
 
Treasury, but I also found the meeting very unusual, because my understanding of 
his role as Advisor did not include him being involved in the processes of the 
department certainly not the HR processes of the department.  So I was quite taken 
aback by what I thought was audacity on his part to be talking to me about what – 
how we should be running the HR process and once I explained to him that he 
needed to discuss the matter with the DG that was the close of – that was the end of 
the discussion. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Did you discuss this issue with the DG at the time? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I certainly did. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And what was his reaction? 
10 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  He was angry.  He was very angry. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Did he interact with – did you know if he did interact 
with Mr Bobat on this issue? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I do not know if he interacted with Bobat on that issue.  I 
did not spend a lot of time on the second floor which is where the DG's office and the 
Minister's office were.  I spent most of my time in my office.  So I was only there for 
meetings.  So if there were any interactions I did not see them. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  You continue also in your statement, you know, to 
deal in the manner in which Mr Bobat was exercising his power and demonstrating 
that the new sheriff is now in town he do so with relation to an incident pertaining to 
20 
one official that had to surrender his office. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes.  So I had to go up to the Minister's office because 
one of the things that we were being asked was a full CV of the Minister.  We had 
posted a very short CV of the Minister that included his qualifications and that 
included his work experience and I was getting a lot of calls from people about 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 34 of 147 
 
Minister was the Mayor of Merafong and a lot of journalists wanted to know when 
and for how long was he mayor and also people wanted to know the qualifications 
that he had listed, in which years were those qualifications obtained and from which 
institutions.  So I was in the Minister discussing this and the Minister asked me "you 
know why are people interested in my CV" and I had to explain to the Minister why a 
CV of a Minister of Finance is important and I explained to him that someone in that 
role is entrusted with a lot of powers and because of that people want to know what 
his experiences are, what his policy views are and trust in the office of the Minister of 
Finance equals trust in government.  So the Minister took the CV and said okay I 
should wait outside of his office while he was going to fill in some of the blanks I had 
10 
highlighted.  While I was waiting outside the Minister's office I witnessed Mr Bobat 
ordering Mr Marlon Geswint to vacate his office and he was saying to Marlon "you 
need to leave, this is where I am going to sit" and Marlon was explaining to him that 
no this office is the office for the Chief of Staff and the Advisors sit on the other side 
and it is quite a distance to go to where the Advisors sit and Mr Bobat was saying "I 
need you out of this office right now and this is where I am going to sit" and he was 
also explaining that everyone needed to move because he needed to be situated as 
close to the Minister as possible. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So did you get the impression that Mr Bobat was basically 
beginning to break the rules that would – that he thought should be followed, you 
20 
know, after his arrival? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I certainly got that impression Chair.  I mean in my 
interaction with him I got the sense that he was ignorant of the rules, but he also was 
not interested in what the rules were, but even if the rules were there he would 
disregard them and he would make new rules, because I had explained to him when 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 35 of 147 
 
he was talking to me about stopping the recruitment process I explained to him that I 
was not authorised to do that, but it was – that was not important he was not 
interested. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So what you had already witnessed in regard to him was one, the 
first time he saw you he told you that from then onwards he would have to approve 
any media statement that you issued, is that right? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes he did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then he told you to stop the recruitment process as well? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes he did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And now he was being told where Advisors to the Minister – what 
10 
offices Advisors to the Ministers use and he was saying he was going to use another 
one? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes he was telling people to move so that he can sit as 
close to the Minister's office as possible. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now I take it that Treasury as a department had a 
recruitment policy.  It must have had a communication policy.  It must have had other 
policies that governed Treasury including in applicable pieces of legislation.  Now 
where was Mr Bobat deriving his power from as an Advisor? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I do not know.  I do not know where Mr Bobat derived his 
20 
power from, but as I have previously testified in the two minutes – in the first two 
minutes that I met with him he made it very clear that he had authority.  Where he 
derived it from I do not know. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And all this that you have related to the Chairperson 
happened within a space of two days? 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 36 of 147 
 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  It happened in a space of – yes inside of 24 hours. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And Mr Van Rooyen was the Minister of Finance for 
two days. 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  He was the Minister for four days. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  For four days? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Chair that concludes the evidence of Ms Macanda 
and I am told that it is already past the tea adjournment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, but did you say that concludes her evidence?  Okay.  Let 
me just ask her one or two questions.  Firstly Ms Macanda in case I forget thank you 
10 
for coming to the Commission to give evidence about what you know happened and 
your understanding of what happened.  Secondly, going back to the issue of Mr Van 
Rooyen introducing the – his Advisor and his Chief of Staff you have already said 
you have no recollection of him confusing their names or their roles or confusing 
their roles or their names, is that right? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  That is right I do not have a specific recollection of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  How far were you sitting from or I assume you were all 
sitting from where the Minister was more or less? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I was quite at the end of the table.  So the table is big 
and round.  The Minister and his two gentlemen were at the Head of the table and 
20 
the DG was next to them.  I was at the far end closer to the door. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and how – where about was the then DG Mr Fuzile in relation 
to the Minister? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  They were sitting very close to each other. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They were close to each other? 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 37 of 147 
 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you were far you say? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I was quite – yes I was quite far. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and where was the current DG Mr Mogajane in relation to the 
Minister? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  So the table is round so it was the Minister, it would have 
been possibly Mr Bobat and Mr Whitley.  The DG was sitting here and the other 
Chair was taken by Mr Momoniat and Mr Dondo was in the middle of ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Dondo Mogajane? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Sorry Mr Dondo Mogajane was much closer to the 
10 
Minister than I was. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you think that in the light of the position where you were you 
may have not heard something that was said or do you think that it was not said? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  I am sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Do you think that the position where you were sitting 
in relation to where the Minister was and where the then DG Mr Fuzile was and the 
current DG was do you think that distance may have disadvantaged you with the 
result that you might have missed something that where the Minister said or do you 
think that you heard everything that was said by the Minister? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  It is possible that my position at the table would have 
20 
disadvantaged me in that manner but I think for me it was because I was waiting for 
the actual meeting to start.  For me the most important thing that I was waiting for 
there was the part where the Minister would start talking to us about his agenda and 
the important things. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay so you are not in a position to say the confusion had 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 38 of 147 
 
not happened.  You are simply saying you did not hear it and maybe the distance 
that the position where you were sitting may have affected that.  That is all you are 
saying? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes I am saying I did not hear it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  No, thank you very much. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Mr Chair, just one question.  Ms Macanda, you said 
that you are a qualified journalist? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now at the time when the journalist wanted to know 
about the qualifications of the Minister did you yourself you know take any initiative 
10 
to verify the qualifications of the Minister? 
MS PHUMZA MACANDA:  So verified perhaps I would not say I took time to verify 
but what I had asked for to be done by people in the Communications Unit was to 
source what we could find on Google so that we could have an interim sort of CV on 
the website because that is the thing that people were interested in. 
 
They wanted to know who he was, where he came from and in the media 
he was being referred to as a back bencher.  So I had done that but we really 
needed a much more extensive CV that listed his experience, his background and 
help people form views about what kind of a person and what kind of a Finance 
Minister he would make. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  From your statement I think one, I got the impression 
that there is something else that you would like to share with the Commission but 
which might not have been considered necessary to include at this stage of the 
hearing.  I just want to assure you that we are interested in hearing whatever else 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 39 of 147 
 
you may have that would help us understand what was happening in terms of other 
matters and if the Commission's Legal Team has not already taken the statement 
that covers other matters they will be doing so soon because anything that relates to 
what we are investigating that you might have information on will be important. 
 
So you will be contacted in due course then with a view to either the 
obtaining of that statement and ultimately you will be – you would be asked to come 
back.  So but thank you very much for coming and I am sure we will see you again.  
Thank you very much.  You are excused.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We will take the short adjournment now and resume at 11:40.  We 
adjourn. 
10 
HEARING ADJOURNS 
HEARING RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Maleka? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Good morning, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Good morning, Mr Manyi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning, Mr Manyi.  Thank you.  Are you ready? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Hopefully. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Should he be sworn in now? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Registrar please do that. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Mzwanele Manyi. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection in taking the prescribed oath? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  No. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 40 of 147 
 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on your conscience?   
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give will be the truth, the 
whole truth and nothing but the truth?  If so please raise your right hand and say so 
help me God. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Yes Mr Maleka? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Thank you very much, Chair.  Mr Manyi, good 
morning once again. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Hi. 
10 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  You recall that at the end of your testimony on the 
14th of November 2016 through the Commission's attorney the Legal Team 
addressed a letter to you dated 15 November 2018.  You recall that? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes I do. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  And you would remember that in that letter the 
Commission's Legal Team set out a number of topics that it intended to raise with 
you in the course of the resumption of your testimony this morning, correct? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes I can confirm that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Manyi, it looks like if you keep yours on there will be no 
problem – your mic on there will be no problem. 
20 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  And you will recall also that after receipt of that letter 
the Commission's attorney sent through to you a bundle of documents which 
comprises some material that the Legal Team would like to raise with you this 
morning.  You received the bundle I take it? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes I got the bundle. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 41 of 147 
 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes and you were invited to include whatever 
information that you in turn would have wanted to raise this morning, correct? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  And you did so? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes I did. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  And that bundle is now before you and Chair a copy 
has been transmitted to you in the course of Friday and may I remind you where it 
should be and with your permission admitted it as an exhibit?  You will recall that Mr 
Manyi ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before that Mr Maleka you say it was transmitted to me on Friday?  
10 
I do not know anything about that.  I did not receive anything on Friday.  I did not 
receive anything over the weekend.  I see there is a bundle here. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which I am seeing for the first time.  I am told by my Registrar that 
she was only told during Ms Macanda's evidence this morning that I was going to 
need Exhibit M. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And she then – she made arrangements or arrangements were 
made for me to use this Exhibit M but we had not brought it. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Chair, first of all thanks that you now have before you 
20 
Exhibit M and you will recall that that is the bundle on the strength of which Mr Manyi 
testified previously on the 14th of November and that will be the bundle that I would 
canvas with him with reference to his version to Ms Williams' evidence. 
 
I will get to it in a moment but what we did following upon the letter that Mr 
Manyi confirms he has received was to prepare a bundle of documents and we have 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 42 of 147 
 
now labelled that bundle as Exhibit M1 to follow sequentially from Exhibit N. 
 
I have asked my colleagues to mark yours on the spine as Exhibit M1.  
Chair, can I ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the one that is here is not marked M1 on the spine. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  May I kindly ask ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just to make sure that it is the right thing it is written Secondary 
Evidence Bundle of Mr Mzwanele Manyi. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Indeed.  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You ...(intervenes). 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  May I propose that it be marked Exhibit M1? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  So that when the time comes to begin to write 
submissions we know where to find it? 
CHAIRPERSON:  This bundle which at pages 1 to 3 thereof reflects according to the 
index Auditor General Report to Parliament on the financial statements and 
performance information of Ward 7 Government Communications and Information 
Systems, the bundle that has got that will be marked Exhibit M for Mary 1. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  I am indebted to you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Is the witness's one already marked? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes, I understand from my colleagues that it has been 
20 
marked and just to confirm Mr Manyi before you, you will have two bundles.  The one 
is Exhibit M which includes your statements that you previously canvassed on the 
14th of November 2018, correct? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  And the second bundle will be the one that includes 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 43 of 147 
 
documents previously made available to you which has been marked Exhibit M1 at 
the back of it. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Chair, I think that underlines the data set that we will 
be dealing with.  Mr Manyi, before I leave the identification of the data set can I 
confirm with you that you have now prepared yourself on the topics that we identified 
in the letter to you that we would like to raise with you and you are quite comfortable 
that we should raise those questions with you, correct? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes, Chairperson I am so ready such that because I also 
am not assisted by any legal representative so therefore, Chairperson I seek your 
10 
indulgence, Chairperson that I am allowed to go through my statement as I have 
prepared it and then so that I can, because I have been given these documents – 
these questions I can go through these questions in my own approach and then 
thereafter Mr Maleka is free to ask any question in whatever shape or form but I 
request, Chairperson that I be allowed to table my statement because I do have the 
questions and I have prepared answers and I request that I get given the 
opportunity.  It is on the short statement Chairperson.  It is about five pages that I go 
through my statement.  I am not going to read word for word.  I go through my 
statement and I am sure I will be answering a lot of his questions so that he can then 
ask those that are outstanding. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let me make sure I understand what you are saying.  
Mr Maleka was asking you the question whether you are ready for him to ask you 
any questions on the topics that they have indicated to you and then in your 
response you said you would like me to give you an opportunity to read, present 
your statement and then after that he can ask you any questions.  Now let me ask 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 44 of 147 
 
first in regard to whether you are ready to answer any questions that Mr Maleka 
might put to you on the topics that you have been notified about is your answer that 
you are ready but you would like that before that happens you be afforded an 
opportunity to talk to your statement as it were?  You are not going to read 
everything but to just talk on what you want to present without being asked questions 
as yet and after that you can be asked questions.  Is that what you are saying? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Not precisely Chair.  What I am asking is that because the 
Commission has been very kind enough to give me the areas of questions I have 
prepared my statement in line with those areas of questions.  So I am requesting to 
have a first bite at giving the answers of to those questions and if it turns out that 
10 
there are some inadequacies anywhere Mr Maleka is free to fill in the gaps and 
probe some more, but I think in that way Chairperson there will be much more 
benefit for the Commission because I have sequenced – because what I have seen 
happening here you get, you get from page five to page 20 to page, it gets very 
disorienting Chairperson.  So in order for me to have a proper flow I am requesting 
that I get given the opportunity to table the answers in the form of the statement 
which are already contained in my statement.  I think in that way it will really assist. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Maleka I do not know if you have any problem with that? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Not at all Chair as long as he identifies ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes ...(intervenes). 
20 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Where we get the statement in the bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay Mr Manyi ...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I will allow you to do that. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay Chair thank you.  So the first question Chairperson 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 45 of 147 
 
related to me being at GCIS how does it happen and all of that and the straight 
answer there Chairperson is that my going to GCIS was from the Department of 
Labour.  It was actually a transfer.  That is a formal categorisation of how I went 
there.  It is a transfer and with – when a transfer happens some of the questions that 
Mr Maleka has asked do not arise.  For instance he has asked a question about 
whether was I interviewed, those questions do not arise Chairperson when getting 
transferred they arise when you get appointed.  Then there is assessment and all of 
this, but I was already in the public service.  So that question does not arise.  I was 
transferred and in fact I have tried to assist the Chairperson Mr Maleka in terms of 
whether how does that happen in the first place. 
10 
 
Chairperson I have got Exhibit 1 here which Mr Maleka will find on page 227 
and page 228 in his bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that now of ...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  M1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Exhibit M1? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Page 227 and 228 is the Public Service Act.  I just took 
extracts there Chairperson of just two pages.  Just a cover page of the Act and the 
actual paragraph which is Section 12(3)(a) which reads; 
20 
"That the President may transfer the Head of a National Department 
or National Government component before or at the expiry of his or 
her term of extended term to perform functions in a similar or any 
other capacity in a National Department or National Government 
component in a post of equal, higher or lower grading or additional 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 46 of 147 
 
to the establishment as the President considers appropriate." 
 
So that is a Section I trust Chair regularises what – my appointment and 
on top of that Chairperson on your bundle page 229 I have got Exhibit 2 which is 
actually my letter of transfer.  So everything was done according to the book 
Chairperson and then I move on to my time at GCIS.  One of the things that was 
asked was the issue around I think the issues around the Bid Adjudication 
Committee.  So what I have then done Chairperson is that on Exhibit 3 
...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you comfortable if I ask you about this letter before you 
proceed? 
10 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Go ahead I am comfortable. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or would you want to prefer to proceed and finish first? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are comfortable? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  I see that that letter is dated 22 February 2010 am I right? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  That is correct Chairperson 2011. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh it is 2011 not 2010? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was the – was it signed before you assumed duty at GCIS or was 
20 
it – did it come after GCIS? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  It came afterwards Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.  Okay you may proceed. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay.  Right, okay so one of the questions that I need to 
answer Chairperson is on Exhibit 3 which talks to, I think it is probably a follow up, 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 47 of 147 
 
but Mr Maleka will then probe some more.  It is just an Exhibit 3 Chairperson in 
terms of the financial delegations.  The one that still responds to the issue of me 
saying that I did not say I wanted to sign off everything.  I wanted to sign off that 
which was R500 000 and above and that was already – that was a financial 
delegation.  So I just took one page of the financial delegation Chairperson.  It is on 
your bundle page 230 that is where it is.  It is just one page.  There is something 
written there at the bottom about concurrence with the CEO prior to the finalisation 
that is when things are above R500 000.  So that is one Chair.  Then there was a 
question about ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, I am sorry, for what it is worth because you in terms of the 
10 
record you have mentioned your names as Mzwanele Manyi. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And did not mention any other name.  Shall we confirm that the 
name that is used there at 230 that refers to you? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes Chairperson it is my slave name Jimmy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I just want to make sure that whoever reads the record knows 
...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is the same as the witness. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is referred to. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes.  It is part of the decolonisation exercise.  I am trying 
to be African here.  So yes Chairperson.  So then the next issue was the issue 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 48 of 147 
 
around I am saying here my interactions with other departments was done at Chief 
Director level.  We use a system there which we call TELMA to determine where to 
place adverts.  GCIS sits with the most objective tool in deciding where adverts 
should be placed.  Departments via their Head of Communication would approve the 
placements.  Sometimes they would actually even defy advice from GCIS. 
 
Then I then make a point Chairperson that the issue of media diversity was 
at the centre of GCIS communication strategy that it was so much at the centre that 
GCIS even had a subsidiary called MDDA run by a very able cadre Mr Lumko 
Mtimde at the time.  MDDA is Media Development and Diversity Agency.  The brief of 
this agency was to ensure that government is assisting in terms of developing other 
10 
platforms of communication.  Government does not want a monologue.  Government 
wants to make sure that all the voices of everyone in South Africa are heard as it 
were.  So that is a posture of government.  So within Media Diversity there are two 
groups of companies or two groups of media groupings that could be find there 
covered within the Act.  It says in fact an act on this matter, MDDA Act as well.  So, 
but there are two groups of media that you find there.  There is what is called 
Community Media and there is also what is called Small Media – Commercial Small 
Media.  So those are the two groups of media that are covered within the Act. 
 
So in my view Chairperson when the issue of the New Age came about it 
was a very welcome development because it fitted in very well with what government 
20 
was trying to do.  Government had a proper infrastructure of even helping the 
development of these agencies – of these companies.  So when this one came on its 
own not even with the assistance – the direct assistance of government in there so I 
thought well this is a very welcome move and in particular the TNA – the New Age 
brought in a different editorial stance Chairperson which was decidedly not hostile to 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 49 of 147 
 
government, which was very important because at the time government as suffering 
from a serious media onslaught generally and the challenge that government has 
had is to be – is to say to media, try – we are not saying try to be nice to government 
but try and be balanced in your reporting, but it looked like Chairperson the posture 
of mainstream media is that when you do something right the attitude is that you get 
paid to do it in anyway.  They wait until you do something wrong then they headline 
with that.  Now the posture of TNA was the complete opposite.  It was a posture of 
saying the glass is half full as opposed to the glass is half empty.  That was the 
posture of it.  So it was a very welcome posture as it were and also even price wise it 
was not the most expensive in terms of the ads for the same amount of square 
10 
centimetres in that page or there is half a page ad or full page ad they were still 
much more competitive than others. 
 
Now Chairperson one of the exhibits which I did not submit because I did my 
research late, I do not know if the Registrar can give this to the Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Have you got a copy for Mr Maleka? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay I only have two copies here Chairperson.  I want to 
read on the one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes, unfortunately.  Now ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me have a look first ...(intervenes). 
20 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then I will get the Registrar to give it to Mr Maleka. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  If Chairperson you can – the particular page I wanted to 
look, to ask ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 50 of 147 
 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Is the second last page that starts with that is the concept.  
The page before that one Chair it starts with that is the concept. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Now as you are browsing through this Chairperson this is 
a letter written by Ms Phumla Williams on the same subject of New Age and she was 
responding to a journalist here called Ranjeni Munusamy.  So Ranjeni had raised a 
very interesting issue about that these breakfasts are elitist, they deprive people an 
opportunity to come to these elaborate breakfasts and so on and why is GCIS 
involved in these breakfasts?  Now and Ms Williams was here last time arguing that 
she was being pressured to support these breakfasts and all of that.  That was her 
10 
posture, but this is a letter Chairperson that I think we must thank Ms Ranjeni 
Munusamy that she had made this letter public.  This is from the website Daily 
Maverick dated 6th of February 2013.  Now just to read just couple paragraphs of this 
Chair for the benefit of those that do not have this copy.  This is an extract from the 
letter of Ms Phumla Williams responding to the issue of GCIS being involved in 
breakfasts and ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, one second.  Registrar, give this to Mr Maleka.  Mr Maleka, 
do you want us to mark it in any way at this stage or maybe later? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Chair, can we take the liberty of marking it in due 
course? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  And we will distribute copies later. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  All right.  The concern is simply that he has given some 
evidence about it on record and whoever reads the transcript will not at that stage 
know where to find it but maybe we might not have an option. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 51 of 147 
 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Can I propose that it comes at the end of Exhibit M1? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  And then it will begin at page 281. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, all right. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  I will take the liberty of ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Paginating it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Paginating it yes.  So it will not be a separate exhibit.  It will just 
be put at the end of the existing bundle Exhibit M1 already. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then all that will happen is that it will be paginated? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Yes you may continue Mr Manyi. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Thank you, Chair.  So in addition to what I have said, 
Chairperson this is what Ms Phumla Williams said in February 2013 and I must 
underline Chair but at that time I was not even in the public – I was not in GCIS at 
the time but this is how she responded here without my help that: 
"The concept of the New Age breakfast meeting was one which 
appealed to government as it presented the best of both worlds." 
 
She says: 
20 
"Government leaders could interact with the audience in attendance 
and at the same time reach millions of viewers watching on 
television." 
 
She says: 
"As a platform it allows government to speak directly to a variety of 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 52 of 147 
 
stakeholders such as business people, thought leaders and of 
course the people of South Africa." 
 
And she says: 
"It allows the audience to engage directly with government leaders 
to probe them and to obtain a deeper understanding of policies and 
programs.  At the same time the television audience has the 
opportunity to hear first-hand about issues which often directly 
affect them.  Ms Munusamy in the article gives an impression that 
government Ministers and the President do not use platforms 
available to them from SABC and so on.  The New Age/Morning 
10 
Live platform is one of the platforms available that government uses 
to communicate with citizens.  Ms Munusamy conveniently chose to 
forget that the President following the State of the Nation address 
has an SABC interview where he further elaborates on his 
message.  This platform compliments a suite of other platforms that 
are used by government to communicate with its citizens and no 
preferential treatment is given to any platform whatsoever." 
 
On the next page just a short paragraph there, Chair if you indulge me. 
"At the end of the day an informed citizenry is good for democracy 
and we will continue to strive to engage with people on every 
20 
available platform we are fully aware that no single platform can 
reach every person therefore we will continue engaging face to face 
via all media channels in parliament and every other available 
platform.   A government communications system is a well-
functioning system with its own weaknesses and successes.  The 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 53 of 147 
 
battle of ideas in a contested society such as ours cannot be won 
only through one platform but by use of all available to our citizens." 
 
So that was Ms Williams, Chairperson responding basically to the 
question that Mr Maleka is posing here by way of why this breakfast and so on – say 
more about this breakfast, explain more.  So this is the context that I agree with.  I 
differ with Ms Williams on a lot of things but on this one we are together.  There it is, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I thought there was a point you were seeking to make in regard to 
the article maybe reflecting something different from what she may have told the 
Commission.  Not really?  That is not your point? 
10 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  It is actually also the point, Chairperson because I think in 
the Commission she had come here basically with a posture that is opposite to what 
is being said here and her posture, Chairperson was one that said it is one that was 
not understanding what she seems to be fully conversant with here and all that and 
yes her doing it last time it was more like I mean she used the word that she was 
being bullied into doing this thing but if I read this article here like I have just done, 
Chairperson you can see that this is a person that believed in this thing. 
 
So this is why it is quite strange how Ms Williams operates that on the one 
side she says this and the next time says something completely opposite which is 
without belabouring the point, Chairperson.  We have dealt with the SMS matter 
20 
which was – also my surprise because the last time I left GCIS we were on very 
good terms.  There were no issues at all.  That is why I was comfortable to talk to 
her and then before I knew there was a 180 degree turn in her attitude. 
 
So I just do not know what actually happens is happening in her space 
that she goes left, she goes right, she goes left, she goes right but anyway this is 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 54 of 147 
 
what she said. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes that article would it be an article that she would have written 
as part of her official duties or would it be an article that she may have just decided 
to write at a personal level or are you not able to tell? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  No, I am able to tell, Chairperson.  In fact I just want to 
read just a cover page of this article.  It says: 
"In an earlier article Ranjeni Munusamy criticised what she termed 
the elitism of government communication in South Africa where only 
a select few who could afford it were privy to crucial information 
about our democracy as well as a non-performance by R429 million 
10 
a year GCIS.  Unsurprisingly the GCIS disagrees.  In the interest of 
broader debate we published a letter by Ms Phumla Williams Acting 
GCIS CEO in its entirety." 
 
So Chairperson she was acting here as – this was written in her capacity 
as Acting GCIS CEO responding to the query about the use of New Age and so on 
and this breakfast. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  So the whole question about breakfast ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you see the reason why I was asking whether she may have 
written in her personal capacity – official capacity is this.  That is it not possible that 
20 
insofar as she – as long as she was writing in her official capacity as Acting CEO of 
GCIS she was supposed to reflect the government's position as opposed to her 
personal view and maybe on another occasion she might have been expressing her 
personal views. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  No, Chairperson I think – okay I hear you, Chairperson.  
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 55 of 147 
 
There is nothing personal here, Chairperson.  This is the position of the Department.  
I think this is why it is complemented by what I have said.  In my statement here I 
have said that the measures of the New Age was a welcome development so this 
backs it up.  So this was our position, Chairperson.  We wanted diversity, wanted a 
multiplicity of voices. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you understand the point I am making? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I am making it as whether there is a possibility namely if I 
speak as Deputy Chief Justice of the Republic in regard to certain matters at an 
official occasion I might not include my personal views.  I might speak on the official 
10 
position of the judiciary but maybe if I am speaking on another occasion when for 
example I might no longer be Deputy Chief Justice it may well be that I might then 
say well that was the official position that I had to convey because I was speaking in 
that capacity. 
 
No I am no longer a Deputy Chief Justice and if you want my personal 
view this is my personal view. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes.  No, Chairperson I think I hear you but let me just 
read the first opening paragraph to contextualise what capacity she was speaking 
on.  The first paragraph she says: 
"In her column in the Daily Maverick on the 1st of February 2013 
20 
Ranjeni Munusamy erroneously attempts to paint a picture that the 
government communication and information system does not 
adequately fulfil its mandate of communicating with the public about 
government policies, plans, programs and achievements.  This 
assumption is flawed on a number of levels.  Firstly, government 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 56 of 147 
 
has a responsibility to reach every citizen." 
 
Then she carries on.  So Chairperson this is clearly somebody articulating 
her government position. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well that is all the more reason why I keep on going back to the 
question because I thought to the extent that she may be expressing government 
position that might detract from the force that your point might have had if she said 
something else at a time when she was required to you know speak her views – 
speak her views you know under oath and not necessarily government's position or 
attitude. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  You understand? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I understand, Chairperson yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I think this here is more government position. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Government position. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Her statement under oath is probably a personal position. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is something else yes.  Okay thank you. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may proceed. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Thank you, Chair.  So, Chairperson there was also some 
20 
question of whether I would have encouraged any DG or anybody to have used the 
New Age.  Almost definitely, Chairperson I would have encouraged everyone I could 
come across because this was actually assisting in the government's approach of 
multiplicity of voices. 
 
So if anyone wants to come here and say Manyi encouraged me I am not 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 57 of 147 
 
going to create war to deny any of that because chances are that I might have and 
so on although I might not remember the specifics but it is something that generally I 
would do because I thought it is the right thing to do. 
 
What I also liked about the New Age is that what they did, Chairperson is 
that the creativity and the innovation of reporting per province.  So what you would 
find in that publication is that at one sitting you could say okay let me check what is 
happening in North West and then you get a sense of what is happening in North 
West. 
 
What is happening in Mpumalanga?  What is happening you know the 
different provinces.  So it had that.  So it was a very useful publication and all that 
10 
and I think also for government it would have been very useful because government 
generally has a problem in having its messages carried across because media – 
mainstream media takes the position that says they are not the conveyer belt for 
government.  They are the watchdog.  This is the approach they take that they are 
the watchdog. 
 
Now government has invested in a lot of equipment hoping in various 
press places I mean if you go to GCIS in Pretoria, you go to GCIS in Cape Town a lot 
of money has been spent by government to ensure that they use media as a partner 
in communicating – in its communication. 
 
But media is not of the same mind.  Media is there to say what wrong are 
20 
you doing.  They are there with a red pen.  In fact when you go to a press briefing – 
when you go to a press briefing you can go there, Chairperson and read 10 pages 
and all that and the very first questions that come after the press briefing is not 
anything about what you have written. 
 
It is the things that they came to the briefing with.  It is an opportunity for 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 58 of 147 
 
them to ask all these other questions.  So as a result when you look at the 
newspaper the next day you will be lucky to find one sentence of what you had read 
reflected in there. 
 
So when you have a paper like the New Age which has a different posture in 
terms of half – the glass is half full it was a very welcome posture and not that by the 
way, Chairperson it did not reflect some of the wrong things that were happening in 
government which I will take the Chairperson through just to illustrate that this paper 
was indeed balanced in its approach.  Now one of the things for instance that would 
be used against this paper Chairperson would be that it is not a member of the ABC, 
Audit Bureau of Circulation.  So what this means Chairperson that the big four in the 
10 
media space, you know, your Times Media, your what is now called Tiso Blackstar, 
your independent, what is the other one Naspers and Caxton, the four big groups.  
They have this thing called Audit Bureau of Circulation where they work – they audit 
how much of the newspapers have been printed and have been circulated and sold 
and all of that and then based on that then they come up with a number through that 
audit process to say this newspaper has got a circulation of 100 000 and that 
circulation figure then gives a basis for the rate card.  So in other words the rate card 
is a pricing mechanism to say do I price this, do I price this half a page this much?  
Do I price a full page this much and so on based on the reach that that newspaper 
would have and that – then that determines how much should an ad cost as it were.  
20 
So that is what they would use. 
 
Now the New Age was not part of that deliberately so, because they did not 
believe that that system was a welcoming system.  It was the view of the New Age 
editors at the time that in fact this thing was also conflict because – riddled with 
conflict because all the people that sat on the board of this thing were all from, you 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 59 of 147 
 
know it is almost like a cabal of the same newspapers sitting here and deciding that 
okay you have this much, you have this much and all that and that determines, that 
determines the price of an ad. 
 
Now this ABC thing Chairperson was also used if you like as a mechanism, 
artificial barriers to entry.  So newspaper – Community Media would not make the 
criteria required to be in this ABC and all that.  So what that does then is that if this 
Community Media or as New Age you go to a private sector company to try and get 
them to put ads in your paper.  The first thing they ask you is your ABC and if you do 
not have that ABC they cannot do business with you.  So this has been the problem. 
 
So at the time when I was at GCIS it was a be all and end all to have ABC.  
10 
So we would use Community Media deliberately so knowing they have not got ABC 
ratings, but because there are other ways of checking this for instance the New Age 
was using audit to say auditors must audit how many papers they are circulating, but 
it was not the approach of New Age in any case to look at circulation.  Their 
approach was based on what they call readership and the philosophy here 
Chairperson is that, the philosophy is that with readership for instance if there is a 
family of five not all five members of the family must buy a particular newspaper.  
One newspaper is enough maybe for the entire household as it were. 
 
So New Age was using that kind of a system to say how many households 
are there.  How many people are in a household.  So if we sold one newspaper that 
20 
newspaper will be read by 10 people as an example.  So that is a kind of philosophy 
they were using in terms of saying what is the reach of their publication. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But how would they know how many able, how many people they 
were able to reach namely how many members of a family had read a newspaper if 
they did not know how many newspapers they sold? 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 60 of 147 
 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes.  Thank you Chairperson it is a very important 
questions.  Stats SA ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  So in other words it seems to me that you have got to first know 
how many newspapers you have sold then before you can then say but how many 
people do we reach because just because one paper is bought by one person does 
not mean necessarily that it will be read by that one person only. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes.  Yes thank you Chairperson.  That is correct 
Chairperson.  That is why I did say earlier there is an issue of audit.  So there will be 
an auditor that would audit how many papers have been sold so to speak, sent,or 
because they used different models of distributing the paper or rather selling the 
10 
paper.  The one model was the retail model where you would go and sell like at the 
street corners and all of that, but the other model was subscription based. 
 
So they would say this particular government department as an example 
requires a 100 copies.  So it is very clear 100 copies go to Mpumalanga, a 1000 
copies go to wherever.  So there will be subscription based and the subscription 
base was in fact the lion share in terms of the revenue streams because those were 
guaranteed and all that.  So there would be all clear arrangements with various 
departments to say or various government departments to say I require so many 
newspapers and all that.  So that would be one firm way of establishing exactly how 
many newspapers would be out and then you multiply that also by a factor of how 
20 
many people are in that government department and in fact some of those people 
will take the paper home and STATS SA is very meticulous Chairperson about the 
number of people in a household.  So that information is readily available.  In the 
TELMAS system all of those nitty gritties are also in there just to get to know the 
reach of the paper and all that, but the important thing Chairperson on this matter is 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 61 of 147 
 
that the GCIS rather, I beg your pardon, the TNA approach was a lot more 
scientifically sound than the ABC in this way.  One of the newspapers in this country 
that has got the biggest circulation is Daily Sun.  Now the Daily Sun probably trumps 
everybody in terms of how many newspapers it circulates, but what ABC does not 
seem to take into account is something called psychographics, because it is all well 
and good to say my paper has gone to a million people, but what are the 
psychographics of those people?  Can you take an analysis of a judgment 
Chairperson and put it on a Daily Sun and hope that the Daily Sun market is going to 
read that?  They would not.  It is not their cup of tea.  They are interested in other 
things as it were. 
10 
 
So therefore the TNA approach was much more targeted as well and 
therefore the issue of what we call spillage was less in TNA.  So with these others 
there is a lot of spillage.  I mean if I live in Northern Cape and one copy of a 
Sowetan is identical from the one side – from Limpopo to Cape Town is an identical 
copy of the Sowetan I mean that blunt approach how much value does it add to 
somebody sitting in Postmasburg and so on?  You will find that there is nothing in 
Postmasburg covered in the Sowetan.  In fact I can even bet even today if you were 
to open Sowetan today Chairperson I am almost sure there is not much covered in 
Postmasburg, but if you had the New Age you would have a focus on Northern 
Cape.  You would have a focus on this and all that and what that does it helps even 
20 
government in those regions to know what are the issues affecting people in the 
various localities. 
 
So instead of buying one paper that is just blunt that is just covering Gauteng 
issues and maybe something in Cape Town and Durban and so on but the rest of the 
country is almost non-existent as it were in terms of the coverage. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 62 of 147 
 
 
So that is the – what New Age did and that is why this ABC was actually not 
meaningful.  In fact Chairperson I think government should be wary of insisting 
because I know here of lately they are insisting on this as well.  This is part of the 
capture of government by the newspapers.  Newspapers actually have captured 
government because government is now also almost insisting on ABC, which I think 
is a mistake because it is anti-developmental.  You cannot have a situation where 
government is going to insist on this thing, because this is an artificial barrier to 
entry.  New players are not able to go into this.  New players will not have a rate card 
that recognises them. 
 
So it is a really big mistake.  So I would really be encouraging government 
10 
not to be using ABC.  They can use it but they must not exclude those that do not 
have it and all of that Chairperson.  So that is that one.  To proceed Chairperson 
then there is the issue of cost and the subtext of how much we paid and Chairperson 
as I go through this I am going to ask the Registrar, I do not know if you have got 
equipment here to be able to put and flag this, just one slide. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Maleka are you able to be of assistance to Mr Manyi in 
regard to slides? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Chair I am technologically challenged, but what was 
indicated as a short statement has gone for far too long now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, but in terms of assisting him with slides you say you are 
20 
technologically challenged? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes we can make those arrangements during 
...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  For later. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  During the lunch adjournment. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 63 of 147 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay Mr Manyi so that can be dealt with later. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  It is just one slide by the way. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I wanted to show. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  In terms of the costing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Now ...(intervenes). 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well before you say, well Mr Maleka you kind of complained that 
what was intended as a short statement has taken long.  It is fine.  I have asked Mr 
Manyi some questions.  Let us allow him to complete.  Thank you. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Thank you Chair.  Thank you for the protection Chair.  
Now Chairperson I had put a slide here.  It is a pity that the Chairperson does not 
have the copy of this here and I see also the printout of – printouts are not as clear, 
but my copy is much clearer that I wish I could even share it with the Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I thought Mr Maleka said that you had sent to them documents 
that you wanted to use? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes I have. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which were included here, but there was the earlier one which 
does not appear to have been included.  Is that another one that ...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  No this one is – actually it is part of the statement this 
one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 64 of 147 
 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  On page – yes it is in the statement this one Chairperson 
on Exhibit 4 and 5 page 231 and 235, 236 to 240. 
CHAIRPERSON:  231 to 236? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  231, yes, Chairperson from 231. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay all right.  Yes you may proceed then. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes.  What I am showing there Chairperson is that 
financial year 2011/2012 because sometimes when we deal with TNA we deal with it 
out of context.  So I thought it is important that we must deal with it ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  TNA being The New Age? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  The New Age, yes Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I think it is important that we deal with it in context.  Now 
on Exhibit Q4 Chairperson which will be there on page 231 to 235.  There is a whole 
list in those exhibit Chairperson of – from 231 to 235 of all the media that was ever 
paid in GCIS in 2011/2012 which was my period.  So the total bill for the year was 
like R194 million.  That is how much GCIS paid in the year 2011/2012.  So I am 
going to deal with the two years that I was there 2011/2012 and 2012/2013.  So the 
first date ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Manyi you have just mentioned the total. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where about is it?  Is it on page 231? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  On my actual statement, the one I am reading now 
Chairperson on 231 that will be a list of – there is a total at the top ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  And the breakdown. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 65 of 147 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes so I am just talking to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The amount at the top is the total? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Is the total that 194. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Involving all publications? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Of all the publications. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes.  So then the total is R194 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is 199,132,58, is that right? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  It is 194 169 477,96. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I am sorry.  You are looking at the first column.  I am looking 
at the second one.  Now I know where you are. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Have you got it Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now I know where you are, yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  So that is, that is the global amount in terms of total 
spend on media by GCIS in the year 2011/2012.  So the amount there is 
R194 169 477,96 that is the global amount. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I assume that the reference to 2011/2012 refers to the 
20 
financial year? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Financial year. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes financial year, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 66 of 147 
 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  That is the financial year.  Okay so just on a high level 
Chairperson then I then on my statement which I am reading now I just 
...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you go to your statement the column if I may call it that 
where the total appears which you have told me about is at the top and then below 
that there is another column.  Is that the one where you say – is that the one that you 
say reflects the breakdown of the various publications? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes okay let me explain this what you see in front of you 
Chair.  What you see right at the top you see 2011/2012 financial year expend right 
at the top and the number there is R194 169 477,96.  That is right at the top. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  And then there is the next line is 2012/2013 and then 
2013/2014 there is a blank because I was not there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Now on – then you get this other table at the bottom 
supplier total expend that 199 that the Chair read is just for that one company called 
Adreach. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  It is just the one company. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Then the next one there is Ads24 which is your Naspers 
at R17 million.  So that is the one.  So what I have then done Chairperson to – so 
that there is about five pages of the spreadsheet that shows exactly which company 
was paid how much.  Now what I have then done, Chairperson just to take just the 
ones that constitute the lion's share and I put only those on my statement 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 67 of 147 
 
...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Just to say of this 194 here with the big hitters of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Because the others are just sharing the spoils. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So in terms of that then, Chairperson in the year 2011/2012 SABC 
was paid R68 889 851.50.  That is how much was paid just to SABC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Followed by just in terms of magnitudes, followed by 
Ads24.  Ads24 is a marketing arm of Naspers.  It is your City Press, Rapport all of 
that group, Chairperson.  That group got R17 995 122.27.  That is what that group 
got and then you have got Avusa at the time which is now Tiso Blackstar which is 
where we are here today in this building those people in that year they got 
R11 219 856.86 and then there was Etv.  Etv got R8 517 788.36 and then you get 
the New Age and the New Age got R8 691 634.86. 
 
So that is how the lay of the land was, Chairperson and if you compute 
that you then say what is the percentage of the New Age in this whole lot?  The 
actual percentage, Chairperson if you work out the ratio between the R8 million and 
20 
the 194 it is actually 4.5%. 
 
Okay so of the total add spend of 2011/2012 the New Age got its piece of 
the action was 4.5%.  The rest was everybody else as it were. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But is your – is the basis of your comparison correct?  I have not 
had time to study this. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 68 of 147 
 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I am thinking aloud.  Take for example you say SABC for 
example got a certain amount which is a big amount but SABC is big and has got 
different TV channels, has got numerous radio stations, I do not know how many 
they are but numerous. 
 
Now did you do the exercise of for example saying which radio stations for 
example what did each one of the radio stations receive under SABC?  What did 
each television channel under SABC receive because you see you are comparing 
them with New Age. 
 
You know as I understand New Age did not have other children.  It was 
10 
just New Age. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So it seems to me assume that we are talking of maybe a 
broadcasting company maybe competing with SABC one might have said well does 
it have – did it have as many radio stations? 
 
Did it have radio stations and television or was it just you know television?  
How many channels?  How many radio stations because the more it has namely 
radio stations and TV channels then the more you can understand if it gets in terms 
of revenue from advertisements because then that would go to different ones. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And if for example you were talking about a newspaper you know 
if you take a newspaper company that has a number of newspapers that it publishes 
and you look at what it got from GCIS, so let us say it has got five or six or whatever 
number of newspapers when you look at the revenue but you simply relate the 
revenue – the size of the revenue to the company and not to each individual 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 69 of 147 
 
newspaper you may well logically easily find that of course the revenue that New 
Age got is smaller than the revenue that this other newspaper company got because 
it has got many newspapers. 
 
To be fair you probably would need to take one newspaper under that 
group or that company which has go a lot of newspapers.  Look at one and then look 
at New Age and say okay let us compare.  What do you say to that? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes, no Chairperson I follow your logic but the figures 
here actually reflect that and by the way I am not complaining that they got more.  As 
you can see R68 million I am not complaining. 
 
Your line of thought is actually embedded in here and I am just showing 
10 
what is it that we actually got – what actually what TNA actually got but not that I am 
complaining but I am saying this is the facts as they stand. 
 
Now also if you maybe actually SABC is not even a competitor of TNA 
because it is electronic broadcast and all of that so there is other dynamics there and 
all that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  But put that aside, Chairperson.  Even with the other 
newspapers the issue for me is that they may also be however big in terms of 
circulation but there is a spillage in the circulation.  So the effective communication 
does not happen there because it is just a blunt tool.  It is just one paper that is 
20 
universal for the country and its usefulness to the various parts of the provinces 
leaves much to be desired. 
 
So therefore there must be some pricing consideration that takes into 
account target marketing versus a gunshot approach.  So what we have here you 
have got newspapers that have got call it a gunshot approach and you just hope for 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 70 of 147 
 
the best and all of that whereas when you do the weighting of the quality of 
distribution that is what it comes to, Chairperson that you may have a quantity of 
distribution but the qualitative aspects of that might be lacking and as far as 
government is concerned government is interested in both quality and quantity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But let us go back to my question.  Let us take average for 
example.  I understood you to be saying that is not one newspaper or what I wrong?  
Average? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Average yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes?  What they got was R199 million something, is it not? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  No, it is R199 000.  It is a small publication. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just repeat that please. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  R199 000. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay.  Okay. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which one did you – which one does City Press fall under?  You 
mentioned one that ...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Ads24, just below that one, Chairperson that R17 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Does that not have a number of newspapers? 
20 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  They have got Afrikaans Rapport.  They are a weekend 
newspaper mainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  So yes.  So it is quite a big statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So one weekend newspaper? 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 71 of 147 
 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  They have got City Press, has got one.  It is a weekend 
newspaper. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  There is no City Press on a daily basis. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes so it is not a number of newspapers under them?  That is 
what I am trying to look at bearing in mind what I was asking you earlier on. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In terms of comparing. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay I hear you, Chairperson.  The – I think the question 
is correct.  There would be Ads24.  Maybe that would include Rapport which is a 
10 
different newspaper, City Press, I do not know whatever else they might have but 
they are mainly those two. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Really for this for what we are paying for here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  That will be the weekend newspapers really in terms of 
this one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Do you accept the proposition that or do you have a problem 
with the proposition that it may be better if one compared a newspaper with a 
newspaper one – as opposed to one newspaper as opposed to a group of 
20 
newspapers in one company to get a picture of the ratio? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes well, Chairperson it is not as – I hear you but it is not 
as simplistic as that because there is also crosspollination.  So for instance you find 
that the one newspaper could cover – the one newspaper in the group maybe to that 
point the one newspaper could cover this particular aspect. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 72 of 147 
 
 
That same aspect can be covered in another sister publication and all 
that.  Similarly for instance you would find that with the New Age for instance they 
would have a system where much of what – they would cover whatever they cover in 
the newspaper but some of it would also be covered on the TV Section without you 
paying more as it were. 
 
So which mitigates the issue of a circulation of a newspaper because they 
have a TV aspect as well so when they go and do a value proposition a value 
proposition includes that although we pay for the newspaper but we will get some 
mentions on TV as it were. 
 
So the mechanical one on one comparison does not work.  The important 
10 
thing here, Chairperson is that these companies is just – it is the companies that you 
deal with a particular editorial line as it were and ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes of course the reason why we are where we are that is you and 
me on this question is because my understanding was that your initial approach 
...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was to simply say look at what Ads24 got for example.  Look at 
what New Age got.  It is much more smaller therefore blah, blah, blah and maybe I 
ask you to soon. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe you were still going to say ...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  No, no Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You knew better. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes.  No, Chairperson – I think Chairperson perhaps that 
goes to the crux of the different understandings of State Capture because the 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 73 of 147 
 
narrative out there is that the New Age was like gobbling up all government money 
so my response here is to show that they got what they got but let us not create the 
impression that this newspaper gobbled up all of government advertising.  They just 
took what was due to them which was in proportion to their size as it were.  So it is 
just talking to its size that to be four percent, 4.5% was probably in proportion to its 
size.  So let us not create the impression that 4.5% is actually the 100% of the 
spend.  This is the issue Chairperson.  If you had a New Age given its size being 
paid R68 million now you are talking, but if you have a New Age consuming only 
4.5% given its size you then say but what is this big fuss all about because it is in 
proportion to its size. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay all right thank you. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Maleka may or may not take that further but you may proceed. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay thank you Chairperson.  So on – so that is what are 
the numbers in terms of 2011/2012 and also Chairperson on Exhibit Q5 which is on 
page 236 to 240 it is the same kind of thing just different numbers, but there you can 
see that again SABC given its size and everything nobody is questioning them but 
they got R71 million.  Naspers got R20 million.  Tiso Blackstar got – they went from 
R11 million in 2011/2012 to more than double to R28,7 million and that does not 
mean then Chairperson that they doubled their circulation.  This is the thing.  They 
20 
went from R11 million without doubling their circulation, but they still more than 
doubled almost tripled actually their revenue Tiso Blackstar.  So that is the thing and 
I think after this Commission here they will be even much more richer as it were 
because this is still their group.  So that is what is happening there Chairperson.  Etv 
went from R8 million to R10 million and TNA went from R8,6 million to 7 it actually 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 74 of 147 
 
went down.  So in the year 2012/2013 it was just a sliver.  If you had these gadgets 
here just to show in proportion you will see then Chairperson that in 2012/2013 the 
New Age was actually 3,2%.  So the number is even smaller as it were.  So the 
notion that they got more than their fair share is really not supported by substance 
Chairperson.  So yes.  So that I think that covers the question of cost and all that in 
terms of that one.  Now Chairperson I want to deal with the issue of Mr Maleka 
wanted to know the issues surrounding the liquidation of the New Age.  Now and I 
am saying here Chairperson in order to understand that it is important to understand 
the – how New Age/ANN7 that media house was perceived.  It was perceived as 
friendly to government, but the sample I am going to show you is going to show that 
10 
it was a balanced publication which was half full as opposed to half empty but at the 
same time if there is evidence of capture as it were this publication would show that 
and I think Chairperson I want to say that I think the demise of this publication was 
really because of its focus on what I would call white collar corporate capture of the 
State.  This is what – this is a phenomena that I think is actually at play in South 
Africa the white collar corporate capture of the State and this is exemplified by the 
kind of reportage that the New Age was doing and so on.  So back in May 2017 
Chairperson there was a project that was happening at National Treasury.  That 
project was called IFMS, Integrated Financial Management System, which is a 
system meant to integrate HR finance and all that, and all that.  It is a project that 
20 
was conceived way back in 2005 but it started to be rolled out from 2009 a R4,3 
billion project.  That project Chairperson allow me to characterise it as a VBS cousin 
– cousin of VBS that project. 
 
You are sitting here Chairperson with – and I will go through some of the 
findings of the internal audit in terms of what happened in that project.  Total atrocity.  
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 75 of 147 
 
You will not believe Chairperson as I take you through that you could find such a 
malfeasance, I heard this new word here mentioned a lot.  You will be surprised 
Chairperson the malfeasance that is embedded at National Treasury that the New 
Age reported on, that ANN7 reported on, all of that which made these publications 
very unpopular with everybody that was part of this white collar corporate capture of 
the State.  Now I take you through Chairperson to – by way of example if you go to 
Exhibit 6.  Exhibit 6 ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  What page? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Page 241 to 246.  Have you got it Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I think I have got it. 
10 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  This was a meeting of SCOPA, a recent meeting of 
SCOPA which was reflecting on the things that happened in this period of this IFMS.  
Now there is a lot written here Chairperson.  There is only one important sentence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The document which is marked, which is at page 241 maybe we 
should not say exhibit whatever because that might confuse the reader of the 
transcript with other exhibits, but it is at 241 at Exhibit M1 it is written Parliamentary 
Monitoring Group or PMG, Parliamentary Monitoring Group. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes that is the one. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it says premium content from before 2017 is now available for 
everyone.  Integrated Financial Management Systems IFMS herein with National 
Treasury, Public Accounts (SCOPA) 5 June 2018.  Chairperson Mr T Ghodi (APC).  
Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  That is the one Chairperson.  I was only going to read of 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 76 of 147 
 
that Chairperson just one sentence.  It is about six pages of this including the 
minutes of SCOPA here, but I know Mr Maleka is pressed for time.  I will read just 
one sentence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Where it says; 
"Members noted that IFMS had cost R1,7 billion to date with nothing to 
show for it." 
 
I repeat Chairperson. 
"Members noted that IFMS had cost R1,7 billion to date with nothing to 
show for it." 
10 
 
Yes now that is very devastating here Chairperson coming out of 
...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I just wanted to say Mr Manyi it is important that you also get 
a fair opportunity to put what you want to put before the Commission. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So yes Mr Maleka may have complained about time but if there is 
something else in this document that you wish to highlight other than one sentence 
do feel free to do so. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay.  Thank you very much Chairperson for your 
indulgence.  So Chairperson this is what SCOPA had to say.  Now this was a project 
20 
of R4,3 billion.  So already almost halfway through we have not got a return on our 
investment.  Now what is crucial here Chairperson are the findings of this internal 
audit report and if you go to Exhibit Q7 on page 247 to 259 ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Manyi this document is it an auditor's report or what 
is it? 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 77 of 147 
 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes Chairperson it is an auditor's report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Internal audit report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And is PMG, Parliamentary Monitoring Group the name of the 
auditing company or ...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay I beg your pardon Chairperson.  That PMG 
...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  I just want to make sure ...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  We know who the authors of the document is before we proceed. 
10 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay, okay.  That PMG, that Parliamentary Monitoring 
Group is just the – it is a website where Parliament records electronically its 
proceedings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is a Parliamentary ...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Monitoring ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Entity ...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
20 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes Chairperson.  This is what recorded what transpired. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what is recorded here would have been recorded by SCOPA. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes it would have been recorded by SCOPA. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 78 of 147 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, all right, thank you. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes Chairperson.  They even have names.  If you go 
through there is about six pages of this.  They even have names of which member 
said what.  It is all there.  Our Parliament is very transparent. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay.  So Chairperson everything is here.  Now what was 
tabled there Chairperson when we were having this discussion are the findings.  
Now in terms of where are these findings?  I put this Exhibit Q7 here which you will 
find Chairperson on page 247 to 259 in your bundle.  This is what was tabled, but I 
summarise it on my statement Chairperson, but these are all the things that were 
10 
tabled there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  But just so that I do not shuffle a lot of paper too much.  In 
my statement I summarise what is here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  What the internal audit found Chairperson is that in fact 
what they found is that there were at least 54irregularities basically.  54 findings of 
irregularities and those findings were categorised into two.  Catastrophic and high 
risk.  Of the 54 findings that were there 49 of those findings were found to be 
catastrophic.  So what does that catastrophic mean?  It means extreme inefficient 
20 
and ineffective operations of control.  So basically on both these categories you 
could not put any reliance on the controls that were put there.  It was total chaos 
Chairperson.  Absolute, absolute chaos that they found there. 
 
They go through that report Chairperson, I have summarised here just some 
of the things that they mentioned in there.  One of the findings that they make there 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 79 of 147 
 
Chairperson is inadequate payment procedures.  So in other words you have no 
purpose, no scope, no objectives defined in the payment procedures.  That is what 
they found.  They found no budget information and no budget breakdown per year.  
This is National Treasury.  In other words no supporting documents to justify the line 
items towards the R4,3 billion.  They found no formal independent quality assurance 
function in place.  So basically this thing was like on auto pilot.  No one says you are 
on the right track, you are on the wrong track it is just free flow and all that. 
 
Then there is an office called PMO, Project Management Office.  They found 
excessive expenditure there.  They make an example Chairperson here that this 
PMO was allocated R145 million for five years, but what happened there within the 
10 
first 16 months they had already spent R70 million of that.  Almost 50% of that which 
shows that it was, in Xhosa Chairperson we would have said (Xhosa expression) I 
just do not know it in English.  Expenditure not related to the IFMS project.  I mean 
really Chairperson how could you find such a thing at National Treasury?  
Expenditure not related to the IFMS when it is us as accounting officers when I was 
in government when you have a thing like this they hit you with something very 
serious, they say unauthorised expenditure.  You have used money for the purpose it 
was not designed for.  They come with a very serious thing and they say financial 
misconduct and they could even criminalise you for this, but it is happening right 
there at National Treasury.  They spent something like R4 million to pay for 
20 
something different.  To pay for centralised supply database on a money that was 
meant for IFMS. 
 
The audit found that there were gaps identified within the SLA agreement, 
Service Level Agreement.  They found gaps which indicated, Chairperson that there 
were no penalty clauses, there were no performance criteria.  This is quite shocking, 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 80 of 147 
 
Chairperson that such malfeasance can happen at National Treasury. 
 
No timesheets to justify bills – hours billed.  No timesheets.  So in other 
words you know having worked in the consultancy space you put a line item there 
that you did research on this matter for three hours.  You bill for three hours.   These 
guys they did not have to do any of that but they were billing.  I then added up time – 
added up amount in terms of just that one line item how much did government 
spend?  R73 million was actually spent if you were to total up all those timesheets 
where there is no justification of hours and all that. 
 
There were also no sign offs or approval of invoices.  You know, 
Chairperson in government you cannot just pay.  An invoice must be approved and 
10 
what that approval process entails is to check if things happened.  It should go 
through all the checklist. 
 
In this case National Treasury did not have the checklist and so one just 
billed and it is just approved.  Internal audit also found there were duplicate payment 
so I find that quite interesting as to what that is.  Duplicate payment, Chairperson 
talks to what I call staggered payment in my language. 
 
So what would happen is that there would be a bill, a bill that says we are 
charging you from services from the 1st of this month to the 25th of the month.  But 
then at the same time in that same period you will have another bill in the middle of 
that that will say from the 10th of this month maybe to the 1st of the next month. 
20 
 
So you have an area that is overlapping right there but both those 
invoices would be paid as if it is two pieces of work happening in sequence.  So 
actually it was a serious issue that was happening there.  Now this is just 
Chairperson as it relates to payment services. 
 
The auditors did not look at how those companies were procured.  They 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 81 of 147 
 
did not look at all other things.  This is just on the one line item on payment of 
services and this is how much atrocity they found. 
 
I shudder to think what would have happened if they had also audited how 
all these suppliers were also part of this, Chairperson.  So this does not help in 
terms of engendering confidence.  You know you hear, Chairperson people saying 
Treasury must be protected. 
 
I am saying to myself that is very true.  Treasury must be protected but 
the question is from who and I would say, Chairperson this is a kind of thing that 
National Treasury must be protected from but the narrative given out there is that it 
is otherwise everything well and Chairperson I think Mr Pravin Gordhan said 
10 
something very important here that when you root out the cancer you must root out 
all of it. 
 
I agree with him and this is part of the cancer that must be rooted out, 
Chairperson.  I totally agree with him.  We must root out all the cancer.  So then what 
followed so I am mentioning this, Chairperson as some of the things that have made 
this media house unpopular because then there was ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you are saying – are you saying that this is one of the issues 
that the New Age published for which it might have made it unpopular in certain 
circles? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Correct, Chairperson.  If you look – if you go to Exhibit Q8 
20 
it is actually there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is the page? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  On page 260.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  On page 260 is an example of what New Age would have 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 82 of 147 
 
reported on this matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes.  So that is what the headline Treasury chaos and all 
that.  So that is what New Age would do and then we would have Treasury people 
saying we are targeting – they are saying Treasury is being targeted and all of that 
when in fact the New Age was reporting the truth something based on an internal 
audit report of National Treasury. 
 
This is what the New Age was reporting on and then the response is that 
National Treasury is being unfairly targeted.  There is no unfair targeting.  We are 
exposing the rot that is being unearthed by the internal audit of National Treasury not 
10 
of anybody else. 
 
National Treasury Audit is the one that did this work and this is what is 
happening there.  So Chairperson as I got towards the closure then this Chairperson 
in my view talks to – talks to the next thing I want to talk to is the issue of the – what 
then happened. 
 
Then a forensic investigation was ordered just to cut a long story short.  
There was a forensic investigation and I think ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Manyi.  I did not look at the time.  It helps when 
counsel is standing there because then they can tell me it is time for a lunch 
adjournment.  I just realised now on my watch it is 13:11.  How long still do you think 
20 
you would take? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Right, Chairperson let us go to lunch.  I have got 
...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is better to go to lunch? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 83 of 147 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  All right.  We will take the lunch adjournment and we will 
resume at 14:15.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
HEARING ADJOURNS 
HEARING RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Manyi? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Thank you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How much more time do you think you might need before you 
finish?  I just want to have an idea. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Half an hour. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  All right let us hear. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay.  Okay.  That does not include questions in between. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Unless you extend it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes no I was not counting. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is just you on your own. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay.  Then, Chairperson just perhaps just to close on the 
previous presentation I just asked the team here to just put that slide on.  Can you 
put it on?  Just for the visual impression of those levels in context that is what was 
20 
the spend of TNA through the GCIS system. 
 
Everybody else is in that big pie and so on.  So when we were having this 
discussion you see because Chairperson part of the narrative out there is that 
whatever was paid on TNA was like irregular.  There is no such a thing.  Everything – 
all processes were followed and all of that.  There is nothing irregular there.  So the 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 84 of 147 
 
impression created that if you spend one cent you spend one cent too much.  That 
approach is really misguided. 
 
So we need to just be clear that all of this is money that was – there was 
value derived for that money but at the same time when people pretend as if TNA 
captured GCIS is actually not true.  These are the only slivers that they got there.  
This is information from GCIS.  So that one then Chairperson I just wanted to just 
flag. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that in the bundle? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  That is the one that is on the statement, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  Okay. 
10 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes so I just wanted it here because I see here that the 
photocopier is black and white.  They do not have colour printers here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay.  No that is fine. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we done then with the slide? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes that slide is done, Chairperson.  We can remove it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay.  Then Chairperson as I close on IFMS I would have 
thought – I was really disappointed Chair.  I must say this by the attitude of National 
Treasury when I was asking for information and I say to them that I am not coming 
20 
here last minute because I am disorganised so to peak. 
 
I am coming to them last minute because I only knew last week that there 
will be further questions that I needed to ask and therefore I need more information 
so I tried to appeal to them to say this is in the interest of achieving the objectives.  
Can you please give me this report which I want to use as an example and they 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 85 of 147 
 
threw all the red tape they can throw at me, Chairperson to say – I spoke to the 
spokesperson Jabulani Skhakhane.  He was saying to me no you must remember 
that you must go through the process and it is a 30 day process that you must go 
through in all this before we release this information and by the way, Chairperson 
having had the GCIS experience because I had the same kind of attitude when you 
are asking for information even 30 days later there is no guarantee that they will give 
you. 
 
They will come up with some clause that gives them the right not to give 
this thing to you and then you have to appeal to the Minister like I did at GCIS but 
this time around I could not appeal to the Minister because they have not refused.  
10 
They have simply said we are still with our processes.  We cannot just give and all 
that.  So Chairperson I had to rely on the rules of the Commission Rule 6.1 which 
allows any evidence so to speak so I used that Rule 6.1 to bring the report because I 
do not want the Commission to be frustrated. 
 
The report is right here, Chairperson and this is from the whistleblower.  
This is exact as it is so we will see 30 days later what happens but the report is here 
so that the work of the Commission is not frustrated by red tape.  I really would have 
thought that given the enthusiasm that National Treasury was on this place talking 
about this thing that they would say okay quickly here but they did not.  They did not 
want to give it to me but that is the situation. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the report that you are showing me is it the report from which 
...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  The findings come. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You got that – what page was it?  230?  231? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  That is where the fundings were, Chair. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 86 of 147 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  The funding.  Where the funding ...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not the funding the revenues for different media. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  No.  This report, Chairperson is the one ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  For the project from Treasury. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Project from Treasury. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the report that was ...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Tabled at SCOPA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That served before SCOPA. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  That is right, Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  All right. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  This is the report.  This is where the R1.7 billion 
...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  There is nothing to show for it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  This is the detail right here.  So I will leave this copy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, you are making that available? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes I am making – somebody can take it here.  There it is 
right here. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  But you are not talking to it.  You are just making it 
available. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  No, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I think ...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I am leaving it here. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 87 of 147 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think the Legal Team will take it and then in due course they will 
indicate what is to be made of it. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Then, Chairperson a very important point because we are 
talking about the capture here and I am going to wrap up, Chairperson.  It is my 
contention, Chairperson actually there has never been a time when the state had not 
been captured.   
 
There has never been a time.  Not only has the state been captured, 
Chairperson even the laws have been captured and I am going to make a very quick 
10 
example.  Even the laws have been captured.  We have a very powerful and 
enabling clause in the Constitution of this country, Chairperson Section 217 that talks 
with the procurement.  That Section, Chairperson has got three sub Sections and the 
one Section talks to efficiencies you know everything about the Sections of 
everybody keeps quoting but there are other two Sections that nobody bothers about 
and the other two sub Sections for instance sub Section (2) says, let me just perhaps 
just to revise memories it is a very quick one, Chairperson. 
 
Procurement 217.  Sub Section 1 says: 
"When an organ of state in the national, provincial or local sphere of 
government or any other institution identified in national legislation 
20 
contracts for goods and services it must do so in accordance with a 
system which is fair, equitable, transparent, competitive and cost 
effective." 
 
Everybody stops there.  Even PFMA stops here but the Constitution says 
sub Section one which I have just read does not prevent the organs of state or 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 88 of 147 
 
institutions referred to in that sub Section from influencing a procurement policy 
providing for: 
a) Category of preference in the location of contracts. 
b) The protection or advancements of person or categories of persons 
disadvantaged by unfair discrimination. 
 
Then sub Section three says: 
”National legislation must prescribe a framework within which the 
policy referred to in sub Section two must be implemented.” 
Now you would then think then Chairperson that here is a directive from 
the Constitution to say there must be a national legislation to effect sub Section 2 but 
10 
the national legislation which we have in the form of a PPFA Procurement Policy 
Framework Act 5 of 2000 makes reference to what the Constitution says but what it 
does is something else. 
 
So what this Act does, Chairperson and the reason I am saying this is 
because in the – in this forensic investigation when Treasury was to brief out for this 
job it then said it must go on a 90/10 principle.  So what that means is that when they 
allocate the point they must allocate the points, 90% of the points must go to the 
lower price, 10% must be for historically disadvantaged considerations whether it is 
BEE or whatever. 
 
So what that effectively means Chairperson this is the most elegant way 
20 
to exclude black business in things because in terms of economies of scale black 
business is not about to be able to compete toe to toe with the established white 
corporate in this country.  So when you say 90/10 you are using a legislative curtain 
to shield your actual message.  The actual message here is that you are looking for 
the established big corporates as it were.  You do not want anybody else. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 89 of 147 
 
 
Now this is the challenge.  I mean last time there was an interaction here 
between the Chairperson and somebody.  I think it was Mr Gordhan or somebody 
about the issues of pricing.  Now Chairperson it is impossible for black business to 
quote on exact same price with an established company for a number of reasons.  
Firstly, it is important for all of us in this country to understand the apartheid spatial 
development that because of that most black businesses that are in the townships or 
everywhere if they have to compete for the same opportunity for somebody in town 
those people have got transport costs that they must put into the product.  They 
have got all kinds of things, because you stay in the township you are deemed to be 
in a high risk area.  So when you go borrow money you borrow it at prime plus three 
10 
when others here that live in town they borrow it at prime minus two.  So therefore at 
the end of the day including economies of scale an established corporate will always 
beat you with price. 
 
Now if you have a government policy that says I am only interested in the 
lowest price it is an elegant way of saying black business do not bother taking, 
participating in this.  So that is how captured the laws are of this country.  I then 
move on Chairperson to that forensic.  That forensic has been done and we await 
the report and in my statement ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry let us go back to what you were talking about just now. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course you may be right that if the work is to be done in town 
and you are based in the township and you have to compete with other competitors 
who are based in town you might have a certain disadvantage in terms of costs and 
so on because of you have to travel and so on and so on and other factors, but – 
and that may well exclude certain black people, but of course to the extent that there 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 90 of 147 
 
may be black businesses if we can call them that for convenience in town then that 
disadvantage in terms of costs, transport costs for example, would not be there.  
There may be others but at least that would not be there, will I be right? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Well except that Chairperson those black businesses in 
town are faced with high rental costs because they do not own property, they have to 
lease that property and they compete with people that own the fixed buildings.  So 
that is a problem.  So you find that your cost items as black business in town are far 
higher than your next door neighbour. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no, no I understand that is why I was saying there may be 
other, other disadvantages ...(intervenes). 
10 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay yes Chair ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  But at least the one for travelling would not be there if we are 
talking about black business that is based in town. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay, yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I was just using a quick example. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  But it goes deeper this thing Chairperson, because there 
20 
is a whole lot of things because what you then do as well now that Chairperson 
seems to be interested in this there is also other things like things that affect your 
liquidity.  As black business your suppliers expect you to pay cash here and now.  
The established businesses they do not have to do this.  They can pay 60 days later 
and all that.  Those are all the arrangements that enable them to do things in a much 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 91 of 147 
 
more competitive way.  Now ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, there is obviously just no doubt that, you know, if you are 
doing business as a black person and mostly you will not be on the same level in 
terms of economically with your white counterpart.  At least most of the time. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes and the Constitution recognised that and the 
Constitution said please put together a legislation that is going to cover that so that 
people are protected.  People are preferred, but then the legislation that we have 
seeks to create, seeks to treat unequal people equally.  That is what it seeks to do 
Chairperson and you appear like you will be asking for favours when you are trying 
to say but this is not fair.  The playing field is not the same.  The playing field is not 
10 
level yet so we cannot have a situation where we are approached as if since 1994 
we just switched on the light, everything is equal.  No the landscape is still very 
much skewed.  So we need to have an understanding of that.  So Chairperson 
without dealing with any specific issue the general principle that the products from 
black business for them to be a bit more, to have a bit of a premium is something 
that must be expected and it is something that the state which purports to be a 
developmental state needs to take that as a given that will have that issue, otherwise 
it really means that the black people must not be in business. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay.  Thank you Chairperson.  Then I move on then 
20 
Chairperson to then just in line, just in keeping with my statement this is the last 
page Chairperson of my statement just to say that another company was appointed 
and it was meant to have submitted the report and on that day I do not know what 
happened, but bottom line ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you still within Treasury? 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 92 of 147 
 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes Chairperson. Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I am just rounding off Chairperson.  Bottom line is that as 
things stand right now I saw a Tweet, you know, the Chairperson of SCOPA is very 
active on Twitter so he keeps live updates.  Although the first expectation was that 
on the 20th of November there would be that report but things happened between 
that company and National Treasury so the report did not happen, but on the 22nd of 
November I think last week Thursday then that report was given raw as it is.  I am 
sure National Treasury will still comment on it, but that report is there.  I think it will 
be interesting to see what those auditors, what that forensic audit has unearthed 
10 
there on that. 
 
So that wraps up that one then Chairperson just as an example of the 
kinds of things that made TNA and ANN7 unpopular because these are the things 
they cut both way.  It really means that National Treasury must think that we are 
attacking them as it were when in fact we want to do what Mr Pravin Gordhan said 
that we must root out the cancer wherever it is there.  So root out all the cancer.  So 
that is really what we thought we were doing there Chairperson.  So I move on 
Chairperson this is another critical story about the white collar capture of the state.  
This is classic what I am going to describe to Chairperson now.  This is classic stuff 
that to try and find illegality and unlawfulness in this thing, the struggle, is elegantly 
20 
done.  It starts off somewhere and this is what we reported on.  It starts off 
somewhere in November 2006 with a very innocent memo which I put as Exhibit 9 
on pages 261 to 271. 
 
So this memo from SARS Chairperson is a very interesting memo.  This 
memo seeks to sanitise the appointment of a particular service provider at SARS in 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 93 of 147 
 
2006.  So in a nutshell what happens here is that the bid, this company gets brought 
in not through open tender process and some argument gets made about emergency 
and all that and therefore regulation 16(a)(6.4) gets invoked which talks to it is not 
practical to go on an open tender. 
 
So this company gets appointed and part of the reason used is that it is 
cheap when others were quoting R300-something million or R400 million this 
particular company was saying they can do this thing for R100 million.  So then it 
sort of like make sense okay R100 million and we need this thing here now and all of 
this let us just get on and get this company on board.  So, and the person that 
makes recommendation, part of the officials of SARS that makes the 
10 
recommendation instead of having a bid evaluation or a Bid Adjudication Committee 
even for the handful that were selected the person says in my opinion I think we 
should invite this one, this one, this one.  So the opinion counted instead of a proper 
committee that is supposed to do this.  So one man decides that in my opinion we 
must do – we must only look at this one, this one, this one.  So and the first one said 
I am not interested.  The other one said about R400 million or something and this 
one said R100 million and said okay, this is our horse, we take this one. 
 
Now the point here Chairperson is that what has since happened since 
the installation of this company and I am deliberately leaving names out because I 
am here to deal with the principle not to lambaste people.  I am here to deal with the 
20 
principle but all the details are here Chairperson.  If the Commission wants names 
mentioned I will take direction from the Commission but I am leaving them 
deliberately.  The names are here.  This company starts off at a R100 million and 
then what then happens since then to date this company has been getting its 
participation renewed internally no processes involved. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 94 of 147 
 
 
By 2016 already this company was racking in a billion Rand.  This is the 
one that started subtlety at one million and all processes to make it in terms of the 
Constitution, in terms of PFMA, cost effectiveness, openness and transparency and 
all that none of that.  Internally this thing would get renewed, renewed, renewed.  So 
what you have now I think now if you look at the IT bill of SARS I am told it is sitting 
at something like R8 billion, but this company is probably 1,5 or something of that.  I 
have not got that number, the fresh number as it is, but it is in that astronomical 
figure as things stand right now.  So what does this mean Chairperson?  Now what 
we have this company plays a very important role in that it is involved in e-filing and 
all that.  So now if you are to say this company must go on an open bid now and 
10 
stop everything maybe somebody else a very solid argument is going to be made 
about how this is going to disrupt the collection of taxes and therefore you have a 
company that is there, that came in through ways that are not so transparent but 
now this company you cannot dislodge it as things stand.  It is almost a real risk now 
to dislodge this company and that is what I call white collar corporate capture of the 
state, because you then begin to understand Chairperson why even PFMA, PFMA it 
incentivises service providers that have got sort of government experience. 
 
So what you find with PFMA is that if you are a new player PFMA is not 
friendly to you.  PFMA is friendly to somebody who has got a foot in the door.  So 
even if I was to have a state of the art IT company today, but my chances of bidding 
20 
against this particular company at SARS are zero because this company is going to 
argue that they have already got the territory, everything is smooth, to take them out 
will cause so much disruption.  Someone is going to work out how much confidence 
will be lost in the system and systemic risk and all of those things will be argued. 
 
So you now have a company that is going to be entrenched like that, 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 95 of 147 
 
Chairperson.  So that is the situation that you find there, Chairperson.  So this is the 
things that TNA and ANN7 report on and obviously we can see it cuts both ways.  
Private sector does not like this that we keep exposing some shenanigans that they 
do in collaboration with some of these state departments as it were.  So that is it 
Chairperson.  I mean even as we speak now I am told that this company is now 
being used to provide services on other departments. 
 
So what we have now we have SARS as almost an agent so other 
companies do not have to go bidding.  They ask SARS that we know we have got a 
good IT system.  So SARS has now become some kind of a broker.  They now 
service other departments and the other departments paying to SARS, SARS pays 
10 
into this company.  That is the network that is in place so that for me, Chairperson is 
the blueprint of white collar corporate capture of the state that really we need to be 
dealing with and by the way Chairperson some of us when we make these points 
people think we are deflecting from Guptas. 
 
No.  If Guptas, we must put this very clear Chairperson, if Guptas are 
found to have done anything untoward, anything that is wrong the full wrath of the 
law must be – they must suffer the full wrath of the law but the law must not have 
eyes. 
 
The law must be blind.  The law must apply to all malfeasance wherever it 
rears its ugly head.  We cannot have – we cannot turn a blind eye on some of these 
20 
things and also Chairperson the reason I am raising this I am not digging up stuff of 
pre 1994. 
 
This is current stuff as we are sitting now that IMFS, Chairperson is going 
to go this route.  Once that system is embedded in the state no other service 
provider will be able to ever walk in there.  Those that are there through the IMFS 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 96 of 147 
 
have embedded themselves for lifetime. 
 
That is how it is going to be.  So that is the white collar corporate capture 
that I am talking about.  So that concludes my issues around why TNA was 
...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Liquidated? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes, Chairperson, was hated by everybody.  So the rest of 
the liquidation thing is well covered in the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the questions. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Mr Maleka will ask whatever he wants to ask.  I am not 
going to go through that but then I have got two other questions – issues quickly 
10 
Chairperson which are also emanating from the questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  The one thing, Chairperson is the issue around the 
Standard Bank affidavit which has been put here as to that talks to what was I doing 
basically at the IMC ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  At the meeting between one or other bank. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or banks at a meeting that seems to have been Chaired by 
Minister Zwane. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes, that one. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  So Chairperson I have put an affidavit to this matter and 
in the affidavit I point out that I actually attended the meeting at the directive/request 
of the Minister.  I was the Advisor to the Minister when this was happening, part time 
Advisor at that. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 97 of 147 
 
 
I was an Advisor to the Minister so I went there as an Advisor.  So the 
question is I must relate what transpired in that meeting.  I think that request, 
Chairperson borders on being unlawful in this way.  You see Chairperson if you – 
there are two groups of people in a meeting. 
 
There are meeting participants.  There are people that are in attendance.  
If I go to a board meeting in the board meeting you could have the board members.  
If they say the quorum of the board meeting is five people and you have brought – 
you have invited all other departmental people there can be 20 in that meeting. 
 
If the quorum is five board members and you have got two board 
members notwithstanding that you have got 20 attendees that meeting is not correct.  
10 
That meeting will not happen.  So to then ask an attendee of a meeting to relate 
what happened in the meeting is just not making sense because also what you say 
carries nothing, carries no weight because first and foremost I am not a 
spokesperson of the IMC. 
 
So I have no mandate to be dealing with that.  If the Commission is 
interested what really happened there the Commission and Chairperson who is 
known and the Chairperson was reporting to Cabinet.  In fact what I have done there 
Chairperson in support and just to show this point on Exhibit 11 page 273 to 274 I 
have shown – I have brought here a Cabinet statement.  I only have got two pages.  
I have highlighted 4.7 of these two pages. 
20 
 
In that it says on 4.7 of those two pages on 273 to 274 it says: 
"Cabinet received a report from the Ministers of Mineral Resources, 
Labour and Finance following their constructive engagement with 
stakeholders in the banking industry.  The outcome of this report will 
be communicated in due course." 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 98 of 147 
 
 
The only reason I am raising this Chairperson is that it shows that there 
was a process that was flowing and if anybody is really interested they are the 
people that can be approached as Cabinet.  You know Chairperson I also used to sit 
– I used not to sit – I used to attend Cabinet meetings but the fact that I attend 
Cabinet meetings that does not give me a right to then explain to people what 
happened in Cabinet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well not really Mr Manyi.  If you were present in an office or at a 
room where something was said or was done whether you were there officially or 
unofficially, whether you had a right to be there or not have a right to be there as 
long as you witnessed something, you saw something or you heard something being 
10 
said you can be asked to say what did you see, what did you hear.  What happened 
while you were present? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the question of whether you are authorised or not might be 
another question but simply from the point of view of saying you were present you 
saw something or you must have seen something, you must have heard something 
tell us what you heard, tell us what you saw.  That is legitimate. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I am only ...(intervenes). 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I am just mentioning that point. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It may be that based on what you are saying maybe I can leave it 
to Mr Maleka to deal with it if he wants to ask you questions about it but I thought I 
must just clarify that part yes. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 99 of 147 
 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay.  Okay, no Chairperson I think because it also 
happened, I do not know a while ago.  All I can remember it was a decorum of the 
meeting.  The meeting had a very good decorum.  There was no screaming at 
anybody and the meeting was a proper meeting, exchange of views and whatever. 
 
Discussion happened.  The details are contained in the minutes of the 
meeting which the secretariat can provide I think if asked. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, no thank you.  You are done? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  That is all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you.  Mr Maleka? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  And then the last point, Chairperson ...(intervenes). 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Then the last point part of the documents I was given 
what is commonly referred to as the Gupta leaks and so on.  Now Chairperson I just 
needed to understand something on this thing.  I must first be clarified in this.  
Except for the one email that is there – except for the one email in January 2011 
where there was an invite but that invite in the list of the things that was given there 
is a spreadsheet of people that were invited.  This was an invite to the India versus 
South Africa or of India and South Africa friendship of 150 years that was happening 
at KZN. 
 
But in that spreadsheet I was invited in my capacity as BMF not as 
20 
President of the BMF not as government and so on.  The rest of the other emails that 
are there are emails when I was not in the public service.  I was not in GCIS and so 
on.  I was not in government.  Now I am perplexed Chairperson as to what is actually 
going on here.  Here am I a business person, a private sector person sending emails 
or receiving emails or whatever with another private sector person. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 100 of 147 
 
 
No government involvement is mentioned there, absolutely nothing.  It is 
just justified to characterise it briefly Chairperson it would be an email talking about 
room allocation.  I do not even know the people that were dealing with those rooms.  
Some operational matter about no let us arrange rooms for them but if I look at the 
timing and everything it was during the wedding.  I have always been on public, 
Chairperson to say I attended the Gupta wedding. 
 
It was never hidden that point.  I see – I saw nothing wrong then.  I see 
nothing wrong today and so on.  If they were to invite me tomorrow to another 
wedding I would still go and so on.  So for me there is no issue attending a wedding 
and then if it is not a wedding then it would be maybe a CV that can be linked to 
10 
have come from me and so on but even that Chairperson we do this all the time in 
the private space to send CV's of people around helping people to look for jobs and 
so on. 
 
I have not understood why is this – what is the context of this but this is 
what Mr Maleka has been explaining and as I close I just want to say something but 
as I close Chair I also wanted because the impression that I have is that this 
Commission is supposed to be impartial, fair and make sure that everybody is 
treated equally. 
 
Now one of the things I just found very strange is that in these leaks 
Chairperson one thing that is not shown is what I have.  Like for instance this picture 
20 
here it is in the exhibit ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it in the bundle here?  There is a bundle here. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I think it must be in the bundle there, Chairperson.  Did 
you find it there?  Yes it is in the bundle there, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 101 of 147 
 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  This picture it might – maybe somebody ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  What page is it? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Can I just ask the Registrar to take it to the Chair there? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or maybe if they tell me the page ...(intervenes). 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Chair, we have put it in a bundle as page 275. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, it will still be put in the bundle or it is? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  No it is already in the bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay 275? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
10 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Now this picture Chairperson as you are going through it 
has got Advocate Thuli Madonsela with the Guptas.  Now this ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  This picture is not featured in the emails that are featured.  
Maybe I am trying to understand the fairness of this process here Chairperson that 
here am I a former government person and I am being followed about where I send 
emails and I do not send emails. 
 
Advocate Thuli Madonsela would have been sent an email to invite her to 
this thing.  But I am not understanding that she is here to explain as to why did you 
get an email from the Guptas but everybody else must answer this Chairperson.  
20 
Where is the levelling of the playing field from this Commission? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you, Mr Manyi.  I understand you are done and Mr Maleka 
is now free to ask questions.  He has heard you what you have said. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 102 of 147 
 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Mr Manyi before I get to the details of your evidence 
in the written statements many as they are that you have now submitted to the 
Commission and also your oral expansion of that evidence from this morning can I 
ask you this? 
 
As you sit here today in the witness box do you accept that members of 
the Gupta family and the businesses that they own have been seriously implicated 
by way of credible evidence led before the Chairperson up to this point in serious 
malfeasance of State Capture? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Well Chairperson my approach in the issues affecting 
anyone in this country is that South Africa is a Constitutional democracy.  South 
10 
Africa is a rule of law country.  I mean I was astounded when Ms Barbara Hogan 
said to me I was at Eskom when I was not at Eskom as an example, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, Mr Manyi it will be helpful if you start by just answering the 
question.  For example he is asking – Mr Maleka is asking whether as you sit there 
you accept – whether you accept that in evidence led before this Commission the 
Guptas – Gupta family has been seriously implicated in corruption so one answer 
might be no, I do not accept that. 
 
Another answer might be yes I accept that but maybe you might want to 
contextualise your acceptance or your rejection of that proposition.  So I am just 
mentioning that because if you start when you answer in that way it will make it easy 
20 
to make progress. 
 
You are not prevented from contextualising where it is necessary but it 
helps if the first response goes to the question. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Well my answer is I do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Yes? 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 103 of 147 
 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes and Chairperson let me just finish then, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  You see I was very hopeful Chairperson when the Estina 
Project was brought before the courts in Bloemfontein.  I was really hoping.  I 
thought that was an open/close case and so on, but when the state lost its case 
there I was not sure anymore as to what is going on here and ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes ...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  And that was a civil case. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  So therefore Chairperson I do not know where this is 
10 
going to end up. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Because when the State went there it went there I think 
with a lot more confidence than what I have seen here.  People that I have seen 
here I think Chairperson I must even if I have got to say so myself I must take the 
cup in terms of producing documentary evidence of things that I am talking about 
and people that have been here have been very poetic Chairperson without 
producing evidence and so I just do not know if we can just implicate people purely 
based on poetry. 
 
People came here and they spoke, they spoke, they spoke, they spoke.  I 
20 
was really hoping that they are going to do something similar to what I am doing.  It 
might not be the best but I have tried Chairperson to listen to your counsel when you 
say people must bring evidence to corroborate.  I tried to do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I did not find it here Chairperson so I am struggling. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 104 of 147 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  To convict people ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes ...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Based on poetry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I just wanted to say just bear in mind that Mr Maleka did not 
say – he did not ask you whether you accept that they are guilty or not.  He simply 
asked you whether you accept that they are seriously implicated. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I think Chairperson it is important that maybe some of us 
that are not in the legal profession these things get explained. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  In that there are two things for me.  You can either be 
mentioned or implicated.  For me I draw a line.  You can be mentioned, they have 
been mentioned here but to be implicated for me is a step higher than being 
mentioned.  So to be implicated there must be corroborating evidence to say indeed 
you did this.  So for me that is implication.  So that is what I am saying I struggled to 
find evidence to corroborate the oral evidence that people were giving here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Mr Maleka? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Mr Manyi do not un-contextualise my question.  I 
have not asked you about proceedings involving the Gupta family relating to Estina 
in other courts.  I have asked you questions about evidence in this Commission.  You 
20 
have been following the proceedings of this Commission since it began, correct? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  No, in and out.  I have been listening and not listening 
because sometimes I would come and listen here and be very frustrated that my 
whole morning is gone and I am not seeing any evidence.  People are just talking 
and talking and talking.  So maybe out of that frustration maybe when I left they 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 105 of 147 
 
produced something, but most of the times that I was here I was just seeing people 
giving us theoretical perspectives on matters and all that.  So I do not have, I mean 
as I sit here now this is, I am speaking under oath. I sit here and now I cannot point 
to any piece of evidence that anybody here put on this table, but I know a lot of lyrics 
that have waxed on everything, but ...(intervenes). 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  You accept that the proceedings of this Commission 
are televised live and they are reported on credibly in news media both print and 
television almost daily?  Do you accept that that happens? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I – two things, yes I accept that happens, but I also think 
the Commission must not take it for granted that we are glued on TV and reading 
10 
newspapers.  For instance I do not buy newspapers just on principle, because of the 
amount of distortions that they have to correct people all the time.  This morning on 
Twitter for instance being here I make a clear statement of reading from the internal 
audit report that whatever point I was making and then you have a journalist here 
twisting that and saying that was a SCOPA observation or something and yet I was 
very clear that these were the findings of the internal audit report.  So I have lost 
confidence in the newspapers.  I do not buy, I do not read newspapers. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes but you watched the proceedings of this TV – of 
this – of the proceedings of this Commission on TV.  That is why you were able to 
see what Ms Williams said about you in your absence from this Commission but on 
20 
TV, correct? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I think it is important to contextualise that.  I was written a 
letter, I was told that on the 31st of August she is going to be here.  So I had a vested 
interest in that particular case, yes, but I do not get letters from the Commission 
every day to listen to everybody. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 106 of 147 
 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Mr Manyi you know, do you not, that Mr Maseko 
came to tell the Chairperson about the extent of unlawful instructions imposed upon 
him by a member of the Gupta family, you know that? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Mr Maseko came here and testified almost or the 
whole day about that evidence.  Do you have reason to doubt what he told the 
Chairperson? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Do I have reason to doubt? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  What Mr Maseko told the Chairperson about the true 
nature of the instruction given to him or imposed upon him by a member of the 
10 
Gupta family? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes I have reason to doubt. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Do you have reason to doubt what then Deputy 
Minister Jonas told the Chairperson about the offer that was made to him by a 
member of the Gupta family? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Let me start with the first one.  I will come to that one. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Please answer the second question because you 
have answered the first.  You can explain the second question later on. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes I have reason to doubt. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Minister Nene then Minister of Finance came here to 
20 
tell the Chairperson a number of things including the way he was dismissed.  Do you 
have reason to doubt what he told the Chairperson in that regard? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I did not listen to Mr Nene's one, but I listened to these 
two. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  You did not listen to the evidence of Minister Nene. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 107 of 147 
 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  No. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Did you follow the evidence of Minister Gordhan? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  That is where I struggled actually.  I came very excited.  I 
booked off the whole day to listen to Minister Gordhan because I thought because he 
was the Minister of Finance he is going to have tangible information, paper trail and 
all that.  I struggled, I sat here and I listened and I listened and I lost concentration to 
be honest. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  But you heard what he said to the Chairperson even 
though you may have lost concentration. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I think by definition it means if you have lost concentration 
10 
you cannot hear as effective. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Do you have reason ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Maleka I am sorry.  Well for what it is worth Mr Manyi let me 
mention that if I recall correctly Mr Gordhan like I think a number of people who were 
at National Treasury at some stage have indicated and I think he also indicated that 
he has other matters in regard to which he wanted to give evidence, but he was 
advised by the Commission's Legal Team that that would need to come later 
because at this stage the Commission is dealing with certain specific terms of 
reference.  So I just want to mention that he might not be done ...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay ...(intervenes). 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  In terms of things that he wants to cover. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay Chair thank you for that Chair.  I will listen when he 
does that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Mr Manyi you heard the evidence of Mr Fuzile? 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 108 of 147 
 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes partly. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  You heard that part of his evidence when he told the 
Chairperson about what Mr Godongwana said to him ...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  About Mr? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Godongwana. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  About the phone call or something? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes I heard that part. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  You heard that evidence? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
10 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes.  Do you have any reason to doubt what he said 
to the Chairperson as you sit here today? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Well yes I do. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Just explain to me why? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Because I would have thought, you see, I could start from 
the beginning the three people that I say I have reason to doubt so that it is clear.  
For instance let us start with Mr Maseko.  He said the President said (African 
language phrase) Gupta.  Now in other words and the Chairperson was very clear to 
explain that statement bullet by bullet what it means that help these Gupta brothers 
so to speak.  Now I was a DG myself.  So Ministers because they are public reps 
20 
they are the face of the department.  They are the chief face of the department.  So 
people interface with Ministers, people interface with the President because these 
are the people that go on the ballot box. 
 
So people go to them naturally to say I need this, I need that and the 
Presidents and the Ministers do not have the apparatus.  The only thing they can 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 109 of 147 
 
point to is to the DG and the DG must then point the people to processes that must 
be followed and all that.  I mean if Mr Maseko had said that the President said to him 
I do not care about what processes that must be followed and all that.  I did not hear 
him saying this.  He just said help.  So that would have been said to me by a number 
of people or Ministers to say help these people and we would call the people in, you 
explain to them how the process works, that is helping the people.  So that is what – 
that is my understanding, but the characterisation of that request was a 
characterisation that could lead to only one and one conclusion only that the 
President was sort of getting him to do something that was unlawful.  So that is why I 
do not, I have doubts about the rest of everything else. 
10 
 
Mr Jonas for instance he makes a claim that he makes and the next thing he 
is not even clear who actually did this.  At one point he says it is Mr Ajay Gupta, then 
he is not clear, then somebody else, then I am not sure if what is this thing and so on 
and by the way part of the disturbing thing Chairperson which is in the public domain 
is that they were in some hotel and then they drove with Duduzane.  I am saying to 
myself why does the Deputy Minister leave his bodyguards and everybody and drive 
with this young chap on a car to some place that he said he is not even familiar with 
this place. 
 
So all those kinds of things they just leave you wonder as to what exactly 
was at play here.  So things like that Chairperson for me they just are things that I 
20 
just do not understand.  So I cannot vouch for people that have got those kinds of 
what I think are gaps in their depositions. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes.  Mr Manyi you indicated earlier on that TNA lost 
its government business because it was punished for revealing what you call white 
collar corporate capture of the state.  Did I understand your evidence to be correct 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 110 of 147 
 
...(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes ...(intervenes). 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  When I characterise it that way? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I was punished for that. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes.  When in your view did this punishment begin? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  This punishment started I think around 2017.  In fact as I 
come into TNA you will see that it is in my affidavit that I came into a loss making 
conversation.  It was already bleeding.  This thing was bleeding something like 
R5 million per month roughly and I thought I was going to stem the tide and my 
biggest preoccupation with this Chairperson was the big thing for me was to save 
10 
jobs.  That stable had employed 500 people and I thought if I replace the Guptas 
there I can save those 500 jobs, but it was not to be.  As we sit here and now 500 
people are without a job and something in my view that could have been prevented.  
So it is a very sad state of affairs. 
 
If somebody had a problem with a Manyi or the Guptas that should have 
been dealt with but the business should not have been undermined which was 
providing an alternative view in the media space which was providing employment to 
a whole lot of young people mainly black.  So I really think that was a tragedy 
Chairperson to have lost that business. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  I thought that you told the Chairperson that the 
20 
reporting slant of TNA from the beginning was not to behave like an enemy of the 
state but also to slant reporting in a manner that reflects positive elements of state 
activity and that is why you liked it, correct? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes.  Yes, so Chairperson I am happy you raised this 
because this thing has got dates.  When we did the IFMS report this happened 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 111 of 147 
 
around May/June 2017 as it were.  This is when the height of hatred began actually 
around that time around May 2017, because the system works in collaboration 
Chairperson you then have a situation where the whole business model which Mr 
Maleka wanted to – is alluding to in his questions as to what is a business model, the 
business model was both private and government.  So the private sector people they 
are very – they hunt like a pack Chairperson.  You mess up with one you have 
messed up with all of them.  So when they saw how we report on this, but because 
they know some of them are doing these things elsewhere so they say now these 
people are not good because they are the people that are exposing our secrets.  So 
let us shut them down and so on. 
10 
 
So that started to – and in fact they create – what then happened 
Chairperson they create such a frenzy around the New Age, such a stigma because 
then there is a whole cabal of four big media companies that inform the narrative of 
this.  So they paint this narrative, the stigmatise TNA such that even Ministers get 
harassed in Parliament how much money do you spend with TNA?  Now Ministers, 
members of Parliament even at a Provincial level were beginning to be 
uncomfortable now because of this because you have got the DA on that side and 
that is also anti some of the transformation messages that this media house 
represents.  So therefore because they have created this monster called the Guptas 
they have created this monster.  So they want to know who is dealing with this 
20 
monster.  Now if this was such a monster Chairperson the question is why is it that 
National Treasury still had it in its systems, because really if this was such a rogue 
activity by this public – this house it should have even qualified to have been on the 
Treasury system and all that, because it is something that is doing things that are 
wrong, but because at a factual level there was no substance to all this.  This was all 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 112 of 147 
 
just a media hype designed to kill an alternative view, designed to entrench a 
mainstream narrative.  This is what they did. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Chairperson can I place on record that my questions 
are fairly straightforward.  They elicit a yes or no answer and they do not require this 
longwinded explanation which I did not call for. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Try the best that you can Mr Manyi to answer the questions 
directly, but when I say that I am not saying necessarily that you cannot 
contextualise, but just try your best. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Chairperson I think it is an unfair request this way.  Let me 
give an example.  It is an unfair request because let me give an example.  One of 
10 
the questions given here is where you interviewed?  Now if the answer is yes or no 
then I am going to say no I was not interviewed then media goes out there with the 
headline Manyi got the job without an interview when in fact the truth of the matter is 
that the interview issue does not arise because I was transferred.  So a yes and no 
answer can be very misleading. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I understand what you are saying Mr Manyi.  I understand 
what you are saying, but if we were to answer on the basis of all the erroneous 
things that the media is going to do we would be here for a very long time.  So what I 
am saying is I acknowledge that there may be questions where legitimately you 
might wish to say more than yes or no.  That is accepted but there may be others 
20 
where maybe the explanation might be too long so let us take it each on its merits. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay.  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes it is a general thing. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am not saying say yes or no all the time.  Just exercise your 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 113 of 147 
 
judgment and let us see how it goes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes but at the same time, Chair there are loaded 
questions.  I think let us just be alive to that.  Sometimes ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, you must feel free if you wish to say something.  You can 
indicate to me if you want to add more. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The idea is not to have a situation where your evidence is not 
fairly portrayed. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or fairly given but it is to strike a balance. 
10 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Between taking too long and giving an answer that you are not 
happy with or it is too short. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay.  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, Mr Maleka. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Thank you, Chair and Chair can I just explore the last 
question on Mr Manyi's liking for the New Age media newspaper and his dislike for 
the so called mainstream media with your permission.  You see Mr Manyi, you have 
now told the Chairperson that the reason you regarded the mainstream media as a 
cabal included the very fact that they were critical of the state in their reporting, 
20 
correct? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I beg, you disappeared there.  They were what in their 
reporting? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  They were critical in their report about state activity 
and that is the reason why you did not like the slant of being almost always critical 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 114 of 147 
 
against government. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Is that in term so the mainstream? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  No.  That was just 10% of the issue.  The rest of the issue 
with the mainstream media is that most of the time they get things wrong.  They get 
things wrong most of the time.  So one could not – one cannot place reliance 
Chairperson on what you see in the media.  It is wrong all the time.  Most of the time 
it is wrong. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  For that part of 10% you are talking about they were 
critical of the state, correct? 
10 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I do not know what you are talking about. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Well I am just repeating what you told the 
Chairperson. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  You are saying critical mistakes? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  For that 10% of the reasons why you did not like the 
cabal. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  It is because they were critical of the state in their 
reporting. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  I just want to make sure I understand that.  Mr Maleka 
is your question to Mr Manyi this?  That one of the reasons or the reason why he did 
not like mainstream media is because mainstream media is critical of the state? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  In the way they reported on the state activity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You mean the way they reported on state matters? 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 115 of 147 
 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay and the answer Mr Manyi? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  The answer, Chairperson is that no, the issue was not 
because they were critical of the state.  The issue was not they were getting their 
facts right.  The state is always open to criticism but the issue is that when they 
criticise they criticise using wrong information.  That is the problem.  That is what we 
do not like about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay in other words what you are saying is they were not 
doing their homework properly? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes, Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  You see Mr Manyi a media criticism of the state and 
what state actors are doing is nothing new.  When TNA was criticising the state on 
your version it was revealing problems about National Treasury about this what you 
call wastage of R1.7 billion.  That was nothing new.  The media has always done 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But are you not Mr Manyi proceeding – Mr Maleka proceeding 
from the point that it is the criticism that you say he had a problem with whereas he 
has made it clear that his problem with mainstream media was not the criticism but it 
was them getting their facts wrong. 
20 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes.  Chair, I understood him to say that there are 
many reasons.  One of them relates to what he calls 10% of the critical reporting by 
the mainstream media of state activity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe you can clarify Mr Manyi. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes.  No, here is the issue, Chairperson.  The IFM one is 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 116 of 147 
 
an example.  The story was broken by our group.  It was broken by TNA and ANN7 
and the length and not only did the story get broken on hearsay and whatever.  It 
was broken and broadcasted on using tangible information from this same audit 
report I just dropped off here and what would happen in the media space, 
Chairperson? 
 
When is others – when it is others when they do their thing whatever they 
do there is some kind of collaboration of sorts then you would just find that all the 
newspapers are pretty much saying the same thing and what have you.  So we were 
not part of that part.  So what then – what that does is that it then diminishes the 
impact of what you are trying to say because they do not want to report what we 
10 
reported on not that we needed to be done that way but then what they then do 
when they do their own reporting then they just find ways sometimes to if they like a 
particular department then they will find ways to find a positive spin of things. 
 
So with us what we were doing – what The New Age and ANN7 was doing 
was to try and report things very sharply whether it is right or wrong.  When it is right 
we really heap praises on it.  When it is wrong we do what we do and we do not try 
to be the spokesperson of various departments. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Chair, may I clarify the question by being factual? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  I think it might help all of us.  Mr Manyi can you go to 
20 
Exhibit M1. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Are you at Exhibit M1? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes I have got. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Can you please go to page 231? 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 117 of 147 
 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  You have explained to the Chairperson that Exhibit – 
sorry page 231 reflects the total ad spend by GCIS to all the media competitors.  
Correct? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes, that is correct. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  And you have indicated that the total ad spend for 
that year 2011 to 2012 was R192 million odd, correct? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  No not correct.  194 I indicated. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  194? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
10 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Right let us work with the figure and you have 
indicated that on that figure TNA for that year and that year alone ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Maleka.  I think I just need to say something to Mr 
Manyi relating to what he was discussing earlier on for what it is worth. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Manyi you were mentioning at least in part that the mainstream 
media was getting certain facts or was getting facts wrong or that they were not 
doing their homework and you said something about what The New Age was doing – 
how it was getting things. 
 
I think I must just mention to you that well The New Age is not there 
20 
anymore now as I understand the position but after my appointment as Deputy Chief 
Justice they asked for an interview with me which I granted and following that 
interview they published an article in which I had – in regard to which I had lots of 
complaints. 
 
This was raised with them and it was indicated to them that a lot of things 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 118 of 147 
 
that they said in that article had simply not been part of the interview and they were 
asked – they had indicated the journalist who attended had indicated – promised to 
send the article before it was published so that I could have a look at it.  It was 
published without being sent to me for me to have a look at it first and then when I 
saw it I found that it had a lot of things that were never part of the interview and this 
was pointed out to them. 
 
Fortunately Mr Nathi Ncube of the Office of the Chief Justice was present 
throughout the interview and had actually recorded everything. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So they refused to correct the article and apologise and they were 
10 
informed that what had been discussed at the interview had been recorded, and that 
there was a record, so in the light of this would they please correct this.  I think at 
some stage there was an indication they would correct it or they may have 
undertaken to, but ultimately they refused, despite the fact that they were told that 
there was a recording and subsequently I think something was sent to various media 
to indicate that there was something – there were a lot of things that were incorrect 
in the article published by the New Age about me arising out of that interview, so for 
what it’s worth I thought I must just mention that there is that incident that occurred 
between me and them. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Ja, well firstly I must say I rest my case, thank you 
20 
Chairperson for that corroboration, but again if you have people that despite you 
showing them the real transcript of the report then they refuse to correct what they 
are saying.  Why should we believe them when they say New Age has got things 
wrong?  So it means they are not trustworthy as people.  I don’t think ...(intervenes).  
CHAIRPERSON:  No in fact what was very strange to me was the fact that they 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 119 of 147 
 
didn’t show interest to show can we listen to the recording.  One would have thought 
that they would say oh you’ve got a recording, let’s listen to it because maybe we’ve 
got certain things wrong by mistake, they didn’t want to even listen to that, by the 
refused to withdraw, and apologise and correct. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:   That’s correct, that’s what was objected to 
Chairperson, and then when we raised these things then it was seen as being 
unreasonable.  For instance on that one as recently as now Chairperson you see this 
one, The Star they say Guptas sets up for sale and so on and they put my face 
there, and all that, now why – what is my face doing on Gupta assets and the only 
reason they’re doing this is deliberate because they have already characterised 
10 
Gupta’s as monsters and what have you, so now because they want to deal with me 
so in order to deal with me they must mirror me into this thing so that what – I 
become sort of a proxy for all the things that the Guptas stand for, then I must suffer 
all of that.  This is the kind of a South Africa we have, very unfair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no I thought I must just mention that there was that 
experience for what it’s worth ja, thank you. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:   Chair thank you very much, I am not going to explore 
that issue further but my understanding of self-regulation of the media in this country 
is that there are always channels available to lodge complaints, where there has 
been factually inaccurate or unfair reporting and there is always a code to which 
20 
most of the major media houses subscribe to, there are enquiries constituted by the 
Press Ombud whose decision would be subject to appeal by the Appeals Committee 
of the relevant self-regulator and that explains why in a democratic country we all 
have to be men and women of the last.   
 
But where I was Chair is at page 234 ...(intervenes).  
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 120 of 147 
 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Can I interject Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Can I just quickly interject to say that I know the things 
that he is talking about but those things don’t work as well as perhaps Mr Maleka 
think they do.  An example is what the Chair has just said, that is an example, the 
very – I mean if you can’t trust a Judge to say here – who is anybody else, if you 
can’t say a Judge says, and the Judge is even in a position of authority, a Judge is 
saying here is a recording, at least listen to this and compare it with what you have 
written.  Same thing Chairperson the front page of the Sunday Times would have a 
picture of some palace in Dubai, and they say it’s President Zuma’s and then the 
10 
next time that same palace has got a different owner and they have never gone back 
to apologise to President Zuma that the palace that they said he owns is actually not 
true ja and so on, but they carry on like this and they get away with it because 
they’ve got the monopoly of the space.  This is the challenge that we are facing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well we have to get back to what is relevant but it’s difficult to – 
for me not to say this, that about two Sundays, maybe three Sundays back, one of 
the Sunday papers had an article relating to the leaks that have been happening and 
on the front page it said somebody was being fingered as the culprit for the leaks, 
and when you read the article well it said it was Mr Nombembe, it interviewed certain 
people from which it got the information and it seems that from when you read the 
20 
article it was the reason why – the reason given why it was said it was Nombembe 
was that it was said he was close to Mr Gordhan – Minister Gordhan, and that he 
wanted Mr Gordhan to help him to get appointed as National Director of Public 
Prosecutions.  Now you would expected that the – this is I think this was the Sunday 
Independent, you would have expected that the journalist would check for example 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 121 of 147 
 
what are the requirements for somebody to be the National Director of Public 
Prosecutions before writing that story. 
 
In terms of the relevant Act you must have a legal qualification, you must 
be able to practice as a lawyer in all the Courts in this country, Mr Nombembe 
doesn’t have a legal qualification and if I’m not mistaken already by that time there 
was a shortlist of people who were to be interviewed for the position of National 
Director of Public Prosecutions so you ask yourself what kind of journalism is that, 
people come and make an accusation against somebody you have to go to ask the 
question why are you saying that, why are you accusing him, what’s the basis and if 
they give you the basis as journalist you expect that the journalist would examine the 
10 
basis to see whether it makes sense. 
 
Somebody says an Auditor wants to be Head of the NPA, and the 
journalist doesn’t say but hang on you need to be a lawyer to be Head of the NPA, 
they don’t say that, they just write the story.  So ja, okay, alright, I think let’s check 
that. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  You know Chairperson this is where I was going to.  
You have indicated two critical instances of media reporting which was not factually 
accurate, but the point is this why would one newspaper lose government business 
because of that and the rest of the media who are equally guilty on that assumption 
of factual inaccurate reporting don’t go out of business.  Perhaps Mr Manyi would 
20 
help us there. 
MR ZWENELE MANYI:  Ja, Chairperson I think the reason I brought this list here so 
people can see how much is spent.  I want to challenge let’s say this house Tiso 
Blackstar I don’t know how much, how many millions they are getting now but in 
2012/13 they got like R28 million.  I want to challenge Tiso Blackstar to say 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 122 of 147 
 
Government must not do business with them, just three months Chairperson, I 
guarantee you this place will shut down, just three months, it will shut down.  So 
what Mr Maleka is saying I don’t think he understands the impact of the slice of 
Government in anything, even this house which has got both business from 
government and elsewhere but at least from GCIS and in fact that R28 million that 
they got in 2012 as Tiso Blackstar is just the one part, the rest of other Government 
Departments that do direct business with them the figure could easily be R100 
million.  Let Government not give them that amount just three months Chairperson I 
guarantee you this will shut down. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Mr Manyi I think I do understand and it is something 
10 
that I am going to converse with you at length tomorrow, because on your 
...(intervenes).  
MR ZWENELE MANYI:  You said here tomorrow? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Oh are you not here tomorrow? 
MR ZWENELE MANYI:  No, no I thought we were going to finish today. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Chair I will be guided by you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well if he was never told about tomorrow Mr Manyi is entitled to 
think we would finish today depending, but let’s go on and see how far we get. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes, Chair I have not even started with the essential 
details that he has given this morning, I have not even gone to this statement.  I’m 
20 
just trying to understand the basic theory of his suggestion.  But a mere critical 
reporting against the State means that you will fall down on your belly by losing 
Government business, that I don’t understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well he is saying revenue from Government advertising is so big 
in any newspaper or at least it was very big in the New Age and he is making the 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 123 of 147 
 
example that even with – is it Tiso Blackstar based on what he knows to be the 
position, how much they are getting from Government or at least how much they 
were getting from Government at a certain stage if they were not to get Government 
advertising for three months even they would collapse, that’s what he is saying. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  And I want to test that Chair because we were at 
page 231 when we got diverted by all of these things, and we have now confirmed 
that the total advertisement spend from just GCIS alone for 2011 to 2012 was R194 
million for all the media houses for that year, just from one Government entity and 
that is GCIS.  On that approach Mr Manyi gave some explanation about how that pie 
was divided amongst the various houses.  What I wanted to test with him is what you 
10 
had already put to him about the comparisons that he has made that for instance 
SABC got the biggest pie, and if I may ask for your permission to test the answers 
that he has given in that regard, because the suggestion that I would like to make is 
that the comparison is not well-founded. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you may do that? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Mr Manyi are you at page 231? 
MR ZWENELE MANYI:  Just before that Chair can I just briefly address just the intro 
that he had given, because I think that intro is incorrect.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
MR ZWENELE MANYI:  It’s incorrect in that he says just the one entity, GCIS is not 
20 
just the one entity, it’s a conduit, when you say GCIS you must see the entirety of 
Government, or this part of Government. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Different departments bring ...(intervenes).  
MR ZWENELE MANYI:  Bringing to GCIS, so you can’t have some kind of a 
preoccupation that that 194 is government – is GCIS budget, GCIS has got almost 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 124 of 147 
 
zero budget, it’s just a conduit, so all that money is money from different 
departments as it were, so that must be very clear. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Can I put my questions now? 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may put your questions. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Thank you.  Mr Manyi are you at page 231? 
MR ZWENELE MANYI:  231? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes. 
MR ZWENELE MANYI:  Yes. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:   Okay, you have indicated that Ad24 for that year got 
10 
almost R18 million, correct.   
MR ZWENELE MANYI:  18 yes. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:   We now know from what you told us that Ad24 is 
owned by the Naspers Group, and that that group owns a number of newspaper 
publications, correct? 
MR ZWENELE MANYI:  Yes. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:   The include amongst others City Press, correct.  
MR ZWENELE MANYI:   Yes. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:   So that if you were to test what City Press got by 
way of government revenue from GCIS you will not look at the total group owned by 
20 
Naspers; you look at City Press itself for that year correct? 
MR ZWENELE MANYI:   No, I think the City Press probably constitutes a part of 
90% of this number, that’s the publication that we’re dealing with here.  So all these 
other things like they would have – whether whatever magazines they have and so 
on is not the kind of publication that Government was doing.  The main publication 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 125 of 147 
 
was City Press, so this I’m almost sure Chairperson that about 90% plus was City 
Press. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Well look at what you – the figures that you produce, 
say about the total revenue and by City Press from GCIS as it …(indistinct) for that 
year.  If you look somewhere towards the bottom of the page, and understand the 
identification of the publications here is alphabetical you will see that somewhere 
there is City Press reference and my reading of what City Press and by way of 
revenue for that year was R199 323,30, these are the figures that you yourself 
produced, correct? 
MR ZWENELE MANYI:  Ja, those are GCIS figures. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry Mr Maleka where are you getting the figure for City 
Press? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Chair almost two thirds down the page, you will see 
that there is A. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At 231? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  No, with page 231 yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, oh yes I see it, yes thank you. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  And Chair I will take you through some of the 
newspapers under that stable, but the point for now is that if you take City Press 
which of Mr Manyi’s evidence constitute almost 80 to 90% of the Ad24 Naspers 
20 
stable, for that year alone City Press received revenue of R199 000 odd, do you see 
that? 
MR ZWENELE MANYI:  Yes. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  And now that we know that City Press has been in a 
long-established business of publication, at least by the year 2011 and 2012, we will 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 126 of 147 
 
look at the open source information so that we could tell the Chairperson about its 
lineage up to 2011 and 2012, but for now if you take the total at revenue and by City 
Press for that financial year, was almost R200 000.  Compare that with what TNA 
earned for that year and you will find that Chair at page 234. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  The second last entry at page 234, are you there? 
MR ZWENELE MANYI:   Yes. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:   And we now know from your evidence that for that 
financial year on a comparative level TNA earned almost R8.7 million of Government 
advertisement revenue from GCIS, correct? 
10 
MR ZWENELE MANYI:   H’mm. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:   Yes or no?   
MR ZWENELE MANYI:  Chairperson there’s a context to this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, give the context. 
MR ZWENELE MANYI:  I think pretty much like the Chairperson was pointing out I 
think Mr Maleka is comparing apples to pears this way.  City Press is a weekly 
publication and the TNA was a daily publication, Monday to Friday, and TNA was not 
only a national newspaper, it had its national and it also had provincial publications 
on a daily basis.  So to compare a day to day national newspaper with a weekender, 
one day in a week, is not a correct comparison. 
20 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:   Let me suggest to you immediately that that 
explanation I will demonstrate shortly that it is mistaken, but for now let’s confirm the 
facts.  On the facts as we have it for that financial year TNA has earned 20 times 
more than City Press from Government’s advertisement business. 
MR ZWENELE MANYI:  Can I respond to that Chair? 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 127 of 147 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZWENELE MANYI:  Now I don’t understand what Mr Maleka where is going to 
Chairperson because that may be the case, what’s wrong with that if what was – 
because even Ms Williams when she was here she explained the TELMA., now what 
happens if this kind of things that departments were looking for required the New 
Age, this is what drives where we place those papers.  GCIS is not some social 
development department that is seeking to spread things equally to a whole range of 
newspapers, no, it’s not about that, so as to how much each newspaper eventually 
got is really neither here nor there.  What is important is what were in the business 
plans, what was their campaign that the departments were putting up, and when you 
10 
put those campaigns and the …(indistinct) targeted into the TELMA system what did 
the TELMA system point out. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, I hear what you are saying Mr Manyi but I think what is 
happening is that you understood that evidence given by certain witnesses before 
this Commission in relation to GCIS and revenue you know which TNA got you 
understood it in a certain way which prompted you to get this information on this 
page, as to what other people were getting, and I think rightly or wrongly your first 
stance, as I understand it, was to say look at what TNA was getting, look at what 
everyone was getting before going into what the differences were.  I think Mr Maleka 
is starting there to say the basis of your comparison was not right first, and then 
20 
saying let’s take one paper and not look at the company, at the Group you know, and 
then you say City Press, when you look at City Press comparing it with the New Age 
annual revenue for that period the City Press got much less, and then in response 
you make the point, and I think the point is a point that you were entitled to make, to 
say well maybe we have to look at even comparing the New Age with City Press 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 128 of 147 
 
because the New Age was a daily newspaper, Monday to Friday, the City Press is a 
weekend paper, so – but I’m simply saying that’s where this  whole discussion 
started from.  You understood evidence given by some witnesses to be projecting a 
certain image or a certain point, you sought to contradict that by using these figures.  
He is now saying but the basis that you used is not right, that’s where the whole 
thing is at the moment. 
MR ZWENELE MANYI:   And I am contesting that Chairperson because I think his 
approach is very mechanical, mechanical in that he is looking at the size of the City 
Press and the process is not mechanical, it’s a bit more scientific, the process is 
more like target marketing.  Now it may very well be just like I said Daily Sun will 
10 
have the biggest circulation, but does it have the kind of market that we are looking 
for?  Yes or no, you know, so it’s not as mechanical as the biggest gets the biggest 
so to speak, the issue is at that specific point in time what was the campaign that 
was being run, what were the audiences that were being targeted and etcetera, and 
what did the system say.  I think the only discussion we should be having on this 
matter is whether despite what the system said we went and we put something 
different, that’s the only credible discussion we can have on this, otherwise this is not 
going to take us anywhere Chairperson because the issue at hand is that GCIS is 
informed by TELMA, so if TELMA says the most appropriate and relevant 
newspapers for this kind of a campaign is the New Age, that is the most objective 
20 
way that we can put into court. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Mr Manyi I am going to take you to TELMA and I will 
show you that the new age was not even assessed on the basis of TELMA, and I will 
show you that your attempt to run away from a comparison on a paper by paper 
basis by suggesting that City Press was a weekend newspaper and the New Age 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 129 of 147 
 
was a daily publication and therefore the comparison in terms of revenue is 
inappropriate that is not correct.  Look at the other daily newspapers.  You have told 
the Chairperson as I recall your evidence, and I hope that I got it correct, at page 
231, about the Daily Sun.  You remember that? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  H’mm. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Chair if you go to page 231. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I am there. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  You will see that the fourth bottom entry relates to the 
Daily Sun and my recollection of Mr Manyi’s evidence was that that was the 
newspaper with the biggest daily circulation. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Look at what it earned from GCIS for that month.  
Can you confirm the figures for us please? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  It’s right there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you asking him to read it into the record? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, please read the figure into the record Mr Manyi for the Daily 
Sun. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  R8 778.   
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:   The biggest daily newspaper of what circulation 
20 
...(intervenes).  
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Again Chairperson if I may interrupt? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Again you see Mr Maleka is almost like becoming like 
how journalists report stuff, he is now coming up with the Sun bite which totally out of 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 130 of 147 
 
context, he is now having – I have explained that the psychographics of the Daily 
Sun although it’s got a big circulation but people that would not – I made an example 
of it’s not where you would put an analysis of a particular judgment because the 
market does not do that, so therefore – and I have been at pains to explain that the 
actual numbers are meaningless, it’s a mechanical process.  The issue is target 
marketing.  Who are you targeting?  Where are those people that you are targeting?  
Which publication is very appropriate for who you are targeting?  This is what counts 
in this space. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Manyi you are entitled to add that kind of explanation to 
your answer, which you have done, it’s legitimate for you to say I hear what you are 
10 
saying but what about this A, B, C, D as you have said. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Thank you Chair. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Chair if I may conclude the daily newspaper 
comparison by dealing with two additional daily publications, which you will get on 
page 234. 
CHAIRPERSON:  234 you said? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Fourth from the bottom is The Times.  Now Mr Manyi 
I take it that you know that The Times is also a daily newspaper, correct? 
20 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  That is the? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  The Times, if you look at page 234. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I’m there. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  The answer is? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  No, no, the end of your question. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 131 of 147 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, he did not hear the end of your question, just repeat it. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Am I correct when I suggest to you that The Times is 
a daily publication? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Was a daily publication, yes …(intervenes). 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  It was? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  It is shut down now. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes, at that point in time, am I correct that in 
2011/2012 it was a daily publication? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  And look at the amount of government advertisement 
10 
revenue it received from GCIS, it is about R183 379,20, correct? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Chairperson, I – what is the right word?  We can do this 
the whole day; the answer is the same that Mr Maleka has taken a mechanical 
approach and I have been explaining that things are not as mechanical as you reach 
them to be.  I have explained that there is a bit more sophistication in deciding where 
the ad should go.  There is something called target marketing and all that. 
 
It may very well be that TELMA would have told the people otherwise, the 
ones that are placing the ads, so this is an outcome of largely what TELMA does, but 
it is more than that Chairperson.  Not only does GCIS follow TELMA.  GCIS also had 
a transformation mandate for instance.  There are many of the publications that even 
20 
on the programming of TELMA they will not feature, but GCIS is an organisation with 
a strategy on media development and diversity, had a duty and a responsibility to 
make sure that the support media other than – over and above mainstream media it 
supported everybody including mainstream media. 
 
It cannot be that GCIS is expected to just support all others, except those 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 132 of 147 
 
that do not have big names, it cannot be. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  You know, Chair, Mr Manyi produced these figures in 
order to persuade you that in the broader scheme of things TNA got about what?  
5/6% of the total ad spent from government in 2011/2012.  When we try to examine 
that broad proposition on a granular basis with reference to his own figures we are 
told that that is a technical exercise. 
 
The key question is what is the point of producing these figures if you do 
not want us to examine them closely on a more accurate analytical basis? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, you certainly are entitled to ask him questions and he is 
certainly entitled to answer and to give an explanation if he has an explanation, 
because the – what you have done now is to look at daily publications 
…(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To say okay with regard to the City Press you say it was a weekly 
newspaper, let us look at other daily newspapers like which – other newspapers 
which were daily publications in the same way as the New Age was. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is where you are.  He has given an answer in regard to The 
20 
Times, he has given an answer in regard to, I think …(intervenes). 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Chair, if you look at – and I will be quick here, if you 
look at three columns above The Times you will see The Star and you will see that 
The Star for that total 12 months period and R97 000. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then The Citizen is not too far above that. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 133 of 147 
 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes, it is 247. 
CHAIRPERSON:  247. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  You have The Herold and the list goes on and on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  So on any comparative basis and I would like to put 
this conclusion to Mr Manyi for him to comment if he wants to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Yes, put it to him. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  These are newspapers which have been in business 
for quite some time and all of them, and at least those that we have looked at, earn 
less than R200 000 per annum and TNA in its first year of business earns more than 
10 
8.5 million, correct?  The first year of business? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you want to say something about that? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Okay, yes, Chairperson, because I understand what is 
wrong about that, because usually when things are new people embrace them.  So 
TNA brought fresh …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry, I missed that? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  People embrace new things, so if TNA was new people 
were having a first embracement of wow, for a change now here is a publication that 
is different, that is not going to be riddled with all kinds of factual inaccuracies.  I 
20 
mean even today as I showed you The Star, why did The Star have my picture on 
assets that I have nothing to do with and so on. 
 
You know, so it just shows, Chairperson, the kind of media that we have.  
Now if we have something fresh, must have been welcome, and by the way, 
Chairperson, as I make this point is that GCIS cannot take the blame for being 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 134 of 147 
 
briefed by government departments. 
 
What Mr Maleka should be asking is who are the government 
departments that did this, because GCIS, Chairperson does not have its own 
budget?  Let this be very clear.  The only budget that GCIS has and I think Mr 
Maseko explained this, is really just to pay for staff and all that.  There is no – if there 
is anything, probably at best be something that we would get from …(indistinct), if 
other departments did not spend and so on and you are trying to make sure that 
money goes into good use.  That is about the only time that GCIS would do anything 
creative like advertisement or something, but otherwise GCIS is a conveyor belt.  It 
carries out mandates from different government departments. 
10 
 
So you cannot have a situation where GCIS must now answer why did 
monitoring and evaluation or why did Public Works or why did anybody like that 
…(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no, no, that may be so Mr Manyi, but the point as I understand 
it which Mr Maleka is making to you, and allowing you an opportunity to respond to is 
this, he is saying as The New Age was entering the market the first year it comes in, 
there are established daily publications – newspapers which had been there for a 
long time.  He says when you look at the revenue that it made from GCIS, GCIS 
accepting that GCIS gets money from – it’s a conduit pipe as you said, it is a conduit.  
Accepting that he says but look at the amount of revenue, the difference between 
20 
what this newcomer was making compared to what established newspapers were 
making. 
 
He says it made in the first year more than R8 million, but newspapers 
such as The Star made in the same year R97 000.  The Citizen made R247 000, I 
see The Herold above that made R255 000.  You cannot deny, can you, that the 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 135 of 147 
 
difference is vast? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I think what, Chairperson, the contention of Mr Maleka 
fails to appreciate is that …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  But let us start from this, do you acknowledge that the difference 
is vast? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes, I acknowledge that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You acknowledge that? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, continue. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  But I think it was justified.  It is justified, because I suspect 
10 
that, because government was generally frustrated by this factual inaccuracies, 
when a new player came it was a relief that for the first time now maybe things are 
going to be reported correctly and all that.  I think it was the freshness that was 
brought in that got people to say, I think this is the place to go and so on. 
 
So I think the important thing, Chairperson, in all of this is, was there 
value derived from this?  You see for me that is the issue and …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, that may be so and I am going to allow you to finish, so do 
not forget the point you wanted to make.  I will let you make the point, but if what you 
are saying – if I understand what you are saying correctly I must conclude that what 
you are telling me is all these other newspapers were not doing their homework.  
20 
Only the New Age was doing its homework, that is why it made – it got such a lot of 
revenue from government at least in the perception of government? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Chairperson, I do not want to speak …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that your approach, and I am asking …(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 136 of 147 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because I need to make sure that I do not attribute to you 
something that you do not mean to say. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Chairperson, there are two issues.  One is the TELMA, 
two is the transformation agenda of government.  Government is very serious, has 
always been very serious about transformation.  So when – I mean as I said, 
Chairperson, that government has even set up a whole subsidiary MDDA to try and 
make sure that alternative media is supported.  There is a whole organisation just to 
focus on this, it just shows how serious the issue is. 
 
Then you have a player that comes in line with that strategy, so 
government then would have looked warmly towards that.  I mean I have read out 
10 
here the letter by Ms Williams in 2013 when she was explaining this thing that 
government had to use all available platforms.  All of these other platforms were also 
being used, but this one was used in line with what TELMA was saying coupled with 
the transformation agenda. 
 
If you look, Chairperson, I think at some point there are even targets of 
the government spent, there was a deliberate strategy to say the 30% of spend 
should go towards community media.  That is a deliberate strategy.  So you would 
then if you look at the analysis of that and you look at the media strategy that is 
being spent, you will find these kinds of what appears to be anomalies, as it were, 
when in fact it is the execution of the developmental agenda. 
20 
 
If you do not do that, Chairperson, then you are paying lip service to the 
transformation agenda. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Chair, I see it is past 16:00, but can I just make one 
point and in fairness ask Mr Manyi to think through it, because it is going to be 
important. 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 137 of 147 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, that is fine.  Before we continue can we agree whether we can 
stop at 16:30?  Would that be fine with you Mr Manyi? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I am easy, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, would that be fine? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  You see Mr Manyi you talk about government being 
dissatisfied and government welcoming a new player, but in fairness this ad spent is 
decided by GCIS through media buying over which you exercised corporate control, 
correct? 
10 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Chairperson, I need to qualify this answer.  I was not 
personally involved in these things.  There as a Chief Director doing – I was indeed 
in charge of the entire GCIS.  All departments reported to me, it is not just media 
buying, all of them they reported to me, including the one that was doing all kinds of 
irregular things.  They all reported to me, Chairperson, but on a day to day I was not 
personally involved. 
 
The Chief Director Donald Dubuc was a guy and before him it was 
somebody else at a Director level, but there are individuals that do this on a day to 
day basis as you were to implement a strategy.  So it is incorrect to try and now 
make this a Manyi thing. 
20 
 
It is not a Manyi thing, it is a government strategy being implemented by 
people best qualified to do it. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Chair, let me move on.  Mr Manyi you earlier on 
indicated that the most objective vehicle to determine where government should 
place its business for media buying is the TELMA system.  Do you recall that?  My 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 138 of 147 
 
notes says that you accredited TELMA as the most objective tool to determine where 
government should place its advertising business.  Do you remember that? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes, I said that. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  And you know, do you not, that part of the TELMA 
requirement is that a publication where government decides to place its business 
must have an accredited audited readership and circulation figures, correct?  You 
shake your head up and down, what does that mean? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I thought it was an understood convention, it means yes. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes, but the point is …(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry, I did not hear the whole answer? 
10 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  No, Chairperson, he is saying I am shaking my head, I 
had nodded. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  So I said I thought nodding is a convention understood to 
mean yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay, no that is fine. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  But, Chair, the record does not capture nodding. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no, what – well that has not been explained to Mr Manyi.  
When you nod or shake your head that is not captured for purposes of the record, so 
I think Mr Maleka simply meant to say it is not enough if you just nod, you must say 
20 
the answer.  I think that is what he meant. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes, he should have said so, Chairperson, but he did not 
say that.  He says that he does not understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I agree, he did not say that, ja, okay. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  We now agree that part of the TELMA tool of 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 139 of 147 
 
evaluation requires that a publication which would receive government business 
must have accredited and audited readership and circulation figures.  It is quite clear 
on what you have told us now – up to now that TNA did not have those accredited 
readership and circulation figures, correct? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  No, incorrect.  What is correct, Chairperson is that TNA 
was using audited figures, but the difference is by who?  It was not using the ABC 
figures which the mainstream media was using.  It was using auditors to audit the 
figures.  That was what was happening. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  So TNA chose to use a totally different model of 
auditing its own figures? 
10 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Correct. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  When you or Mr Dubuc assessed whether or not 
GCIS should place its business with TNA you are telling the Chairperson there would 
be audited figures from TNA? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Ja, TNA was using audited figures.  I am not 
understanding the follow up question, because I did answer this question.  I am not 
understanding what is lacking with the answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you want to repeat your question Mr Maleka? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Remember the analysis is done by TELMA, which is a 
template and the template would decide all things being equal which publication 
20 
should enjoy government business, it is a template.  Are we agreed on that? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes, we are agreed on that. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  And the template will show immediately on the spot 
which publication enjoys the audited accredited circulation figures, because 
newspapers would have submitted those figures, correct?  It is on the template.  You 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 140 of 147 
 
do not have to go and make an inquiry elsewhere; it is on the template. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Ja, once again, Chairperson, I think again Mr Maleka is 
putting the mechanical ahead and I keep saying that the ABC figures, the circulation 
figures are just a cold number with no brain, just a cold number, no thinking involved.  
It is just to say how many people and all that. 
 
Now when you are doing placements you got to use a bit of sophistication 
to take into account the kind of psychographics that we are also looking at.  Not just 
cold numbers.  So TELMA would do a bit of that, but we would have to also use a bit 
of – because we have got professionals there who are not just going to take 
everything and lap it as is.  You then need to put a bit of qualitative aspects as well 
10 
that are informed by what it is that a particular department is saying should be – is 
being targeted.  The actual target group that is being targeted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would you agree that the one thing good with using just figures 
only, I think you called them cold figures, if you just use…(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  ABC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, if you use just what how many newspapers are sold with the 
circulation, you know, that has got some objectivity about it in the sense that it does 
not depend on anyone's opinion, you know.  You can prove or not prove what the 
readership is and I must say that I am partly I do not know about some of the 
newspaper things, but you know, the moment you go to the issues of the quality of 
20 
maybe of the articles in the newspaper, you know, then there is a certain level of 
subjectivity, but if you want to just compare and say look, which one, if you just use 
figures, then that is very objective. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I do not agree, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry? 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 141 of 147 
 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I do not agree, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, explain? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I do not agree, because it is again the thing of being 
mechanical.  The fact that you have a particular circulation which means that you 
have got a particular purported number of people who lay their hands on that 
newspaper, does not address the purpose of why every person – a particular 
department wants to put an add in a particular paper. 
 
The departments they put ads not because they are bored, they put ads, 
because they want to communicate a particular message to certain people to say we 
want this message to go to this target market as it were. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, I understand that.  I understand that.  I am not saying that 
is wrong.  I am not saying it is wrong.  I am just saying to the extent that we may be 
dealing here or we may be dealing with a situation where one is looking at why 
would more adverts from the same source go to that publication and not to that 
publication to the extent that one is looking at that? 
 
If the position were that it was to be accepted that all we should look at is 
the circulation the advantage of that would be that there is not much subjectivity.  
You just look at who has greater publication, but I am not saying that other factors 
are not important. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Chairperson, let me just make this example. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  If you – I also have a car industry background, I used to 
work for Toyota at one point.  Now they each have one of their small cars at that time 
called Toyota Tazz.  Now you can sell 100 Toyota Tazz, 100 what will be paid to you 
for selling 100 Toyota Tazz would be miniscule of what would be paid to somebody 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 142 of 147 
 
selling a Rolls Royce but both of you are selling cars. 
 
So therefore to look at just purely how many Tazz's I produced when in 
fact somebody is talking about a Rolls Royce, you are actually comparing 
incomparables. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no, no, no. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  But we are all selling cars. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you and I are on the same level there, but there is some 
misunderstanding.  I accept that there may be other factors that – other than the 
figures that may be important.  All that I was simply saying is, is it not true that 
maybe some of the factors as to how important they are, what weight should be 
10 
attached to them might involve some subjectivity compared to things like simply the 
figures of circulation?  Without saying necessarily – without saying the figures should 
be the only factor? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Chair, if I may add on that score.  I mean we are a 
country of laws. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on Mr Maleka.  Let him respond. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Ja, Chairperson, I think we are probably going to go 
around in circles. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I think you make your point and then we move on. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes, okay, the point, Chairperson, is that if you would then 
20 
go and even interrogate actually how those numbers are arrived at and then you 
would come to a very clear conclusion that even the reliability of these numbers that 
are so called audited is another kettle of fish, because even those numbers it is not 
like it is gospel.  It is not even gospel even in those numbers, Chairperson. 
 
What people do they take a whole bundle of newspapers, they go and 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 143 of 147 
 
give them to a company and you go to any company, Chairperson, and you will find 
bundles and bundles of newspapers left at the reception area, nobody reads them, 
but those newspapers would be counted as part of the circulation as it were. 
 
So whether how many eyes actually get to them is another story.  So even 
those numbers are actually cooked.  So you cannot sign your life on ABC numbers, 
that would be irresponsible. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you, you may continue Mr Maleka.  You wanted to say 
something and I stopped you. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Chair, we are a country of laws and here the law 
requires that TELMA should be applied. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  It does not require that TELMA should be ignored.  If 
someone has difficulty with TELMA, you go and apply for an obtained deviation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You want to put to put that to Mr Manyi? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes.  Mr Manyi you accept that TELMA is part and 
parcel of the law that require lawful placing of government advert business? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  No, there is no law that says so. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  No but, you say that TELMA is meaningless? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  I beg your pardon? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Do you say that TELMA is a meaningless process in 
20 
deciding where government should place business? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  No, but you said part and parcel of the law.  There is no 
law, there is no law that says that you must use TELMA. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  But I thought that …(intervenes). 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  This is a tool, Chairperson, that we are using to try and 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 144 of 147 
 
make sure that the outcome is somewhat objective.  If where Mr Maleka is leaning 
towards was correct it would mean that for all the community media that we have 
spent on, that is irregular expenditure, which is not the case. 
 
So you can spend, you do not need TELMA for everything.  You need 
TELMA for certain and others, you do not have to use TELMA necessarily, but we 
use TELMA just to try and say to departments that we do here is informed by some 
level of objectivity as it were, but using or not using TELMA is not in the Treasury 
regulation. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Are you saying that you could ignore TELMA and go 
ahead and place government business with any publication? 
10 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  The departments, Chairperson, are doing that as we 
speak.  In fact GCIS is struggling.  I do not know now, but I can even show you that 
even now newspapers, yes, they do that – most departments they go directly.  The 
194 number let us look at these years that I was involved.  I think more than double 
that number, Chairperson was placed directly outside GCIS. 
 
My biggest struggle was to get everybody to come into GCIS and 
departments had their own relationship, they did not have TELMA.  They do not have 
TELMA even as we speak, but even decisive today, I am sure there could still be a 
few departments that have got direct relationships.  So yes, no, TELMA is not a 
regulated tool, no. 
20 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  I am not talking about other businesses; I am talking 
about – and I am not talking about other departments.  I am just talking about GCIS, 
because this is the entity which you and I are talking about with reference to your 
own figures. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  GCIS is a government department.  The same rules.  
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 145 of 147 
 
There are no different rules for GCIS.  We are all governed by the same rules.  Yes, 
so if other government departments can place media directly without using GCIS and 
TELMA and they are not red carded, you cannot red card GCIS for not using TELMA. 
 
And as I say, Chairperson, with the community media in particular TELMA 
does not even feature.  So, and there is no irregularity there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you are basically saying that TELMA is really not being used 
as – is not regarded as something binding? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes, Chairperson, it is not binding.  I mean sometimes 
…(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  By GCIS or by other departments? 
10 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes, Chairperson, I mean you would go and tell the 
department this is what the system says, but the department, some of those 
departments with relationships with media directly they would insist, and GCIS did 
not have veto powers, this is another problem. 
 
GCIS does not have veto powers.  If a DG from another department, it is 
his money, he says you shall place this with Sunday Times, even if I say, but TELMA 
says put it with City Press and he says I said Sunday Times.  So what you then do, 
because what we are all about is economies of scale, then you would look at how 
many other Sunday Times in the system and everything. 
 
So when you go to Sunday Times to bargain for a price you then go there 
20 
with a bigger number and you try and negotiate a price down, that is as far as you 
can do. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Chair, I see it is 16:30. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  How much time do you think you will need? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Chair, I am hesitant to hazard a guess in the light of 
26 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 30 
 
Page 146 of 147 
 
the answers that I am getting, because there is not a straightforward answer.  So I 
might well be misleading you in suggesting to you that this is the time I think I would 
be able to deal with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe we should start early tomorrow? 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Yes, we are available, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Manyi, you may not have had an idea that we might have to go 
over to tomorrow.  Are you able to come back tomorrow? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes, Chairperson, I am here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes, and we can start early like 09:00. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  07:00 I am easy. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Even 07:00.  Okay, alright, we are going to then adjourn and 
tomorrow we will start at 09:00. 
ADV VINCENT MALEKA SC:  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
MEETING ADJOURNED
 
Page 147 of 147 
 
TRANSCRIBER’S CERTIFICATE FOR COMMISSION OF INQUIRY 
INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
DATE HELD 
 
 
:  2018-11-26 
DAY: 
 
 
 
:  30 
TRANSCRIBERS 
 
 
:C. SWART, M. BOCCHIO, E BOUWER,  
  A BOSMAN, L DAPHNE 
10 
 
Audio’s are typed verbatim, as far as audible/possible 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
