 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
27 JULY 2020 
 
 
DAY 238 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757 
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 231 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
27 JULY 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 3 of 231 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 27 JULY 2020 
CHAIRPERSON: Good morning Mr Hulley, good morning 
everybody.  Switch on your microphone. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Good morning Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Are we ready? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  We – I believe we are ready Mr 
Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I think they must switch off the air 
conditioner.  Thank you.  It sometimes interferes with the 
hearing – what people say. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  We can start. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Mr Chairman – thank you very much Mr 
Chairman.  Mr Chair this morning is the evidence of Mr 
Nkosinathi Nhleko.  Mr Nhleko has been implicated by 
several witnesses.  He has – he has deposed to affidavits in 
respect of two of the witnesses who have implicated him.  
The one witness is Mr Robert McBride and you will – you 
have granted leave for him to lead evidence to be questioned 
and to be – and to cross –examine Mr McBride. 
20 
 
Mr McBride on Sunday afternoon provided us with – 
through his attorneys provided us with an affidavit in which 
he explains why it is that he would not be present today.  
Counsel has been appointed to address you on the – the 
question of why he is not present today and I want to first 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 4 of 231 
 
take you through the bundles and show you where is 
application or rather where his affidavit is in the bundles 
before I call upon Counsel who appears for Mr McBride to 
explain to you the circumstances for his absence today. 
 
The bundle for today consist of a series of documents 
or bundles which comprise what we refer to as Exhibit Y8 
series Mr Chair.  The – if I can take you to the first one of 
those documents which is Exhibit Y8.1.  That Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us start with Bundle – what… 
ADV HULLEY SC:  It has got a Bundle A. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   What do – what do suggest the bundle 
should be called? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sorry it is Exhibit Y8. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I see on mine it says Exhibit. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  8A but I understand the – if you say bundle 
whatever. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  It should say Bundle A I am not sure.  It 
should have said Bundle A. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Bundle A. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Correct Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you would have to check because 
there may have been another Bundle A in another work 
stream. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sorry it is the bundle – it is the Bundle A 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 5 of 231 
 
in the Y8 range.  So Y8 consists of bundles A all the way 
through to bundle H but all under the Y8 stream.  So if you 
consider the spine there should be a Y8 on the spine that 
shows that it is Exhibit Y8 and then there is – there is a 
number of documents that come under the Y8 range.  So the 
first… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us make difference the bundles and 
exhibits first. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The exhibits will be the actual affidavits 
10 
and documents. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Correct Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The box – the file would be bundle what, Y 
or bundle? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So it will – the box would be Bundle A. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So you would – so you would have 
Bundle A all the way to Bundle H. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  The exhibits would all be under the 
20 
Exhibit YH – sorry Y8 range. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I think there is a Bundle B and I think if 
there is a Bundle B there must be a Bundle A. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In another work stream.  I think the PRASA 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 6 of 231 
 
work stream if I am not mistaken.  So I think we must be – 
we need to be creative on this one.  Maybe we should call it 
Bundle LEA. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am thinking about Law Enforcement 
Agency work stream. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But we need to put something that will 
make it – that we make sure we do not confuse it with 
another bundle.  But I do not even know whether putting LE 
10 
is the right thing but let us be creative. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes.  The – what my understanding was 
from having spoken with the administrator is that every one 
of the Exhibits which fall within a particular range or relate 
to a specific topic or witness in this case through the 
evidence of Mr Nhleko would fall under the Y8 range of 
different exhibits.  Each bundle that goes with that.  So you 
will have a Y8 and you will have a Bundle A that goes with 
Y8 as opposed to the Bundle – the PRASA bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the – the number of the exhibit need 
20 
not be connected with the name of the bundle but it could be 
but that might cause confusion. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If inside the file your exhibits are Exhibit 
8A, B, C, D up to whatever. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 7 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We can keep that like that in terms of 
exhibits. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So if I can just explain to you Mr Chair 
how we have done it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  If you would open the first bundle and 
you will see the index is Exhibit Y8. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And then you will see a table with a # 
10 
which is your first column followed by description, followed 
by bundle and followed by pages.  So you will see that the – 
under the # column you have got 1 all the way down to – on 
the second page you have got – all the way down to 16.  So 
that 1 is Exhibit 8. – Y8.1 and if you look across to the 
Bundle number the appropriate column which is the third 
column that Exhibit Y8.1 appears in Bundle A.  And you will 
see that – for instance Exhibit Y8.3 appears in Bundle – 
appears also in Bundle A but it passes over into Bundle B.  
So in other words there is… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  It seems this is more confusing than I 
thought it was. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The – my expectation is that we would 
have a name for the file.  That is what I would say we call 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 8 of 231 
 
Bundle.  Let us say – let us say for argument sake Bundle A. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Then inside Bundle A there are 
exhibits. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Exhibits will consist of affidavits, 
documents and so on and so on.  Now documents that are 
annexures to an affidavit would form part of the exhibit that 
the affidavit is. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Correct Mr Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  But those that are – that stand 
alone they would have their own exhibits number. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know.  But the box would be like 
Bundle A and then you have Exhibit – even if you called it 
Y8A the first exhibit in the bundle. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Y8A.  The next one may be – can then be 
Exhibit Y8B, Y8C then that is what – that is what I am 
expecting. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I get the impression that is not exactly how 
this is. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So that is not how it has been prepared.  
It has actually been prepared the other way around.  So what 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 9 of 231 
 
we have done is the exhibit number would be in this case – if 
you consider for argument sake the first – the very first item 
in that bundle it is the affidavit of Mr Nhleko which is part of 
a 3.4 Application.  That together with all its annexures we 
have marked that as Exhibit 8 – oh sorry Y8.1 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja you see for example when I look at his 
affidavit on page 1 I expect that something would tell me 
what exhibit number it is.  Okay if it has not been done of 
course we can do it as we go along. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is an option.  So to be sure that this 
is a certain exhibit. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then the annexures to it would not… 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Would be part of it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Be allocated as separate exhibit numbers. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They would be part of the same exhibit.  
But the moment there is a document that is a stand-alone 
that is not an annexure to his affidavit then that becomes the 
20 
next exhibit.  That is what – that is what – and it would be 
marked Exhibit whatever. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if it is not marked as we go alone we 
could mark it.  That is what I have in mind. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 10 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How different is this from that? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  The – in the present case the – each one 
of these was marked in the opposite way to what you 
describing Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  What – what we have done is the – if you 
look at the bundle numbers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  The bundle – the A range. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Refers to a bundle number. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Whereas the numeric range which is in 
the left column. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Refers to the exhibit that goes with the 
Y8 range.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So everything that is Y8. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Has a number attached to it.  Any exhibit 
has a number attached to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And that – but the exhibit may appear in 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 11 of 231 
 
a different bundle which has an alphabetical letter attached 
to them – the bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  My concern is that that is different 
from how they have been done and I do not want to … 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To be confused later – a few months from 
now.  How much work would be involved in trying to do it the 
way that I would prefer it to be done? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  I would imagine that it is a quite a bit of 
work that it will entail. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  But… 
CHAIRPERSON:  But what I am having in mind is if we 
decide what the bundle is going to be called. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then as you refer to each exhibit we 
then give it an exhibit number. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  An alphabetical number or an exhibit – or 
a numeric number? 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Preferable 
I 
think 
alphabetical 
but 
20 
whichever way. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would make things – would make it 
convenient.  So as – so as we go along we do that.  How 
would that – how does that sound? 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 12 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  We – 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then we do not interfere with the page 
numbers - with the pagination.  We retain the pagination as 
is – well I have not – I assume it is – ja I think it is 
sequential from beginning to end. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  It is sequential. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja which is important.  So in that way we 
do not – we will not interfere with the pagination but we will 
simply give exhibit numbers as we go along and if the first 
one – if Mr Nhleko’s first affidavit is Exhibit Y8A for example. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then the next stand-alone document would 
be Exhibit Y8B and we go along up to the end.  And then the 
index saying that can be changed – the index can be 
amended later. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Very well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would that work? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  We would certainly endeavour to do that.  
I – at the moment I think it would – it might be a bit of 
trouble. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  But if we… 
CHAIRPERSON:  With a little bit – with some adjournment 
maybe of sometime during. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Perhaps I can seek instructions. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 13 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  To give you to see 
ADV HULLEY SC:  As far as that is concerned.  I would 
imagine if I were to make a call through the person that is 
responsible for preparing the bundles. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  He might be able to indicate to me how 
difficult that might be. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But what I am having in mind is that – I 
mean we would put the exhibit number simply write it in by 
hand.  It would have to… 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes for present purposes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja for present purposes you know. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the present purposes can be forever.   
It can remain like that.  And it seems to me as long as we do 
not interfere with the pagination. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That should be fine. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  You see it might just be a case of 
amending each of the indexes or indices as we go along. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes as we go along. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is fine Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And if we need to have an adjournment of 
twenty minutes just to make sure everybody understands it 
we could do that so that once we start everything flows. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 14 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Can flow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Smoothly.   
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay alright.  Maybe shall we give this 
the exhibit number the bundle number straight away?  Shall 
we say Bundle LAW A maybe – for Law Enforcement Bundle 
LAW A. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is fine let us call it that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us – it is unlikely there will be another 
one called LAW A. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is fine Mr Chairman.  What I will do 
it for present purposes I will take your point, I will discuss it 
with the team and with the person responsible for the 
bundling.  If that proves to be a problem we will address you 
on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja and then – ja.  No that is fine.  That is 
fine.  But should we mark it now we can deal with the 
preliminary issues and mark it later? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  I think it would probably [00:15:44] if I 
first took instructions on that because if we were to mark it 
20 
now and then there is a problem with that range. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  Okay alright let – okay let us 
deal with what the application. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes.  If I can just take you then to the 
affidavit.  I have been careful not to refer to it as an 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 15 of 231 
 
application Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  If I can ask you to turn for what it – to 
the G – sorry the H range.  Under H at the moment.  And if 
you were to turn with me Mr Chairperson to the very last – 
that is under the 16t h file divider there is a document there 
that appears at page 3647. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay he is still getting me the bundle.  
What is the number of divider 6 – 16? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  It is 16 Mr Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have a letter there is that what I should 
be having? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is a letter from a firm of attorneys 
called Adams and Adams they represent Mr McBride.  If you 
turn to page 3650 that is an affidavit of Mr McBride.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  With your leave Mr Chairperson I would 
ask that Ms Harding who appears for Mr McBride be allowed 
to address you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay alright.  Thank you.  Yes 
20 
Counsel. 
ADV HARDING:  Good morning Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning. 
ADV HARDING:  I am instructed to appear on behalf of Mr 
McBride to hand up or take you through this affidavit Mr 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 16 of 231 
 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes maybe for the record you could just 
place yourself on record and then we continue. 
ADV HARDING:  Mr Chair my name is Katherine Harding and 
I appear on behalf of Mr McBride. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Yes. 
ADV HARDING:  Mr Chair an affidavit has been provided to 
the commission as pointed out it – you will find it Mr Chair at 
Bundle Y8H as it is named presently and that is at page 
3650.  The affidavit has been provided to Mr Nhleko’s legal 
10 
representatives I also gave him a hard copy of the signed 
version a few moments ago.   
 
If I may can I take you through the salient portions of 
the affidavit? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I must just say that I think I was told 
yesterday about the affidavit but I am only able to see it now 
because yesterday was too late. 
ADV HARDING:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The legal team did offer to send it but so I 
said I will see it this morning here.  So you can tell me the 
20 
important parts of it. 
ADV HARDING:  Thank you Mr Chair.  Mr McBride has been 
provided with three notices of set down for three different 
dates for three different cross-examinations.  The first of 
those is today the 27t h.  The next if the 29t h for he is set to 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 17 of 231 
 
be cross-examined by Advocate Pretorius and the third is the 
13 August where he is set to be cross-examined by Brigadier 
Kuba’s legal team.   
 
This affidavit does three things. 
 
The first if I can take you to it Mr Chair is at 
paragraph 5 of that affidavit.  It expressly reiterates Mr 
McBride’s commitment to the commission and its processes 
including a commitment to appear to be cross-examined. 
 
The second important thing that the affidavit does is 
at paragraph 17.3.  It indicates that Mr McBride is not able to 
10 
appear today or on the 29t h to be cross-examined but that he 
is in principle available and makes himself available in that 
affidavit to do all three sets of cross-examinations on the 
third date the 13 August. 
 
And the third important thing that the affidavit does is 
that due to Mr McBride’s respect for the commission and its 
processes it sets out the reasons in detail why he cannot 
appear today or on the 29t h for that cross-examination. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you need articulate those because as I 
say I am only seeing the affidavit now. 
20 
ADV HARDING:  Yes Mr Chair.  The first of those reasons 
can be found at paragraph 12.  Mr McBride highlights in 
paragraph 12 that when he received those notices of set 
down, 
he 
was 
not 
in 
a 
position 
to 
instruct 
legal 
representatives to advise him on those notices or to advise 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 18 of 231 
 
him on the scheduled cross-examinations.  That position 
changed when he was appointed into his new position at the 
State Security Agency and that was with the effect from the 
16 July. 
 
He then appointed legal representatives in paragraph 
14 it sets out on the 23 July.  He instructed Adams and 
Adams and retained their services to represent him in these 
proceedings and to advise him on the notices of set down 
and the scheduled cross-examinations. 
 
The following day on the 24 t h Adams and Adams 
10 
addressed correspondence to the commission that is the 
letter to which you were referred just before this affidavit in 
the bundle it is also attached to the affidavit.  And in that 
letter Adams and Adams immediately indicated that Mr 
McBride would not be in a position to attend today. 
 
And in paragraph 15 of the affidavit Mr McBride 
indicates that the reason why we cannot appear is because 
he and his legal team require more time to consider new 
documentation that has been provided to him in the last few 
days and also to obtain advice on the notices of set down 
20 
and the scheduled cross-examinations. 
 
The essence of the affidavit then Mr Chair is that Mr 
McBride is committed to appearing to be cross-examined and 
is willing to do so as indicated that he can do so on the 13 t h 
of those three suggested dates.  But that he needs more 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 19 of 231 
 
time to prepare himself and his legal team in order to go 
through all the documentation and in order to be efficiently 
prepared for those cross-examinations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is he in effectively asking to be excused 
today and later this week when he is supposed to appear 
again but as far as the 13t h August he has no problem? 
ADV HARDING:  That is the effect of this affidavit Mr Chair.  
The affidavit does indicate that he and so did the letter of 
the 24t h they both indicate that he is in principle available to 
do all three cross-examinations on the 13t h. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HARDING:  But the effect of this affidavit would be to – 
to seek to be excused from today’s proceedings and the 29t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  And for the 13t h he is fine? 
ADV HARDING:  He is available for the 13 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then I guess another date that will be 
determined for the evidence – for his appearance relating to 
Mr Nhleko and to somebody else later in this week then in 
terms of his commitment he – he will come as long as there 
will have been enough notice. 
20 
ADV HARDING:  Yes Mr Chair.  He has committed to 
appearing as long as there is enough time to sufficiently 
prepare. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay alright.  Thank you.  Let me 
hear if Counsel for Mr Nhleko and Mr Hulley what they have 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 20 of 231 
 
to say.  Thank you. 
ADV HARDING:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You – it might be convenient for now if you 
just say something from there.  You can press on your 
microphone and tell me Mr Mokhari what your attitude is?  
Oh okay is it easier – well I am just afraid that if you do not 
put the microphone on then it will not be recorded but you 
can put off – okay ja you can take off your mark – mask not 
mic for purposes of speaking otherwise you are supposed to 
press a button somewhere.  Oh, is it not working?  Otherwise 
10 
if you can move over there that is fine.  Ja you can move 
over there ja.  Ja.  Oh okay, okay no that is fine.  You can 
just place yourself on record first and then start. 
MR MOKHARI SC:  Thank you very much CJ – I mean 
Chairperson of the commission.  My name is William Mokhari 
SC.  I appear for Mr Nhleko and I am with my two juniors Mr 
Mokhatla [?] as well as Ms Martinglatsi [?]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Thank you. 
MR MOKHARI SC:  For – for present purposes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR MOKHARI SC:  I am required to respond to Mr McBride’s 
affidavit.  Yesterday we were given or yesterday afternoon 
we were sent an unsigned statement or affidavit by the 
commission’s evidence leaders that McBride is saying that 
he will not be coming today.  And this morning when we 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 21 of 231 
 
arrived, we were given his signed affidavit.   
 
We had already expressed our view to the evidence 
leaders yesterday by saying that insofar as McBride’s 
position that he will not be coming to be cross-examined 
today for the reasons that he articulates we will leave it in 
the hands of the – of the Chairperson to decide.  But what 
we wish to place on record is our displeasure in us being 
informed on the eve of the hearing when we have taken all 
the time to prepare. 
 
We have seen the notice that was sent to Mr McBride 
10 
insofar as Mr Nhleko’s request to cross-examine him and the 
notice from the commission which informed him as way back 
as on the 10 t h of his month and that is clearly more than 
fifteen days and he will have articulated these views much 
earlier in order to save unnecessary costs that were 
expended. 
 
But of course, we cannot really take any – we cannot 
take the matter any further except to say that it is not up to 
Mr McBride to decide that he be cross-examined by all the 
legal teams on the 13 t h because that will depend on the 
20 
availability of us.   
 
So we can only assume that insofar as the cross-
examination by Mr Nhleko is concerned, we will receive a 
new notice from the commission which we will take into 
account our availability as well. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 22 of 231 
 
 
But as for the 13t h then we will not be available to be 
able to do that.  But otherwise then we leave it in the hand of 
the Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no thank you. 
MR MOKHARI SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Hulley. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chairperson.  Mr 
Chairperson the – the position is as we currently have it.  Mr 
McBride was not under subpoena at the time.  It was at all 
times the understanding of the commission that Mr McBride 
10 
having been given adequate notice had always been made 
himself available for consultations in the past and that he 
would comply with – on that basis so that it was not 
necessary in the circumstances to subpoena him.  Had we 
known that we would run into the danger that we ultimately 
did we would obviously have subpoenaed him but that was 
entirely based the decision not to subpoena him was based 
entirely upon the fact that he had at all times been 
cooperative until then and I do not mean to intimate that he 
has not been cooperative.  Quite the contrary he – but he 
20 
has given us an indication that he wishes to – well by way of 
the correspondence and the affidavit that he is taken up 
employment elsewhere and that it has become difficult for 
him to comply today. But that was the situation that we were 
confronted with and we could not nothing more than what we 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 23 of 231 
 
presently have. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well we have generally been working – the 
commission has been working on the basis that when people 
know that they are expected to appear these certain people 
will comply – will come. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Indeed Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Without any compulsion.  On Friday I had 
occasion to mention at the hearing that it was a pity that I 
had to issue a directive for a judge to appear before the 
commission because there are so many people in a – who 
10 
regard it as enough that I request them appear.  They do not 
wait for me to issue a directive or to be subpoenaed as long 
as they hear that the commission would like them to appear, 
they say I will come. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As a result.  So – so that has been working 
largely well.  There are circumstances where it has not 
worked well.  But of course, if we had – if the commission 
had issued a subpoena or a directive, I have no doubt Mr 
McBride would have been here.  Because even in his new 
20 
job he would be able to show a subpoena or a directive but 
he has been cooperative in the past.  I am sure that it is 
probably just a difficult situation and I can see that in his 
affidavit he says that for some time he would not have been 
able to afford lawyers. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 24 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it is only recently that he was able to 
afford lawyers.  So other dates will have to be determined.  
The one for the 18t h August will remain as a date for the 
particular cross-examination that is indicated for it. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Another date will have to be determined in 
regard to Mr Nhleko in regard to Mr McBride’s cross-
examination by Mr Nhleko’s Counsel.  But I do want to say 
because Mr Mokhari mentioned that or suggested his 
10 
understanding that the dates would take into account their – 
the counsel’s availability. We determine the dates without 
really negotiating them with lawyers because there are so 
many lawyers involved.  It would really be very difficult if we 
were to negotiate them with lawyers.  But we – we will be 
trying to make sure that there is reasonable notice so that 
arrangements can be made.  So I am inclined to grant the 
postponement of Mr McBride’s – the hearing of Mr McBride’s 
evidence under cross-examination day Mr Nhleko’s counsel.  
I talked about later this week when he is supposed to appear 
20 
but I cannot deal with that I think because the other party 
that is involved in that one is not – is not here. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I think what can happen is that as soon 
as possible the commission must be in touch with them so 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 25 of 231 
 
that they know what happened to day.  Of course, I think we 
will then decide what is going to – we will decide on the day 
so I am afraid Counsel for Mr McBride will have to come 
back, I think.  Is it on the 29t h?  I think it is the 29t h or 
whatever the date is. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That – there is – the next date is the 29t h 
that is for the leading of the evidence of Advocate Pretorius. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  For his questioning and of course for the 
cross-examination. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  In respect of Mr McBride and in respect 
of General Booysen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  So the decision I make today will be 
confined to this one because I cannot make a decision on 
another one because the other party is not here.  Okay 
alright.  The cross-examination of Mr McBride by Mr Nhleko’s 
counsel is adjourned to a date to be determined. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you.  Thank you Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Mr Chair that then brings us to the 
question how the bundles… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I think just for the – for the sake of 
completeness I know I think we all know the effect of that is 
that today we will have Mr Nhleko giving evidence and being 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 26 of 231 
 
questioned by yourself and – and if his counsel after that 
seeks to re-examine him he may do so and then another – on 
another day his counsel will then cross-examine Mr McBride. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Okay do you – do you need 
some adjournment for purposes of that housekeeping? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Of the bundles. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or have you done it in the meantime? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  I have not been able to do it Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  I would require an adjournment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  It seems appropriate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That we should perhaps have the tea 
adjournment at this stage.  So we can use up that time to 
attend to this matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On my watch it is about quarter to eleven.  
You propose we combine it with tea? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  I propose so then we do not have to – 
20 
subject of course to everybody’s… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or up to quarter past eleven or how much 
time do you think you need? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  I would imagine that I need about twenty 
minutes. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 27 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  About? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Around about fifteen to twenty minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay so maybe we then say we resume 
at quarter past eleven. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Very well.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  As it pleases Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja Okay.  Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  We will adjourn – we will then 
10 
adjourn and we will resume at quarter past eleven.  We 
adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES:   
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we ready? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes, thank you DCJ.   
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  DCJ, it would seem that the proposal that 
you have made on how you want things to be done should be 
20 
fairly easy to follow going forward. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  There may have to be some discussion 
but not on this occasion about some of these documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 28 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  But that is for a different occasion.  For 
present purposes, it seems quite simple how we can deal 
with it practically going forward. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Probably for present purposes, we would 
have 
to 
write 
the 
manuscript 
on 
the 
documents 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  ...that we would want to identify as 
exhibits. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, that is fine.  That is fine. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you, DCJ. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  DCJ, I understand... I want... what I 
would like to do is to just place in context the evidence of Mr 
Nhleko. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And before we commence.  I understand 
from Mr Mokhari that he would like to make... what he refers 
to as an opening address. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is of course with your leave. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And then once we have placed the 
evidence in context, I can then commence by leading the 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 29 of 231 
 
evidence of Mr Nhleko. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay.  Alright. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So DCJ, the... as I have indicated 
previously, Mr Nhleko has been implicated by several 
witnesses.  His present round of testimony will relate to... 
mostly to the evidence of Mr McBride.  Mr McBride, Mr 
Sesoko and Mr Kuba who were all members of the IPID at a 
specific point in time. 
 
In the case of Mr McBride, he commenced with IPID in 
2014.  I believe it was on the 3r d of March of 2014.  And he 
10 
has implicated Mr Nhleko who at the time was the Minister of 
Police. 
 
Mr Nhleko was the Minister of Police during the period 
2014.  I believe it is May of 2014 and he remained the 
Minister of Police up until, I believe it was 2017.  There was 
a Cabinet reshuffle which took place in 2017 which resulted 
in Mr Nhleko being removed as the Minister of Police. 
 
The events relate in particular to a so-called rendition 
report on which Mr McBride, Mr Kuba and Mr Sesoko all 
testified.   
20 
 
The rendition reports related to and some incidents or 
three incidents that took place in the year 2010 creeping into 
the year 2011 when certain Zimbabwean nationals were 
allegedly – and I put to say “allegedly” in inverted commas – 
they moved from South African and taken across the border 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 30 of 231 
 
to Zimbabwe without following the processes of the Home 
Affairs processes that needed to be complied with in order to 
do so. 
 
That gave rise to a report that had been published in the 
Sunday Times which alerted the public to the fact that there 
had been this rendition which resulted in an investigation 
that was conducted and the investigation itself has been 
testified to on several occasion.   
 
It ultimately landed up with IPID.  And Mr Kuba was the 
person, for present purposes, Mr Kuba was the person who 
10 
had conducted that investigation.  
 
He produced several reports.  There has been a dispute 
about the status of these reports, whether they were interim 
reports, whether they were final reports. 
 
For present purposes, we need not to concern ourselves 
with the status of those reports. 
 
Shortly after Mr McBride took office in March of 2014, Mr 
Nhleko became the Minister of Police which was in May of 
that year.  Mr Nhleko established a team of people to 
investigate certain issues relating to what he referred to the 
20 
two reports and those reports came to be changed. 
 
The issue, ultimately, resulted in the question being put 
to an external private firm to investigate how these two 
reports came about and that private firm has also been 
implicated. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 31 of 231 
 
 
One of the people in respect of that private firm will be 
testifying about the report that they had produced later on, in 
the course of this week. 
 
Ultimately, Mr McBride, Mr Sesoko and Mr Kuba were 
suspended and they, in relation to Mr McBride, he instituted 
legal proceedings which resulted ultimately in him being... 
this suspension being set aside and he was allowed to return 
to work pursuant to a court order. 
 
In relation to Mr Sesoko and in relation to Mr Kuba, their 
processes followed a bit of a different process but ultimately, 
10 
they...  
 
When the State Capture Commission was established, 
they lodged affidavits before the State Capture Commission 
in which they complained about the complicity, as they put it, 
of Mr Nhleko in having them removed for an ulterior purpose. 
 
The testimony of Mr Nhleko today is to deal with that 
and to attempt to clear his name insofar as that is 
concerned. 
 
The papers that are before you presently Mr Chair, 
relate to the affidavits of Mr McBride, Mr Nhleko... sorry, Mr 
20 
McBride, Mr Kuba and Mr Sesoko and we would be making 
reference to that. 
 
There is an affidavit that came in on, I believe it was on 
Friday, that relates to the affidavit of Mr Kuba where Mr 
Nhleko has responded to some of the allegations that have 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 32 of 231 
 
been made by Mr Kuba. 
 
It is not accompanied by an application to cross-examine 
Mr Kuba but for present purposes, we need not to concern 
ourselves as far as that is concerned.   
 
I have to give an indication to Mr Nhleko’s legal team 
that are... it is my intention to question Mr Nhleko on the 
affidavit of Mr Kuba and, of course, on the affidavit of Mr 
Sesoko as well. 
 
For present purposes Mr Chair, that is the... well, that is 
what I would like to highlight to you.  I would have taken you 
10 
through the bundle more carefully. 
 
But given that we already have got some problems with 
the bundle, it would not make sense for me now, at this 
stage, to comment upon on the bundle but we will update the 
bundle as we go along Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, that is fine.  I see that there are a lot 
of lever arch files, certainly, behind you. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But from what you have said and that, of 
course, with my understanding, the important... the most 
20 
important part of Mr Nhleko’s evidence and the most 
important part in relation to how he has been implicated 
would be the one relating to the IPID reports, is it not? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is so Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, that is the main issue.  You... as far 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 33 of 231 
 
as, certainly as I recall, there may be other issues which, as 
far as I recall, might not be as critical as that one. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I just want to make sure we are on the 
same page. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes, if I can summarise essentially 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, in terms of issues. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  ...what Mr McBride has addressed.  So 
Mr McBride has made reference to quite a few different 
10 
aspects.   
 
He has referred to the fact that Mr Nhleko had appointed 
a chief of staff a certain Mr Mbangwa who was his Chief of 
Staff and who will Mr McBride was a foreigner and a 
convicted... and had been convicted of certain crimes 
relating to this identification. 
 
Mr McBride has also taken issue with the establishment 
of a reference group that was established ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us take them one-by-one.  The one 
about Mr Mbangwa... is it Nbwanga or Mbangwa? 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  I understand it is not Nbwanga.  Mr Leon 
Abednego Mbangwa. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mbangwa.  Yes, the one relating to Mr 
Mbangwa, Mr Nhleko may or may not have known what Mr 
Mbangwa’s...[intervenes]  
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 34 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Status was. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...position is about the criminal record, but 
where does that take us in terms of the Commission?  What 
is the significance of that as far as the Commission is 
concerned? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  The ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  In other words, what would be the point 
that you seek to be made about it? 
ADV 
HULLEY 
SC: 
 
The 
point, 
as 
I 
understand 
it 
...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  ...and it is certainly not something that 
we can see, falls necessarily within the scope of the 
Commission’s Inquiry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  We have debated amongst ourselves.  It 
was a point that we did not think we ought to pursue it.  Mr 
Nhleko has, of course, produce some documentation relating 
to the circumstances around the appointment.   
 
He may well, of course, feel that he is entitled given that 
20 
evidence has been led on that point.  He may well feel that 
he is entitled to at least place before the public what 
transpired as far as that is concerned so that at least the 
public has a sense of what the explanation is around that. 
 
But as far as the evidence leaders are concerned, we 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 35 of 231 
 
did not think that it was a point that we should pursue 
because it does not take the issue anywhere. 
 
But maybe a point that is relevant for other purposes, I 
am not sure but it is a point... we do not believe that it is a 
point that is relevant for the State Capture of Commission 
Inquiry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, because I do not want us to spend too 
much time on issues that are not really important for the 
Commission. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Obviously, I do not have a problem if Mr 
Nhleko says, “Look, may I just set the record straight 
because 
somebody 
came 
here 
and 
said 
I 
appointed 
somebody who should not have been appointed”.   
 
Then takes a few minutes to deal with that but I do not 
want us to spend too much time on peripheral issues as far 
as the Commission is concerned. 
 
I want us to focus on the real issues. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  With respect, I think that must be correct 
Mr Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then the next one is... what was the 
next one in terms of issues ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  So the next issue relates to the 
appointment of the reference group.  A reference group was 
established when Mr Nhleko... shortly after Mr Nhleko came 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 36 of 231 
 
into office, he has established a reference group. 
 
He has referred to some documents relating to the 
establishment of the reference group and that he has 
included in a certain bundle. 
 
There are certain additional documents that we have 
referred to relating to the establishment of the reference 
group and that is referred to elsewhere. 
 
But as far as the reference group is concerned, the 
complaint was, as I understand Mr McBride’s evidence, was 
that this reference group had been established to... had 
10 
been properly established and had been established to, as it 
were, as almost as hit squad to get rid of people that were 
perceived to be opposed to some of what the minister had 
wanted to achieve at that point in time. 
 
And I use the word “hit squad” in inverted commas 
because I do not believe that it was Mr McBride’s testimony 
but I believe it is the thrust of his testimony. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, that one is fine subject to what 
evidence, obviously, is there at this stage. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course, the investigations of the 
Commission continue. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if that is what was said about the 
reference group, that might be fine.  And what other issues 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 37 of 231 
 
are there? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So the next issue that has been raised 
relates to the appointment of the private firm of attorneys to 
conduct an investigation which Mr McBride complaints was 
an investigation that ought to be conducted... all it appears 
to 
have 
been 
a 
criminal 
investigation 
that 
has 
been 
conducted by a private firm of attorneys. 
 
And so the circumstances relating to the appointment of 
this firm of attorneys, in the first place, that seems, 
according to Mr McBride’s testimony, appears to be improper 
10 
in the first instance. 
 
And second instance which relates to the outcome of 
that investigation and the report itself, the content of the 
report which Mr McBride has complaint. 
 
Obviously, Mr McBride complaints that the firm of 
attorneys came to a conclusion which is just completely 
unsustainable insofar that is concerned. 
 
The firm concerned or a representative of the firm 
concerned, will come and testify to that.  Insofar as mister 
...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  ...insofar as Mr Nhleko is concerned, it 
relates mostly to the fact that this firm of attorneys had been 
appointed and according to Mr McBride’s evidence, to use 
the language that he used, be tuned.   
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 38 of 231 
 
 
That is Mr Nhleko, and the firm were in cahoots to use 
this language in order to achieve a particular outcome which 
was that they were ultimately to be charged on a criminal 
level and also in terms of internal disciplinary processes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, that would follow with... within what I 
call the important issue. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that is fine.  And then, what would be 
another issue? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  The additional issue relates to the actual 
10 
institution of the criminal proceedings that emanated... that 
stemmed or arose in the wake of the production of that 
report. 
 
And there was a criminal investigation that started and 
ultimately resulted... was ultimately withdrawn.  It was a 
criminal case against Mr McBride, Mr Kuba and Mr Sesoko. 
 
And where Mr McBride says that the entire process 
related to that was improper.  He implicates a number of 
people in relation to that, that criminal investigation. 
 
But apart from the minister, one of whom is supposed to 
20 
come and testify on Wednesday and that relates to the 
prosecution within the NPA’s office and how that prosecution 
took place.  So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, what I am looking at is what would 
the issues ...[intervenes]  
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 39 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  To Mr Nhleko ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  ...today ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  Shall I refresh them? 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...in relation to 
Mr 
Nhleko because 
...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  So Mr Nhleko’s involvement in instituting 
those or in how those criminal proceedings came about 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  ...because it seems that Mr Nhleko did 
10 
play a role in ensuring that the criminal investigation actually 
took off. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  Okay.  No, that is important to clarify 
because otherwise the question would be, is it suggested 
that he got involved in decisions that should be made by the 
NPA? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  I agree. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or did he... is it suggested that he 
influenced the making of certain decisions.  So that is what I 
am looking... 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because as I see it, today should look at 
decisions that he made or whatever other conduct, you know, 
that he is implicated in. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 40 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Rather than conduct of other people 
...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...decisions made by other people that may 
have adversely affected Mr McBride and whoever else. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes.  So particularly, it relates to the 
process by which having received the report, why the private 
firm of attorneys... how it came about that the charges, those 
are the criminal charges, were ultimately instituted because 
it seems that the ministry played a role in that.   
10 
 
And of course, it seems that Mr Nhleko as the head of 
that ministry, would have of course had been involved in 
ensuring that happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay.  Would that cover the issues? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That would cover the issues as far as 
that is concerned. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That would cover the issues.  Okay.  No, 
that is fine. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Then in relation to... the next point Mr 
Chairperson related to the appointment of Mr Ntlemeza to 
20 
take over... sorry.  Of General Ntlemeza to take over the 
position of a... Lieutenant General Dramat who was at the 
time had been the head of the HAWKS. 
 
And just to put it in context of course.  The initial 
investigation 
had 
been 
the 
investigation 
which 
had 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 41 of 231 
 
implicated mister.  Sorry.  Lieutenant General Dramat and 
Lieutenant General Lebeya, arising out of that. 
 
And once the two IPID reports had been produced and 
arising out of those two IPID reports and the investigation 
relating to that by the ministry, this is now an investigation 
which had... which proceeded the HAWKS(?) investigation - 
arising out of that, Mr Kuba states in his affidavit that he 
received a telephone call from General Ntlemeza in which 
General Ntlemeza informed him that he must watch the news 
because there was going to be a hit on mister... General 
10 
Dramat. 
 
He puts that date at the 6t h of December of 2014.  On 
that very day, the 6t h of December 2014, Mr Nhleko sent a 
letter to Mr Dramat in which he called upon Mr Dramat to 
explain why... or to give reasons why he should not be 
suspended on the 23r d of December of that same year.  
General Dramat was then suspended.   
 
So the point that has been made is that it is just far too 
much of a coincidence that the... that Lieutenant General 
Ntlemeza would have known about this on the very day that 
20 
the minister made the... sent the letter to General Dramat. 
 
So it is been implied or inferred from them that 
general... 
that 
Mr 
Nhleko 
not... 
must 
have 
been 
in 
communication 
with 
mister... 
or 
rather, 
with 
General 
Ntlemeza and they were trying to ensure that General 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 42 of 231 
 
Ntlemeza was ultimately appointed as the Head of the 
HAWKS. 
 
And then arising out of that, of course, are the issues 
related to the actual suspension of General Dramat but that 
also flows from the same thing. 
 
Then Mr Chair, there is the question of Mr Nhleko’s 
involvement in the suspension of various people within IPID 
and the disciplinary processes within IPID. 
 
In relation to Mr Kuba.  The... Mr Kuba had testified 
about certain events which took place just before he was 
10 
placed on suspension and he just spoke about one of the 
PA’s from his... from the IPID head office who travelled up to 
Polokwane to hand over a letter of suspension that the 
minister wanted to make available to Mr Kuba or...  and so 
he spoke about that incident. 
 
I understand that the... it is... the most recent affidavit 
that is coming from Mr Nhleko would address... addresses 
that issue. 
 
I understand, if I read the affidavit correctly, it seems 
that Mr Nhleko is disputing the fact that he had given those 
20 
instructions.  And then there is also a Cape Town meeting 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Would the suspension not have been or the 
suspension decision not have been taking by the acting 
director or...? 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 43 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  The acting executive director. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or is the suggestion that are being made 
that the acting director had acted on the instructions or 
request or ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  So basically, under the IPID Act... pardon 
Mr Chairperson.  That is absolutely correct.  So under the 
IPID Act, of course, those decisions, operational decisions 
should be taken by the executive director. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And the complaint, insofar as that is 
10 
concerned, is that the executive director ought to have taken 
if he had reason to believe that there was any misconduct 
that had been committed and which warranted a suspension 
but it should have been the executive director who took that 
decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  In truth, the suggestion is... well, the 
inference drawn from the fact is that the person who took 
that decision and imposed it upon the executive director was 
in fact the minister ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  ...who had given instructions as far that 
is concerned. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Then there is the question of the Cape 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 44 of 231 
 
Town meeting that had been called by the minister’s office.  
Mr Kuba testified to the fact that there was a meeting that he 
had been invited to, to meet with the minister in Cape Town 
and that he was contacted by the minister’s PA who had 
made several attempts for him to meet... to travel through to 
Cape Town. 
 
And the complaint was because that because these were 
operational issues the minister ought to have approached the 
executive director to meet with any of the people that were 
beneath him and the minister did not do that but the minister 
10 
was, in fact, approaching Mr Kuba directly. 
 
And the inference that Mr McBride certainly draws from 
that, is that it was the intention of the minister to try and 
improperly get him, that is Mr Kuba, to implicate Mr McBride 
in the so-called of the first report to produce what was 
then... what became known as... has become known as the 
second report. 
 
Now that is what the... the inference that Mr McBride 
draws from that as I understand it based on the affidavit that 
has been filed recently. 
20 
 
The minister will challenge the question of whether he 
had invited Mr Kuba to that meeting, but as I understand it, 
he acknowledges that he did phone Mr Kuba but it was only 
to 
instruct 
him 
to 
cooperate 
with 
the 
Werksmans 
investigation which at that stage was underway. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 45 of 231 
 
 
And so Mr Chairperson, I believe those are the issues 
that will be dealt with insofar as the evidence of Mr Nhleko is 
concerned. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, that is fine.  Now you did 
indicate that ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  That Mr Mokhari ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  ...the counsel for mister would like to 
...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  Address. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...what you referred to as an opening 
10 
statement.  I have... I not had occasion, I think, to allow 
opening statements in this circumstances but I think I should 
rather put that to Mr Mokhari if he would like to make it 
because if I allow it with him, I will have to be prepared to 
allow it with everybody.  So let us... so let me hear whether 
he wishes to pursue the issue. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  As it pleases. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  Ja.  I do not remember Mr Mokhari 
that I have allowed any opening statements before and I am 
reluctant to allow it because then if any other counsel would 
20 
ask for it in the future I would have to allow it.  So I have got 
that reluctance.  So what do you say?  How strongly do you 
feel about it? 
ADV MOKHARI SC:  I thank you, Chair.  I appreciate that.  
The reason I requested the evidence leaders that I shall 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 46 of 231 
 
make an opening statement was to deal with the procedural 
matters which Mr Nhleko indicated that he would rather not 
deal with so that he can go straight to the evidence. 
 
And that if I am able to deal with them regarding the 
processes that have unfolded from the time when Mr McBride 
came to testify until when he is now given the opportunity. 
 
So he prefers those matters be dealt with by myself 
instead of him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  H’m.   
ADV MOKHARI SC:  He would prefer to go straight to the 
10 
evidence himself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, maybe that assist because the one 
thing that I have done on some occasions when a request 
has been made, is allow a witness a little bit of time before 
being questioned to say something.  I allowed it with Mr 
Mokonyane last Monday.  I allowed with the former president 
and may have allowed it with maybe a few other witnesses. 
 
So Mr Nhleko would have been entitled to say, “May I 
also have some time before I am questioned to make some 
statements”. 
20 
 
So the way in which we could do it is if you take the time 
that I would have given him to do that.  Then you do that.  
So in the future, I can always say, it is not going to be both. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is not going to be... or it is going to be 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 47 of 231 
 
one.  You must choose whether it is the witness who will take 
that time or it is counsel.  So I think I will allow it on that 
understanding. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:  Yes, indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:  So he has elected it will be done by my 
and he is not going to repeat it himself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  How much time do you have in 
mind? 
ADV MOKHARI SC:  Not more than ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Five, ten minutes? 
ADV MOKHARI SC:  Not more than ten minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:  Yes.  I thank you, Chair.  Chair, Mr 
Nhleko is relieved that finally he is afforded this opportunity 
to put his side of the story.  He watched McBride testifying 
on television without having received McBride’s affidavit 
which ought to have been given to him in terms of Rule 3.3 
of the Commission’s Rules.  He, on the second day of 
McBride’s testimony, instructed an attorney, Mr Mabuza, to 
20 
come to the Commission to inform the Commission or the 
evidence leaders that Mr Nhleko has watched Mr McBride 
then testifying and mentioning his name but he has not 
been favoured with anything which suggests that McBride 
was going to say those things.  It was only at that time that 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 48 of 231 
 
Mr Mabuza, the attorney, was furnished then with a copy of 
McBride’s affidavit.   
Again, Chairperson, Mr Nhleko only heard about the 
evidence that was given by Mr Sesoko and Mr Kuba again 
without having been furnished with the Rule 3.3 notice 
from the Commission that the two have implicated him or 
might implicate him but he was also informed that in their 
testimony they also mentioned him in the manner that 
suggested that he might have committed some impropriety. 
On several occasions, Chairperson, Mr 
Nhleko 
10 
through his attorneys wrote to the Commission, of course, 
and the Commission’s secretariat after then he has made 
an application to the Commission to testify and also to 
cross-examine Mr McBride as to when will he be given an 
opportunity to testify.   
What he was told was that his affidavit has been 
given to Mr McBride for a response but the response never 
came from Mr McBride and to date he is unaware of any 
response to his affidavit which came from Mr McBride but it 
seems as if that has not been responded.   
20 
When he made follow ups as to when will be given 
an opportunity to put his side of the story given the serious 
impact, the allegations that were made by Mr McBride to 
his career prospects and that he is unable to find a job as 
a result of that he was told that he should wait and that he 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 49 of 231 
 
will be told.  Until when Mr Nhleko threatened legal action 
against the Commission that he will rather go to court to 
compel the Commission to treat him fairly, then he was told 
that he will be given a date before the end of June and 
indeed he was given that date which was the 14 May to 
come and testify.   
On the 11 May, when he was hearing nothing from 
the Commission, his lawyers had to write a letter to the 
Commission 
to 
enquire 
whether 
all 
systems 
go 
and 
everything was in order for him to testify on the 14 t h only 
10 
for his attorneys to be told just two days before the 14 May 
when Mr Nhleko was already in Johannesburg, having 
conducted preparations with his legal team, that there will 
be no hearings at all and that he will be told as to when he 
will come.   
And, Mr Nhleko, who had travelled all the way from 
KZN to consult with his legal representatives and to attend 
the hearing, had to certainly then return to KZN empty 
handed. 
Mr Nhleko received the notice now to attend this 
20 
hearing today, which he gladly accepts and he gladly 
accepts that today the Commission is giving him an 
opportunity to say his side of the story.  However, the 
Commission was still not forthcoming to assist him in terms 
of the processes that will unfold when he testifies in a 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 50 of 231 
 
sense 
that 
documentation 
and 
the 
index 
to 
the 
documentation and how documents will be identified was 
never forthcoming until in the afternoon of yesterday  
Nevertheless, Mr Nhleko took a position that this shall not 
be used as a cause for a postponement because he wants 
to have his day before this Commission.  He said that he 
has read all the documents and he knows each of the 
documents which are relevant for the inquiry and for him to 
testify, it does not matter that he has received the index in 
the afternoon of yesterday as long as the documents can 
10 
be identified in terms of which page and that document will 
be found, he will be able to identify those documents.   
So Mr Nhleko is happy that this Commission is 
affording him this opportunity and he will deal with the 
crisp issues that the Chairperson has identified because Mr 
Nhleko from the beginning, he has been clear that the 
issue that is relevant and central for the Commission to 
enquire upon is whether as a result of the two reports 
which emanated from IPID, one of the 22 January and the 
other 
one 
of 
the 
18 
March 
2014, 
resulting 
in 
him 
20 
commissioning a law firm, Werksmans, was that a state 
capture and whether Werksmans in accepting the brief in 
conducting the investigation was a state capture and a 
collusion between the law firm and Mr Nhleko and whether 
he was not required as a minister upon receiving the 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 51 of 231 
 
recommendations of Werksmans not to implement them 
even though he was happy with them and whether, when 
you accepted the recommendations of Werksmans and 
instituted disciplinary proceedings against Mr McBride, he 
was committing a state capture and an improper conduct in 
collusion with Werksmans.   
So those are the issues that he has identified to be 
central for the Commission to determine.  But also, he 
would like then the Commission, whilst he is not a lawyer, 
to interrogate the judgments of the High Court where Mr 
10 
McBride challenged his suspension and the institution of 
disciplinary proceedings as being unconstitutional because 
the Minister, according to him, was given unconstitutional 
powers by Section 6(3) read with Section 6(6) of IPID Act 
whether that judgment has pronounced on the allegations 
of 
Mr 
McBride 
that 
indeed 
the 
minister 
was 
acting 
improperly and that the Constitutional Court confirmed the 
unconstitutionality of Section 6(3) and 6(6) but never for 
once ever said that the minister acted improperly and also 
then we would like to – and this Commission will enquire 
20 
into whether then the Constitutional Court and the High 
Court were remiss in not pronouncing that Mr Nhleko 
committed an improper conduct because that has never 
been the case. 
But also then, the Commission will also, as a matter 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 52 of 231 
 
of the legal issues that arise from the Constitutional Court 
judgment, whether the fact that the suspension of Mr 
McBride was never lifted even by the Constitutional Court 
but remained intact on the order of the Constitutional Court 
for 30 days to allow parliament to take a decision on 
whether Mr McBride should be disciplined and parliament 
never took any decision until 30 days lapsed and Mr 
McBride was reinstated, whether that on its own was 
indicative of Mr Nhleko’s ulterior purpose. 
So, at the end of the day, there are some legal 
10 
issues which Mr Nhleko, whilst he will try to articulate 
them, him, not being a lawyer, may not be able to 
articulate them but the Commission is well-versed then to 
be able to read those judgments and the Constitutional 
Court judgment and to formulate a view as to what 
precisely did the Constitutional Court find and why did the 
Constitutional Court not uplift Mr McBride’s suspension, if 
indeed Mr Nhleko improperly, and why it allowed Mr 
McBride to remain on suspension and also then why 
parliament was remiss in its duties to take a decision one 
20 
way or the other about Mr McBride should face disciplinary 
proceedings.  So, at the end of the day, Mr Nhleko says 
that he is in the hands of the Commission and he is 
available to answer all questions that may be put to him. 
Insofar as I heard Mr Hulley then saying something 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 53 of 231 
 
about the cross-examination of Mr Kuba and Sesoko, Mr 
Nhleko’s never given those affidavits but of course then 
they were given to him last week and he has taken a view 
that there is nothing which will warrant him having to 
cross-examine Mr Sesoko and Mr Kuba because nothing 
turns on their affidavits.  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, Mr Mokhari. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   Thank you very much for the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sure that some of the things that 
you have said which caused Mr Nhleko concern about 
10 
maybe not getting some notices either at all or timeously, I 
have a suspicion that some of those things, even if not all 
may be true while most of time Rule 3(3) notices have gone 
out and been received timeously by, I would imagine, most 
people.  There have been occasions when notices have 
either not been received timeously or not at all.  Actually, 
as recently as last Monday, Ms Sikhakhane appeared here 
for Mr Fraser and Mr Manzini complained or his clients 
complained that they had not been given the 3.3 notices.  
But, as I say, most of the time one does not hear any 
20 
complaints and one assumes that that is because people 
receive them timeously.  So Mr Hulley might or might not 
be able to deal with some of those things and because 
some of them may have happened before this time in the 
Commission but if there are any problems that happened, 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 54 of 231 
 
which should not have happened like notices not being 
received 
on 
time, 
it 
would 
really 
be 
administrative 
challenges within the secretariat, it would never have been 
because somebody did not want him to receive them. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   No, I accept that, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   In fact, all what we are happy about 
is that we are now here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   And Ms [indistinct] 11.47 was able to 
10 
comprehensively respond to the affidavit of Mr McBride. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   Well, of course, the Chairperson will 
see in the bundle that there are affidavits of like Mr July 
which 
are 
part 
of 
the 
bundle 
of 
the 
hearing 
and 
supplementary affidavits of McBride, Kuba and Sesoko, but 
all those affidavits they were responding to Mr July. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   So at no stage have they responded 
to the affidavit of Mr Nhleko. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Well, from what you say it 
appears to me that there certainly should have been a 
response from Mr McBride to Mr Nhleko’s affidavit and so 
on.  But let’s see how things go and I must just say that I 
am aware that Mr Nhleko at some stage was corresponding 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 55 of 231 
 
with the Commission expressing his concern at not been 
given a chance to come and testify or cross-examine Mr 
McBride.  The fact is simply that the Commission has to 
follow its own programme, there would be hundreds of 
other people who also want to get their time as soon as 
possible so it’s inevitable that people are not going to get 
their chance as quickly as they would like, so – but I am 
sure he understands that. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   No, I understand that, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  Thank you very much. 
10 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And while they are sanitizing, just say 
that, Mr Mokhari, I am aware that over this past week there 
have been challenges in the secretariat of the Commission 
which prepares bundles, there have been delays, it is 
unfortunate that you did not get, when Mr Nhleko did not 
get the bundles timeously, I think the Commission must 
take responsibility for that.  There have been certain 
administrative challenges but we are grateful that your 
attitude and Mr Nhleko’s attitude has been to say we do 
20 
not want to postpone, we want to use this opportunity.  So 
we 
apologise 
certainly 
about 
the 
bundles 
not 
being 
available in time, that is a problem, that is within the 
secretariat which has been looked into.  
ADV MOKHARI SC:   Thank you, Chair.  In fact, in respect 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 56 of 231 
 
of the bundles and we are not saying that we have been 
inconvenienced in terms of the contents of the documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   Because we are the following with 
the content, the documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   The inconvenience will simply be in 
respect of the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Numbering. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   Where do you find it. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   But the Chair has come with a 
practical view, I mean, a solution of how we deal with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   And we also accept. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Hulley? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chair.  Mr Chair, of 
course the – in trying to – and I am not sure that I should 
20 
take up some of the time relating to the issues that have 
been raised by my learned friend regarding the procedural 
aspects.  I am certainly in a position to address some of 
the 
complaints, 
I 
was 
not 
[inaudible 
– 
speaking 
simultaneously] 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 57 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I think you can address those that 
you are able to address but I would like in due course, 
maybe tomorrow, I would like to know why – whether 
factually all the issues that he has raised about Mr Nhleko 
not receiving certain things timeously.  Even in regard to 
last year, I would like to know so that one, we should know 
it is factually correct and two what, if anything, still needs 
to be done about it. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I am sure your juniors have been 
10 
making notes about this. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I think you can deal with those that 
you are able to. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Indeed.  Thank you, Mr Chair.  Mr 
Chair, according to the records that I have received it 
appears that Mr McBride would have testified on the 11 
April, the 12 April, the 15 t h and the 16 t h April, according to 
the records that I have over here, it appears that a notice 
dated the 8 April would have been sent to Mr Nhleko of 
20 
2019, by the way.   
 
Then insofar as the evidence of Mr Sesoko is 
concerned – and when I say a notice I am referring to the 
Rule 3.3 notice - insofar as the evidence of Mr Sesoko is 
concerned, according to what I have here, Mr Sesoko 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 58 of 231 
 
would have testified on the 24 September 2019 and it 
seems that a notice in terms of Rule 3.3 was sent out to 
him on the 10 September of 2019.  It appears to be 15 
days before that.  According to the schedule I have got 
there was a receipt which was confirmed on the day – on 
the very same day.   
Then in relation to Mr Kuba, the notice was sent on 
the 11 September of 2019 and I understand that Mr Kuba 
testified on the 26 September of 2019.  So there does 
seem to have been insofar as Mr McBride’s testimony is 
10 
concerned, there seems to have been about three days 
notice that was given if this schedule is to be accepted as 
correct which, for purposes I accept it is correct, but in 
relation to Mr Kuba and Mr Sesoko, there seems to have 
been at least 15 and in one instance 16 days notice that 
had been given. 
So that is what I can address at this stage.  I know 
that there was correspondence that had flowed previously 
in relation to Mr Nhleko’s desire to come and testify and he 
had been notified that he was going to testify during the 
20 
period which was during the lockdown but then because of 
a range of different issues that had arisen relating to the 
lockdown and whether the Commission was ready to 
proceed at that stage, that could not happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Ja, I think that the May date that he 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 59 of 231 
 
may have been given had been determined together with 
dates, other dates for other people on the understanding 
that the lockdown would have ended on the 16 April. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because that is when it was supposed to 
end but then the lockdown was extended. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that is why all of those people who 
were supposed to have appeared towards the end of April 
and in May – actually in early June, all of those had to be 
10 
postponed, so it was simply because of the extension of 
the lockdown. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   That is so.  If I understand the 
complaint that has been raised by my learned friend, what 
he is complaining about, is the late notification of that but 
it was always – given the fact that there had been an 
extension, if my recollection serves me well, it was always 
a danger that arose as a result of the extension. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chair.  Mr Chair, I would 
20 
like to refer to the – if we might be permitted at this stage 
then to deal with the evidence of Mr Nhleko that we can 
take you through …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am thinking whether you want to deal 
with that before the oath is administered or you want to 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 60 of 231 
 
deal with that after? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   No, no, no, I am going to lead his 
evidence so you have to start by administering the oath 
first.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please administer the oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR 
NHLEKO: 
 
 
Nkosinathi 
Phiwayinkosi 
Thamsanqa 
Nhleko. 
10 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR NHLEKO:   [IsiZulu]  
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR NHLEKO:   [IsiZulu]  
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth?  If so, please raise your right hand and say so help 
me God. 
20 
MR NHLEKO:   [IsiZulu]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, that was – the 
responses were in isiZulu and I think Mr Nhleko will just 
have to indicate whether he intends giving evidence in 
isiZulu or in English.  Mr Nhleko? 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 61 of 231 
 
MR NHLEKO:   No, thank you very much, Chairperson of 
the Commission and members of the Commission.  Indeed, 
I would like to attempt my level best at English in 
presenting you my evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:   And I am not too sure whether am I allowed 
to do so straightaway, as we speak. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I cannot hear you.  I know 
you are entitled to look at your counsel, you are paying 
him, but I think …[intervenes] 
10 
MR NHLEKO:   I was basically just looking for a signal 
from his end as well because my intention is to basically 
present my side of the story and I am asking whether am I 
now allowed to do so.  I think there has been quite a bit of 
technical issues we dealt with.  Now that has been 
dispensed with and then I would like to go ahead. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us take it step by step.  I just 
want to you to confirm first whether you will be giving 
evidence in English or in isiZulu?  I did not hear the 
answer to that question. 
20 
MR NHLEKO:   I did say I will try my level best in, you 
know, to attempt to speak English. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think your level best will be very good.  
You see, you gave your answers to the questions for the 
oath in isiZulu.  For the record we need to confirm what – 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 62 of 231 
 
confirm those answers in English.  We did not provide an 
interpreter who is going to tell us but I know that you can 
do so.  Do you want to confirm what you said in isiZulu so 
that the record reflects when you were asked or would you 
like to be asked again?  You cannot remember the 
questions? 
MR NHLEKO:   Honourable Chairperson, I would really 
prefer to be led in that respect, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, maybe – do you mind if we do it in 
English? 
10 
MR NHLEKO:   Ja, no, it is alright, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so that we do not have to translate. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, I can accommodate you there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Alright, certainly it can be done in 
isiZulu, it is just that if it in isiZulu then we have got to 
translate it for the record. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR NHLEKO:   My name is Nkosinathi Phiwayinkosi 
Thamsanqa Nhleko. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
20 
prescribed oath? 
MR NHLEKO:   I certainly do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR NHLEKO:   Indeed it is. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 63 of 231 
 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth?  If so, please raise your right hand and say so help 
me God. 
MR NHLEKO:   So help me God. 
REGISTRAR:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Okay, now I think e can get 
to the issue you were raising.  I think you were saying 
something about you want to give your side of the story.  
Just talk to me again about that or you..? 
10 
MR NHLEKO:   I was looking for a signal from my senior 
counsel representing me in this particular matter whether 
am I now 
allowed to do so, proceed.  I need to 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Mr Hulley, the evidence leader is 
going to put questions and when you answer those 
questions then you put your side of the story in regard to 
that issue.  What I said to your counsel earlier on was that 
what has happened sometimes that the witness would ask 
to be given a time to make a statement and I have allowed 
20 
them but if I was going to allow him to speak then I would 
not allow you to take the same time, so it is not a 
duplication, but even during – even if we do it this way, you 
will get a chance in regard to each point to put your side of 
the story properly. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 64 of 231 
 
MR NHLEKO:   No, with due respect, Chair, I disagree with 
that approach. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As? 
MR NHLEKO:   I disagree with that approach largely 
because essentially it is tantamount to channelling. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MR NHLEKO:   I am saying essentially that approach is 
tantamount to channelling what it is that I have got to say.  
Now, the fact of the matter is that there has been range of 
issues that have been said. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:   And that the issue at hand, we do not need 
to be selective about it, we need to first and foremost to be 
able to walk through and answer the critical question and 
the 
critical 
question 
is 
what 
happened 
and 
how 
it 
happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:   Now I would have really – and I am not – I 
do not have a problem with being questioned. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR NHLEKO:   In fact that can happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:   But after I would have presented my story. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:   In terms of what happened, how it 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 65 of 231 
 
happened and essentially also what it is that I make the 
particular issues that …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no, we are not going to do it 
like that, Mr Nhleko.  Mr Hulley is going to ask you 
questions.  When he asks you a question in relation to 
each point, I am saying that I will allow you to present your 
side of the story in regard to that point.  When he has 
finished with his questions, if there are still points, some 
issues that you would like to address, you raise that with 
me at that stage and then I hear what those issues are and 
10 
I will allow you to deal with them. 
MR NHLEKO:  Chairperson, that was not my understanding 
in terms of the interaction between the two legal teams.  
My team as well as the legal team of the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, that is how we have been doing it. 
MR NHLEKO:   So may I – I do think that matter would 
have to be dealt for it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, that is how we have been doing it 
with everybody.  That is how we have been doing it with 
everybody, so you get asked questions, you answer them, 
20 
you put your side of the story.  If you do not understand 
the questions, you say so and you give your answer and 
your answer might be one sentence, your answer might be 
like a paragraph depending and we move to the next issue.  
At the end, when he is finished with his questions, when I 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 66 of 231 
 
am finished with my questions, if you say there are some 
issues that have not – I have not been given a chance to 
deal with then I allow you to deal with them. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   Chair, if I may clarify? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   Mr Nhleko’s confusion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   In fact, then what the evidence 
leaders 
and 
ourselves 
agreed 
on 
when 
we 
had 
a 
prehearing – of course it was subject to your approval. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   Was that Mr Hulley will allow Mr 
Nhleko to narrate his story. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Like an opening statement or remarks, 
opening remarks. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   No really opening statement because 
I dealt with the procedural aspect, which I will repeat. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   But you will deal with the facts.  So 
we deal with the facts, you allow him to flow. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   And then from there he will then 
cross-examine him, so that is what was narrated to him, 
that is why he has that confusion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you see, if the evidence leader 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 67 of 231 
 
says – if the evidence leader ’s question is broad and 
allows you to say quite a lot, that is one thing.  If the 
evidence question goes to a specific question, issue, that 
is a different thing.  So maybe it will help if we start, let us 
see. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You might not have any complaint.  Let 
us get started and then let us see. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  I do not think your counsel is 
10 
concerned.  So it may be that because you are not a 
lawyer, I think all of us have an understanding that there is 
no problem in how we propose to do it.  In the end when 
you are done, my chances are that you will feel that you 
have been given a fair opportunity. 
MR NHLEKO:   Okay, no, thank you very much, Chair.  It is 
just that English is complicated.  Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you Mr Chair.  Mr Nhleko, sorry, 
you have already submitted an affidavit to the Commission 
20 
and perhaps if I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I am sorry, I am sorry Mr Hulley. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes, Mr Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see one of the things Mr Nhleko I 
want to try and control, you will have heard me say earlier 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 68 of 231 
 
that there are lots of lever arch files behind Mr Hulley and  
lot of lever arch files, but as I see it the issues don’t seem 
to me to warrant so many files, but maybe it is convenient 
to have those files at hand to deal with whatever issues, so 
I am more concerned, I want us to focus on what I call the 
real issues, and not peripheral issues.  In that way we use 
our time profitably.   Okay, alright. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you very much Mr Chair.  Mr 
Chair if I could just take you to the first bundle in the YC’s 
of bundles, this is EXHIBIT Y – sorry 8 ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, I am sorry, let’s mark this bundle so 
that 
we 
know 
whenever 
we 
refer 
and 
I 
think 
that 
...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  This Bundle Mr Chair will be, this is 
LEA bundle, we can call it LEA1 and inside LEA1 would be 
a number of exhibits, the first of those ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You are too fast, we will call it bundle? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   LEA1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   LEA1? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is correct Mr Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   LEA1, okay that is the bundle.  Now the 
witness’s bundle must be marked accordingly as well. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Correct, so ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Somebody must mark it for him so that 
when he is told Bundle LEA1 he must know which one that 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 69 of 231 
 
is.  Well you better show him which one is Bundle LEA1 so 
that he will – ja, okay alright Mr Hulley then you can 
explain. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you Mr Chair the – that bundle, 
the first document that appears in that bundle is currently 
an index, the second document, which is page two, is a 
Notice of Motion and the – attached to the Notice of Motion 
is the affidavit of Mr Nhleko. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And that document, the Notice of 
10 
Motion, affidavit and the Annexures attached to that Notice 
of Motion run from page two to page 187 of Y8, we would 
call that entire document Exhibit Y8(A). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well we don’t actually need the notice of 
motion anymore, do we, or do we? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I don’t believe we do…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja we should just start on the affidavit, I 
think. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Very well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so, the affidavit – you want the 
20 
affidavit to be admitted as Exhibit? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Y8(A) 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay the affidavit of Mr Nkosinathi 
Phiwayinkosi Thamsanqa Nhleko and its Annexures will be 
admitted as Exhibit Y8(A). 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 70 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay and then as and when you refer to 
another stand-alone Exhibit, we’ll give it a number or you 
already have given them? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   What we’ll do is – we haven’t given it a 
number thus far but what we’ll do is, we’ll take the lunch 
adjournment to make sure we – what we don’t want is if we 
go to the next document and call that document, for 
argument sake, B, because it’s second in the – in terms of 
what we’re discussing with Mr Nhleko then it throws the 
10 
sequence of everything out. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So, we would have to make sure that 
the A, B and C also follows the numbering system as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay that’s fine. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So, Mr Nhleko, for your benefit do you 
have the document which we’ve just currently marked 
Exhibit Y8A? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, I do have it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you can mark it if you did do so while 
20 
you were doing so, so namely the first page of your 
affidavit at page five and I’m saying – when I say page five 
I’m looking at the red top number, you can then mark it 
Exhibit Y8(A), okay.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   If you look at page five of the bundle 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 71 of 231 
 
that has been given to you sir, look at the top, you’ll see 
it’s in red. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   You’ll see there’s a Y8-NPN-0005, the 
0005 refers to the pagination system, it’s the page number 
and that’s the system that we’ll use.  So, when we refer to 
the page number, you’ll want to look at that particular 
sequence in terms of the top right-hand corner. 
MR NHLEKO:   Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So, now, this I would like to 
10 
take…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So maybe, Mr Hulley we can also verify 
– because I see there are two red numbers on each page.  
So, when you refer to a page number, you’ll be referring to 
the top number not the…[intervenes]. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   The top number. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja do you understand Mr Nhleko. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, I do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and he might not say, for example, 
page 0005 he will just say page five, so if you – just so you 
20 
can follow the pagination, yes Mr Hulley. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you very much Mr Chair.  This 
document is…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry, how is the space there Mr 
Nhleko, it looks like you’re struggling with the space, are 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 72 of 231 
 
you comfortable, are you able to open that file? 
MR NHLEKO:   No, I’ll try my level best Chair, otherwise 
we’ll land up with the situation where we’ll have to buy new 
furniture and I don’t think this Commission can afford to do 
so, so I’ll try my level best. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, thank you. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Perhaps, Mr Chair if I can be of some 
assistance to Mr Nhleko perhaps, because I believe that 
his microphone can adjust, so perhaps if he were to raise it 
up in the manner that I’m demonstrating, so that he can put 
10 
his file underneath the microphone.  Mr Nhleko the 
document that you’ve just marked Exhibit Y8(A) is, if you 
look at the tramlines on page five, you’ll see between 
there, 
it 
says 
the 
sworn 
statement 
by 
Nkosinathi 
Phiwayinkosi 
Thamsanqa 
Nhleko, 
do 
I 
pronounce 
it 
correctly. 
MR 
NHLEKO: 
 
 
No, 
you’re 
not, 
it’s 
Nkosinathi 
Phinwayinkosi tongue sound. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, but I think you’ve given it your best 
20 
shot. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thanks, if you’ll turn with me to page 
109 on that same…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well on a lighter note Mr Nhleko, I see 
that your first two names have got nothing to do with 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 73 of 231 
 
Nkosi. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, [laughter]. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Page 109 you’ll see that just below 
three, paragraph 312 is a signature, is that your signature 
sir? 
MR NHLEKO:   I have a – we said we are using the red 
numbers at the top, isn’t it? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   That’s correct, right at the top. 
MR NHLEKO:   So, it’s Y8 NPN 0009, is that what we’re 
10 
using? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   In this instance we’re referring to page 
109 top right-hand corner. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What page did you say Mr Hulley? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  109 Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   1-0-9? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   That’s correct. 
MR NHLEKO:   I don’t see it here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja you use the top red number at the 
corner. 
20 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, the 09, yes, I see that ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Have you got the page? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, it’s actually page five of – is that what 
it is? 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 74 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Your original pagination system, was 
15 our is 109. 
MR NHLEKO:   And then I’m somewhere confused in this, 
because I don’t seem to be seeing it here…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Hulley…  
MR NHLEKO:   Okay, this is right here, excellent, thanks 
for your patience Chairperson, I’m now following, thank you 
very much, indeed that’s my signature sir. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thanks – thank you very much and this 
is the statement that you’ve given – the affidavit that 
10 
you’ve prepared in response to the allegations that were 
made by Mr McBride is that correct? 
MR NHLEKO:   Right. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I want to take you through to deal with 
your background which appears on page nine, Mr Chair, 
but if I understand your affidavit…[intervenes]. 
MR NHLEKO:   Now I’m getting educated yes, I am on 
page nine ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   If I understand your affidavit correctly 
and just to place it in context, I understand you to be 
20 
saying that this particular affidavit is not information that 
you have first-hand knowledge of entirely, there are 
aspects that you do have first-hand knowledge of and there 
are 
certain 
aspects 
that 
you 
don’t 
have 
first-hand 
knowledge of, do I understand that correctly? 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 75 of 231 
 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And if I can ask that you would give an 
indication when we’re dealing with a particular topic where 
a particular aspect is within your knowledge, tell us what 
that – that you have personal knowledge of it and if you 
can also indicate when something is not within your 
knowledge, you can tell us where it is that you got that 
information from but that’s just by way of a general pre-
cursor.  Now in relation to – on page nine section A, you 
deal with the background and if I understand correctly, 
10 
you’re setting out over there your history within the ANC 
and 
your 
history 
leading 
to 
your 
qualifications 
and, 
ultimately, your appointment but I think I’d like to leave it 
to you, just to take us through that and to explain to the 
Chairperson what your background is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Obviously only with only that which you 
feel is important to deal with because it is a lengthy 
background but if you think – those parts that you think are 
important to articulate, you don’t have to go through 
everything on the background part. 
20 
MR NHLEKO:   I’ll try Chairperson and sum it up for you, I 
think, indeed, it’s summarised yes but it’s still long in my 
statement.  I think it has been established that I’m the 
former Minister of Police and essentially Minister of Public 
Works at a later point until the latest Cabinet reshuffle by 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 76 of 231 
 
President Cyril Ramaphosa in 2018.  I hold a Master of 
Science Degree in leadership and change management 
with Leeds Metropolitan University in the United Kingdom 
as well as a National Diploma in Labour Law at an Honours 
Degree level with the Global Institute of Management 
Technologies and I can also confirm that I, indeed, I am a 
member of the African National Congress in good standing 
and that I am in no gainful employment as we speak in my 
term of Parliament and that with the fifth Parliament having 
the National elections of 8 May 2019. 
10 
 
Now, my history cuts across, and indeed, what I 
avoided in this particular statement is to talk about, you 
know, my student and youth social activities and issues 
and so on but at a professional level, my history cuts 
across my early days in the trade union movement.  In 
1987 I joined the, then Transport and General Workers 
Union, in today’s terms it’s now known as SATAWU, I was 
the branch secretary, eventually – no I was the branch 
organiser, that’s how I started off and later on I became 
the branch secretary.  So, essentially, I was responsible for 
20 
the administrative activities of the Trade Union within the 
designated – your graphical scope.  At the time, I think the 
branch was called Northern Natal, so that’s where I started 
off.  Three years later, I then became the general 
secretary, I was elected general secretary of the same 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 77 of 231 
 
union, Transport and General Workers Union which meant 
a 
greater, 
sort 
of, 
National 
responsibility 
and 
an 
administrative 
level 
as 
well 
as 
issues 
of 
policy 
development and enforcement of such policies and the 
constitution of the said union and so on.  
 
That was – I played that particular role up until, of 
course we’re approaching the democratic elections of 
1994, so I stepped down from being the general secretary 
in 1993 in September, I think because I wanted to go back 
to KZN where I come from.  So, I - 30 September COSATU 
10 
Congress, it was a special congress basically, I was then 
the nominated, you know, elected but I’m using this term 
quite qualifying because I think it was a nomination for the 
ANC candidature of Parliament for 1994.  So, I was 
amongst the twenty so delegates nominated for that 
COSATU Congress.  Now, from that point onwards, given 
that I had already stepped down from the general secretary 
position of the Transport and General Workers Union, I 
then was assigned in KZN to work briefly on a COSATU 
project which was there for some few months, just before 
20 
the 1999 elections, it was more to do with the overall 
election 1994, yes, specifically COSATU was, broadly 
speaking for the ANC and I also had to, you know, amongst 
the functions that I had to undertake there was the 
question 
of 
integrated 
that 
subsequently, 
you 
know, 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 78 of 231 
 
eventually to the ANC election machinery in the province of 
Kwa-Zulu Natal in 1994.  
 
In that brief role I was responsible for your ongoing, 
you know, sector analysis and the critical, sort of, Political 
environment at the time, included in that was the question 
of, you know, negotiating for peace, precisely because KZN 
at that time was engulfed by a terrible period of violence 
that occurred amongst our people there and so on.  Then 
post that I, you know, elections came and I was then sent 
to Parliament by the ANC in 1994 when I started off there, I 
10 
was assigned for the ANC study group on transport which, 
essentially, in its broader institutional context then was the 
Portfolio Committee on the – on transport.  There, I was, 
largely 
responsible 
for 
the 
coordinating, 
sort 
of, 
coordination function of that very same study group in 
dealing with the critical policy issues of transport.  I think 
that’s the period between 1994 to 1999. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   In 1999 you were – you Chaired the 
Public 
Service 
Administration 
Portfolio 
Committee…[intervenes]. 
20 
MR NHLEKO:   Public Service and Administration Portfolio 
Committee, with responsibilities of drawing up the annual 
programmes and plans and essentially directing the work 
programmes 
of 
the 
Portfolio 
Committee 
and 
the 
presentation of such reports before Parliament and other 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 79 of 231 
 
structures of course but at the centre of that Portfolio 
function 
was 
liaising 
between 
stakeholders 
such 
as 
Ministers, 
departments, 
institutions 
in 
support 
of 
democracy, civil society and others. So, that essentially, 
was the function there.   
 
In 2001 I was appointed Chairperson of the ANC 
Parliamentary caucus, function which essentially placed 
myself as a point of contact between ANC MP’s the 
leadership of the organisation being the ANC and of course 
enabling discussion on the work of study groups.  So the 
10 
ANC which play of Portfolio Committee work and have sub-
structures 
of 
the 
National 
caucus, 
lasting 
enabling 
members of Parliament to discuss and agree on their 
approach pertaining to all matters on the Parliamentary 
agenda and that – in that function as the Chair of the ANC 
Parliamentary caucus I also represented the ANC caucus at 
the ANC National Executive Committee meetings. 
 
In 2002, honourable Chair I was appointed Chief 
Whip for the ANC which responsibility was Political and 
Resource Management of the ANC in Parliament and it’s 
20 
also a function that required coordination between relevant 
structures of Parliament, Public Ministers, and ANC Head 
Quarters and of course, critical in that function was the 
liaising 
function 
between 
political 
parties, 
Presiding 
Officers and the Programming Committee of Parliament. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 80 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   If I could be of some assistance Mr 
Nhleko and if I – and I don’t mean to hurry you along. 
MR NHLEKO:   Right. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   What I would like is, if you could 
highlight the aspects that you believe are important that 
the Chairperson has to have regard to in relation to your 
background.  You obviously – most of this is already set-
out in your affidavit but if you’d like to highlight certain 
portions, I will appreciate that. 
MR NHLEKO:   I – no I’ll try and do that, the one area, of 
10 
course, was my function as the Regional Commissioner of 
the Correctional Services in KZN, coordination of security 
programmes as constitutionally mandated and so forth.  
The 
– 
and 
the 
question 
of 
promoting 
community 
involvement and awareness in correctional matters was 
amongst those but I was, essentially, also responsible for 
all accounting issues at Provincial level but response – the 
reporting 
to 
– 
at 
a 
National 
level 
to 
the 
National 
Commissioner as the Accounting Officer.  In 2008 I worked 
for Umhlati Municipality as Deputy Municipal Manager 
20 
there but most of the time I functioned as the Acting 
Municipal Manager, given the variety of reasons that 
occurred there in that municipality. In that I had the 
responsibility, 
I 
was 
then 
responsible 
for 
the 
implementation 
your 
IDP’s, 
maintaining 
Organisational 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 81 of 231 
 
Management 
System, 
coordinating 
Human 
Resource 
activities and national relationships, risk management, 
strategic 
management 
of 
local 
economy 
development 
initiatives as well as public relations and communication. 
 
I do also need to mention that in the period set out 
in my affidavit, in 2002 to 2005 I served as a member of 
the Judicial Services Commission, the structure primarily 
concerned with courts and administration of justice as well 
as the appointment of Judges.  I also served, within the 
said period, 2002 to 2005 served as a Deputy Chairperson 
10 
of the ANC Political Committee in Parliament where largely, 
that’s a structure responsible for political direction of the 
work of the ANC in Parliament. 
 
I then left, Umhlathuze Municipality, I think, at the 
beginning of 2010 because I was asked by the Minister – 
then Minister of Public Service and Administration, Mr 
Baloyi that I needed to come in and assist him in the 
setting up of the Special Anti-Corruption Unit in the 
Department of Public Service and Administration.  I 
performed in this particular function for – for some few 
20 
months, I think it must have been four months and the work 
there was still at a conceptual stage.  The intention was 
that the entity itself needed to form out as a Government 
entity 
eventually, 
the 
Anti-Corruption 
Unit 
in 
the 
Department of Public Service and Administration.  So, I 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 82 of 231 
 
could not see that kind of work to fruition precisely 
because I then moved on, after being hired as Director 
General of the Department of Labour in 2011 and I 
functioned in that particular position up until the May 
elections of 2014.  Then I was appointed in May 2014 as 
Minister of Police.  I think the rest then is…[intervenes]. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Very well and that was because the – if 
I understand correctly from your affidavit, you – the 
general elections had just been held and a new Cabinet 
was appointed by the then, President Mr Jacob Zuma? 
10 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, correctly so. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now if we can just move forward, 
paragraph 40 you set-out that there was a Cabinet re-
shuffle that took place in 2017 and you assumed a new role 
as the Minister of Public Works. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, that’s correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay and you presently not – you’re 
not a Minister in any portfolio, is that correct? 
MR NHLEKO:   No, no I’m not, I’m not gainfully employed 
as they say. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes, and that was as a result of a 
Cabinet reshuffle by the present President, Mr Cyril 
Ramaphosa? 
MR NHLEKO:   That’s correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now, the – if we can move forward to 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 83 of 231 
 
page 18 of that bundle you deal there with the complaint 
that had been raised by Mr McBride relating to Mr 
Mbongwa.  Now, is there – and obviously very briefly 
you’ve heard some of the discussion that has taken place 
between myself and the Chairperson regarding the attitude 
of the evidence leaders towards the complaint relating to 
Mr Mbangwa, is there anything, obviously you’ve been 
accused of employing a fraudster – a person who is a 
foreigner, is there anything that you’d like to say, as far as 
that is concerned before we move on to the more weightier 
10 
matters, as it were? 
MR NHLEKO:   No, indeed I do need to say something 
about that. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes.  
MR NHLEKO:   There are two issues that have been raised 
there, both before this Commission and also at a public 
level.  The first one is that Mr Leon Abednego Mbangwa 
whom I hired as Chief of…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Nhleko, I don’t know if you could 
raise your voice a little bit. 
20 
MR NHLEKO:   Oh okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now, you have a deep voice, I think, and 
sometimes I can hear you quite clearly but sometimes I 
can’t, so maybe you can raise it a bit. 
MR NHLEKO:   No, my apologies Chair.  There are two 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 84 of 231 
 
issues that were raised with regards to Mr Mbangwa’s 
employment.  The first one is that he’s a fraudster and the 
other one that he’s a foreigner.  Now, just a little bit of 
background is that, how I linked up with Mr Mbangwa was 
that I actually found him as part of the recruitment exercise 
and hunting around that I conducted, which then located 
him being Kwa-Zulu Natal Legislature.  This is after, of 
course, I had Ms Kathy Hendriks there who was my Chief 
of Staff who then moved over to the South African Police 
Service for another function.  So, Mr Mbangwa, in KZN 
10 
Legislature was a Senior Manager, basically a Chief 
Director kind of position that he held there within the 
Legislature.  On the qualification front, Mr Mbangwa holds 
a Masters Degree in Business Administration with Regent 
Business 
School, 
a 
Diploma 
in 
Human 
Resource 
Management, a Diploma in Industrial Marketing with Unisa, 
a Diploma in Public Relations Practice with the Public 
Relations Institute of South Africa, a Teachers Diploma 
with the University of Zimbabwe, Programme and Project 
Management 
with 
the 
American 
Institute 
Graduate 
20 
University and currently he’s awaiting results of his 
dissertation for his Masters in Public and Development 
Management with WITS University.  Now, these documents, 
I’ve also provided them in a separate Annexure to this 
Commission. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 85 of 231 
 
 
Now on the work experience, Mr Mbangwa has been 
with the South African Public Service for no less than 20 
years, in different functions but he started teaching in 
Zimbabwe, Zambia, Botswana and South Africa between 
1986 and 1995 and he headed communications for the 
Mpumalanga Provincial Government, 1995 to 1998 and he 
was a Director of the Independent Electoral Commission of 
South Africa from 1999 to 2001 and also a Director of the 
Department of Justice, 2001 to 2002 and the Chief 
Director, KZN Department of Health 2005 to 2010 and of 
10 
course where I got his was that he was then – by then the 
Senior Manager of Kwa-Zulu Natal Legislature 2011 to 
2015, 2015 that’s the time he was then transferred to the 
Ministry of Police. 
 
Now as I have said he has been with the South 
African Public Service for over 20 years, he was awarded a 
Merit Certificate by the Mpumalanga Provincial Government 
and as Director for IEC together with Judge Kriegler and 
they represented South Africa in East Moore as an 
Electoral Officer of the United Nations and that also, the 
20 
appreciation note by the United Nations is also a document 
that we have just handed in.  He was also in the Minister of 
Justice Office dealing with the implementation of the e-
Justice Programme. 
 
Now given this history and of course the level of 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 86 of 231 
 
qualification, I was satisfied that he was the correct 
candidate for the Chief of Staff position in my office and I 
accordingly arranged for the lateral transfer.  Now, I must 
then point out to the honourable Chair, members of the 
Commission that  - just basically two things, the issue 
being raised about his criminal record and so on, those are 
issues that, if this was a fresh and direct sort of 
employment, would have been declared – or perhaps would 
have looked at establishing some veracity about this man 
and so on but a transfer, lateral transfer, already that 
10 
person is in the system, within Government.  So, you 
wouldn’t start the exercise all over again and so on.   
So at the time when I hired him, I wasn’t aware 
about the criminal office that he allegedly committed, which 
was, by the way it’s about an ID document and it’s the first 
time I come across somebody who was arrested, sentenced 
– and served a sentence for an identity fraud.  So, I – it 
was just one of those things but nevertheless.  Now, so on 
one occasion I’m participating in a – there’s a radio station 
which is quite popular here in – around Johannesburg, I 
20 
think, called Power FM.  So, I went in there, it was more to 
do with the Police Portfolio and many other things that I 
had to deal with, the anchor then asked this question about 
Mr Mbangwa’s employment and citizenship and of course I 
had no direct answers at the time.  So, except undertaking 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 87 of 231 
 
that I was going to follow through on these issues and try 
and establish what, actually happened.  Now, indeed, I saw 
then after that, that sure, then confronted Mr Mbangwa, I 
asked him these questions, are you a fraudster, what 
happened?  Then he provided the brief background to that 
issue, in fact an extensive background to that issue.  
Firstly, that indeed he was sentenced to 36 months 
imprisonment of which he served 18 months and released 
from prison in 2004 and at which point, the point being that 
he’s releases, he was given a letter to apply for citizenship 
10 
by decent. Note that he was not deported and Mr Mbangwa 
informed me that in all positions of employment, in other 
words pre the 2015 transfer to my office he had – he 
always declared his criminal record and completed his 
Z204 form for security clearance, and upon releasing 2004 
he took steps to rectify his citizenship and documents in 
accordance with Section 3 sub-section1 of the South 
African Citizenship Act 88 of 1995. 
 
Now it has got – this point has got to be noted, to 
date, the Department of Home Affairs has not been 
20 
forthcoming in dealing with this particular issue.  As a 
result of which the Pietermaritzburg High Court was 
approached to give force to this particular attempt.  The 
Pietermaritzburg High Court, case number 6840/09 ordered 
that and ordered that evidence be held on 16, 17, 18 March 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 88 of 231 
 
2011 on determining descendancy for Mr Mbangwa.  On 17 
March 2011 a settlement agreement was entered into 
before the Pietermaritzburg High Court for a deoxy nucleic 
acid test between Mr Mbangwa and a surviving sibling in 
South Africa and such a DNA test results were in Mr 
Mbangwa’s favour, that document I’ve also provided it for 
this Commission.  In other words, the actual DNA, he did 
test results and so on.  Today the Department of Home 
Affairs has continuously reneged from this Court Order. 
 
Now I do need to raise two things here, Chair, about 
10 
this thing.  For me this is a very worrying tendency for 
some State Departments not to comply with Court Orders.  
Now I’m saying this thing because, indeed, the advantage 
that I have got is that I’ve been an administrator so I’ve 
seen the administrative aspect of the State, so I’ve 
participated in that.  So, I do have particular experiences 
when it comes to such issues but also, I have an extensive 
sort of experience around issues of Political Management, 
I’ve also seen these particular issues.  Now, for me this is 
a political problem, precisely because if you – if we allow a 
20 
situation such as this for an example our efforts on the 
creation of a developmental State on the basis of the rule 
of law gets compromised.  So, I’m throwing this point 
because I think this point is quite fundamental, even with 
regards to this issue but also far beyond this particular 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 89 of 231 
 
issue and so on. 
 
Secondly, the second point I want to raise is that, in 
any case it is absurd and lunacy, at best for anyone to 
suggest that an African person is a foreigner on the African 
soil. Africans by birth, Chairperson, in this continent of 
ours, are understood to be of a tree of origin, this very 
same land of our forebearers.  At issue here, Chair, is what 
the European powers did in 1884 when they met at a billing 
conference wherein, they said divide, plunder rape, maim, 
rape and dehumanise the African person.  All of these 
10 
atrocities were committed on the basis, of nothing else, 
except that they considered themselves as being White 
superior human beings and that’s the matter. 
 
I’m 
raising 
this 
point 
because, 
even 
in 
this 
Commission reference is being made to a fellow African 
person as a foreigner and that can’t be correct and I think 
Princess Mugure Ndarathimirwo was correct when, in a 
song, with tears on her face articulated that those who 
worship foreign Gods are swallowed by them.  The 
greatness of our land lies in the glory of our children as we 
20 
fight our battles, we create …[intervenes].   
CHAIRPERSON:   But Mr Nhleko, how far can you take that 
because ...[intervenes]  
MR NHLEKO:   I am done with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...because you were a member of 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 90 of 231 
 
Parliament. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
An 
act 
of 
Parliament 
recognises 
foreigners as including Africans, you were a member of 
Parliament, under democracy that Parliament – the majority 
of which are members from your political party recognises 
by way of a law that an African who is from Zimbabwe, an 
African who is from Kenya, Swaziland is a foreigner in 
South Africa. 
MR NHLEKO:   I don’t know, perhaps you are probably well 
10 
read with regards to that piece of legislature but for me, 
Chair…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I’m talking about, I mean, you were 
Minister of Police and when it comes to people who are 
regarded as foreigners, as I understand the position, there 
is no distinction being made to say, if you are a – if you 
are from Zimbabwe or from within the continent you are not 
a foreigner in South Africa.  
MR NHLEKO:   I think, honourable Chair, the correct 
reference it’s an illegal immigrant or I think there is 
20 
another term that is being utilised.  I’m not too sure 
whether that piece of legislation, for instance, is termed in 
that kind of manner in terms of referring to Africans 
being… [Chair and witness speaking together] but I’m not 
sure…[intervenes]. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 91 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   It might have, since then, been amended 
and maybe different terminologies…[intervenes]. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, I think the proper reference is that, if 
you do not have – you are not properly documented, you 
are then…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   An immigrant. 
MR 
NHLEKO: 
 
 An 
immigrant, 
an 
illegal 
immigrant 
or…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are an illegal immigrant. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, something to that effect I think that’s 
10 
the…[intervenes].   
CHAIRPERSON:   Would you not have the same concerns 
if …[intervenes]. 
MR NHLEKO:   That’s – conceptually that’s a different 
definition as opposed to saying to an African person, 
foreigner. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR NHLEKO:   On the African side you can’t say that, in 
any case, Chair, even if what you just spoke to is correct, 
that perhaps, maybe the law says that I still maintain my 
20 
position it’s incorrect to have such a reference regardless 
of what the law books say. 
CHAIRPERSON: Yes, no, no that’s fine, I don’t want us to 
spend too much time on it but you have made the point 
that, for you there’s a distinction between a foreigner and 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 92 of 231 
 
an immigrant.   
MR NHLEKO:   Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And if the word, immigrant, is used 
that’s acceptable, yes. 
MR NHLEKO:   So I’ve clarified this issue, you know, up to 
a point where there were Court Orders for an example and 
the status of Mr Mbangwa – for me then, all of this, 
clarified why, perhaps, even the other State Department 
hired him, this is now my deduction from this but as I had 
qualified it earlier on - that look there was no way, given 
10 
the lateral transfer that I would know about the criminal 
record that he has got and his nationality kind of status 
and so on, there was no – the original file, then is with the 
Department that – or State institution that he used to work 
for.  So, when you do a lateral transfer you take that right 
over and that’s basically it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, your point – the points you make 
about Mr Mbangwa is, one, you had a vacancy you wanted 
to fill. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes. 
20 
ADV 
HULLEY 
SC: 
 
 
Two, 
he 
was 
– 
he 
had 
the 
qualifications and the knowledge and experience that was 
required for that position. 
MR NHLEKO:   Correct. 
COMMISSIONER:   Three, to the extent that he had a 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 93 of 231 
 
criminal record, one that you didn’t know and two you 
couldn’t know because he was coming from another 
department he was not being employed as a new person in 
the Public Service. 
MR NHLEKO:   Correctly so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay, thank you.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   Just to – if I might just to complete 
that, if I understand correctly, Mr Mbangwa took the matter 
to Court and you say that the Department of Home Affairs 
has reneged upon the Court Order as things stand, to the 
10 
best of your knowledge, Mr Mbangwa – the Court has not 
yet declared Mr Mbangwa to be a South African Citizen by 
decent? 
MR NHLEKO:   No, I’m not sure whether I’m getting you 
correctly 
there. 
 
The 
High 
Court 
established 
the 
descendancy of Mr Mbangwa through the DNA test, it 
established that. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   If I understand your – and correct me if 
I’m wrong, if I understand your narration, what you’re 
saying is that there was a settlement agreement in terms of 
20 
which it was agreed that he would go for DNA testing in 
order to establish whether he was a South African citizen 
by decent, well presumably whether he was related to a 
person who was a South African citizen and you’re saying 
that the test came out in his favour. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 94 of 231 
 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   But the Department has reneged on the 
agreement, in other words, the Department either had to 
implement – having come up with an agreement it had to 
implement it and the Department had to make him a citizen 
by decent, alternatively he had to go back to Court to get a 
Court Order declaring that he is a South African citizen by 
decent? 
MR NHLEKO:   No, it’s not what I’m saying, it’s an order of 
Court. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me put it this way, of course you 
may or may not understand the picture completely, you can 
nod, you – but what I understand from your affidavit, 
whatever issue there was between Mr Mbangwa and the 
Department of Home Affairs with regard to his status in the 
country, that was taken to Court. 
MR NHLEKO:   Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And a process was agreed between Mr 
Mbangwa and the Department of Home Affairs in terms of 
which 
his 
descendancy 
was 
established. 
 
As 
you 
20 
understand the position the Court made an order and in 
terms of the order, was the Home Affairs Department 
supposed to issue him with the citizenship documents or 
was it required to decide on his citizenship application?  
What is your understanding of what…[intervenes]? 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 95 of 231 
 
MR NHLEKO:   My understanding is that they were 
supposed to issue him with…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   With a citizenship. 
MR NHLEKO:   A citizenship. 
CHAIRPERSON:   A citizenship yes, and the point you 
make is that, as far as you understand, up to now the 
Department has not complied with that Court Order. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you can’t take it beyond that. 
MR NHLEKO:   Of course. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, thank you, alright.  Mr Hulley 
we are at seven minutes past one. 
ADV 
HULLEY 
SC: 
 
 
Perhaps 
we 
should 
take 
the 
adjournment now. 
CHAIRPERSON: Ja let’s take the adjournment, lunch 
adjournment, and we are going to resume at ten past two.  
We adjourn.   
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Mr… 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  The – from time to time Mr Chair if you 
would perhaps forgive me I might just lean back against the 
thing for my lower back I suffer with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh is that so. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Back pain yes. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 96 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well if you have an ailment like that I do 
not want it to be made worse because… 
ADV HULLEY SC:  No, no I will continue until it becomes a 
problem and then I will mention it to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay but if you – you wish to sit because 
of that situation I would understand. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.   
ADV HULLEY SC:  Mr Chair if I might just indicate I have 
had the opportunity during the adjournment just indicate who 
10 
– what the exhibit numbers are because it may cause a 
problem if later on if we do not have the exhibits in their 
sequential order. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So item 1 which is Mr Nhleko – it says 
here Mr Nhleko’s Rule 3.4 Application of course it must be 
Mr Nhleko’s affidavit – his sworn statement. So item – so if 
you look at the – the index. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You want me to look at the index? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is right and then when we go there 
20 
at a later stage to a particular document, I will then ask you 
Mr Chair with your leave to mark that particular document 
with a particular number. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on one sec.  Hang on one second.  
Ja the main index.  Ja. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 97 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So – so you will see there that the item 1 
is – it says the – Mr Nkosinathi Nhleko’s Rule 3.4 
Application.  Now the affidavit itself will be the Exhibit Y8A.  
It is – because the notice of motion does not form part of 
that.  But that item 1 will be Exhibit Y8A 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Exhibit – item 3 on the – on that list 
which is – it is Mr Sandile July’s reply to Robert McBride that 
will be Y8B. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us – let us start from item 1.  You 
10 
want us to say to – what do you want us to do? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So if you can in your – just to the left of 
it in manuscript for present purposes mark that as Y8A that 
will be Exhibit Y8A. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am – just switch on your microphone if 
you are able to switch on your microphone.  Ja. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   I was saying that we can make it easy 
by just deleting Rule 3.4 application then it will be Nhleko’s 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I think that is… 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so we basically delete – cross out 
Rule 3.4 application. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And put in affidavit and then you want us 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 98 of 231 
 
maybe in bracket to say Exhibit. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Y8A. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Y8A. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is correct Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright.  And – and then the next one that 
is 2. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Then number 2 already has an exhibit 
number. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So just say Exhibit. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So that is Exhibit Y7 but that was a 
10 
historic document so I cannot interfere with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So item number 2 is an historic 
document.  It has already got an exhibit number. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So it is Exhibit Y7 you will see. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  So – so – but we can make it 
clear it is Exhibit Y7. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So it is Y7 ne? 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is so Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.   
ADV HULLEY SC:  Then item 3 Mr Sandile July’s reply to 
Robert McBride his affidavit that would be Exhibit Y8[B]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Hm. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 99 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Then the next one item 4 that is an 
historic document so it has already Y5. Then item 5. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Y5.  Hang on one second.  
Somebody should be doing the same exercise for the witness 
because otherwise when we get to… 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On the witness’s file.  Okay alright. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So item 5 would read – that is the 
affidavit of Mr July in reply to Matthews Sesoko that would 
be Exhibit Y8[C]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes that is fine. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Then the next item is Mr Sesoko’s reply 
to Sandile July that is item 6 that would be Exhibit Y8[D]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Then the following affidavit – item which 
is item 7 it already has an exhibit number that is Y6.  Then 
the item 8 will be Y8[E], Exhibit Y8[E]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Item 8 is Exhibit Y8[C]? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  E. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no we have had – we have had C. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  E – that is Echo, E for Echo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh E? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is correct Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Exhibit Y8[E].  Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Then item 9 will be Exhibit Y8[F] for 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 100 of 231 
 
foxtrot. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Then Exhibit 10 I am going to break that 
up into two if I can just take you – take you to that item Mr 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  It is – explain.  If you would turn with me 
Mr Chair in Bundle G. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  The first part of that is a docket and it 
10 
says over here Ex – the description. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One second – one second.  What page? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So it is at page 3207. 
CHAIRPERSON:  3207? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is so Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So page 3207 would be one bundle of 
documents which is – which are extracts from the police 
case docket. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Pretoria Central CAS245405/2015 and 
that will be marked as Exhibit 8 – Y8[G]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Exhibit Y8[G]? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is so Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay we – right. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 101 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And then we will – if you turn to page 
3215. 
CHAIRPERSON:  3215? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is so.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That will – that page together with the 
correspondence running to page 3221. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And that would be Exhibit Y8[H]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Exhibit Y8[H]. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV HULLEY SC:  And then if you would – the next 
document would be item 11 on your… 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are done with this file?  Are we done 
with this file? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  No we are not yet done with that file Mr 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  There is – there is still a few items. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  We go back to the other one. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So the next item is page 3 – sorry is 
3222 in the bundle that you have got but the index is item 
11. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just repeat that. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 102 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Okay let me do it a little at a time.  So if 
you turn with me Mr Chair to page 3222. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And if you can mark that on that page 
Exhibit Y8[I]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Exhibit Y8? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  [I]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [I]. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And then… 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the Rendition Report by the 
10 
Reference Group. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Correct.  Now if you turn to – follow the 
sequence on your – on your index Mr Chair if you look at 
item 11.1 on your index.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  If you can mark that item 11.1 that is 
your Exhibit Y8[I] so it is the document we first looked at. 
CHAIRPERSON:  11.1 will be Exhibit Y8[I]. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is so Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  The 11.2 on your index. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  What did we – what did you 
say we must mark item 10 on the previous page? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Okay item 10 is going to be broken up 
into two. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 103 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not have to write anything on that 
column? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes because it will be difficult to write it 
in the column. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Because that column just has one item 
which is 10. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Alright and then 11.2? 
ADV 
HULLEY 
SC: 
 
So 
11.2 
on 
your 
list 
would 
be 
appointments and that would be item – sorry Exhibit Y8[J]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So if you can go to page 3241 of the 
bundle that you were looking at in [G].  Now that on the – on 
page 3241 if you can write Exhibit Y8[J]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well 41 is just the label of what comes 
after that is it not? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes.  It is – we can take that away. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja should we not have – go to 3242? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then that will be Exhibit? 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  J8[J]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Y8[J]. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is so Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And that exhibit will continue right up to 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 104 of 231 
 
page 3250 so that is all – would all be one exhibit.  And 
then… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it is – it is different letters is it not? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  They are different letters but all – all 
related to the – they are different letters my only fear is that 
if we start breaking up individual letters within that series 
then it may lead to – but I am quite happy to do that except 
that it may lead to problems. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes otherwise the Rule we are following 
will be breached. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because they are separate document is it 
not? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  They are separate documents.  They all 
relate however to – to the same issue which is – sorry which 
is the appointment letters of the various people that sat on 
the Reference Group. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I – I think your – your – well why do we not 
make them K, L, M whatever. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Very well. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  So the next one at 3243 would be 
Exhibit Y8. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  K 
CHAIRPERSON:  [L] no K 
ADV HULLEY SC:  J, K. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 105 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  K ja.  And then the next one will be Y8[L]. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is so Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The next one will be Exhibit Y8[M]. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then the next one will be Exhibit Y8[N] 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The next one Y8[O].  The next one Y8[P].   
ADV HULLEY SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Q – so then – the one at 3249 is Exhibit 
Y8[Q].   
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The next one is Exhibit Y8[R].  Q, R.  The 
next one is Y8[S].   
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is 3251. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That has two pages. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that one has got two pages.  So we 
skip the page – the second page of the letter and the next 
one will be Exhibit Y8[T], is that right? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is so Mr Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  R, S, T. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  That is the one at 3253 it has got 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 106 of 231 
 
also two pages. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  It does. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That takes care of those letters.  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Then the next bundle of documents which 
are all your Rule 3.3 Notices.  There is no reason why that 
should have an exhibit number and which would then take us 
through if I could to what should be page 3342 in the 
sequence and that will be given that the last number was T 
this one would be U, Y8[U]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What item number? 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  3 – it is on the list it is item 14. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Right. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So it is at page 3342. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that will be Exhibit? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Y8[U]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  U.  Okay.  Alright. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And then attached to that – in fact 
separately because it is not really attached.  This is a 
document 
that 
we 
have 
received 
from 
Mr 
Nhleko’s 
representatives but it seems to be a – it is the affidavit of Mr 
20 
Gamanyane.  I am not sure if it is already in the bundle I do 
not know where it is but I just received it.  They have 
obviously found it somewhere and I am not sure if we should 
give it a separate … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well maybe should your juniors not have a 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 107 of 231 
 
look at that while we continue and at some stage they can 
tell you what the position is and then we can take it from 
there. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  The – it does not seem that he is 
testifying which means that he would not have an Exhibit 
number to his document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but is it needed for purposes of Mr 
Nhleko’s evidence? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  I do not know they have asked us to put 
it in and we have put it in for their benefit. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  But I would imagine that they would want 
it in. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes well let us see when we get to – to 
when somebody talks about it. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  If I – if I can then just – so that the last 
item was U there are additional.  Then item 15 which was the 
bundle that had been handed up to us for inclusion in the 
record was a series of documents relating – or that had been 
provided to us by Mr Nhleko’s representatives.  A lot of the 
20 
documents in that bundle are duplications of things that are 
found elsewhere and it would seem to me that the preferable 
way in which to deal with it is to give it – the entire bundle 
its own exhibit number because if we try to break it down we 
are going to find that the document already has an exhibit 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 108 of 231 
 
number elsewhere.  So rather give the bundle as a whole an 
Exhibit number subject to what you have to say Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that of course would breach our other 
rule. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  It would.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you could have a document – we 
could have a – well have those that may have been given 
exhibit numbers in previously under a different work stream 
have they been identified as to which ones they are?  They 
have not been identified? 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  It is difficult.  Some of the documents – 
most of the documents that I know are duplications seem to 
relate to documents that have been taken out of the 
affidavits 
of 
either 
Mr 
McBride, 
Mr 
Sesoko 
Kuba 
or 
alternatively the affidavit of Mr Sandile July one – some – 
certain things have been extracted from that and put in here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I guess what we could have – we 
could have – we could give them an exhibit number for 
present purposes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Hm. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And if they happen to be identical to a 
document that has been given an exhibit number in another 
work stream it is just identical. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Hm.  We just live with the consequences. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It – ja I think if – I think if they are 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 109 of 231 
 
identical but it is known that they have been given different 
exhibit numbers that is better than when there is two 
documents that have the same exhibit number but they are 
different because that makes it more confusing. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes of course.  That is problematic. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  So – so maybe let us give them 
Exhibit numbers for purposes of Mr Nhleko’s 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Evidence and if – if they happen to have – 
to be identical to others that are there – different exhibit 
10 
numbers elsewhere at least they are – they are the same. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair.  So the next item 
and on this list would be at page 3368.  In fact, it started on 
3369 this forms part of the bundle that was handed up. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that must be another bundle not this 
one. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sorry this is Bundle H.  Mr Chair this is 
Bundle H. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is the page number? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So from 3369 to 329 – sorry 3391 those 
20 
are all – that is all correspondence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja what page do… 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Is this case notices. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Starting on page? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  3369. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 110 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So that is a notice in terms of Rule 3.3. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us deal with – oh that is just a 
notice. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now this was part of what Mr Mokhari 
was addressing on when he asked to make his opening 
statement, he was addressing you on this bundle of 
documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So unless we are going to make that an 
10 
exhibit number? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no the notice has no evidential. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Value. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Value.  And the correspondence it also 
depends what the purpose is, is that… 
ADV HULLEY SC:  As I understand… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or was it simply about the procedural 
issues as the service of notices because if it was about the 
service of notices, we should not put that – I think Mr 
Mokhari agrees. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Keep it out. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We should not – ja we should keep it out of 
– out of it.  If it remains in the bundle for convenience that 
might be fine but preferably it should be taken out. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 111 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So we – but we – we will not give them 
exhibit numbers. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Then Mr Chair if we can go to page 3393. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What page? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  3393 of the same bundle that you have 
got before you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So this is the corres – these are the – the 
10 
degree certificates and so forth that Mr Nhleko was referring 
to in respect of Mr Mbangwa. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  What exhibit number should we give 
to? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So we – the previous one was Y8[T] so 
this one will be Y8[U]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just say that again please? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  This document on 3393 will be Y8[U]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Exhibit Y8[U]? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is correct Mr Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  The next one is the certificate. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So that would be V. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Y8 – U, V. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  V. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Is the next one a different diploma or 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 112 of 231 
 
same thing?  It looks like the same as the one we have just 
done. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  The… 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is the same. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  It is the same. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So we have duplication.  Let us go to the 
next one 3396. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is Exhibit? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  W. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Y8. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Y8[W]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  W okay certificate at 3397. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  X 
CHAIRPERSON:  Y.  Exhibit Y8[Y]? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  W – sorry this is – this should be Y8[X] – 
W, X. 
CHAIRPERSON:  X okay.  Okay the one at 3397 is Exhibit 
Y8[X]. Ja.  Has it got page 2 or is the next one. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  It looks like it is a two page document. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Then the one at 3399 is Exhibit Y8 
what? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Z. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Z okay.  3400? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Should be Y8[AA]. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 113 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  3401? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Y8[AB].  Y8 – sorry we have called it Y8 
– we either call it Y8[AB] or Y8[AA] – ag sorry [BB]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The previous one we said is what AA? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  AA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So this would be BB. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  We can call it BB. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja it is Exhibit Y8[BB].  And then the one 
at 3403? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  CC – Y8[CC]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  And then – then the one – the next 
one at 3404 is Y8[DD]. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is so Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then the next one is Y8[EE]. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is at 3405.  Y8[FF] is the one at 3406. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And 3407? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  It would be Y8[GG]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  3408 Y8[HH]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  3409 is Y8[II]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  3411 is Y8[JJ]. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 114 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  3412 is Y8[KK]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  3413 is Y8[LL]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that is two pages. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  There is two pages to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the settlement agreement. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Is Y8[MM]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that has got … 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That has got six pages. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  A number of pages.  It ends at 3420 is that 
right? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Up until 3420 that is correct Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  3421? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Is Y8[NN] that is N for November. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Y8 double? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  NN. 
CHAIRPERSON:  M? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  N for November. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Is that a one page or… 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  It is a one page document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  3422? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Is Y8[OO]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And 3423 is Y8[PP]. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 115 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And then after that there are some 
extracts taken from legislation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is at page 3425. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But let us… 
ADV HULLEY SC:  I understand that we do not give them 
exhibit numbers anymore. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Legislation is – does not have to be proved 
is it not?  So it is put in just for convenience.  We do not 
10 
have to put it as an exhibit is it not? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As long as we know where to find it when 
we looking for it.  Yes are we done? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And then there is a document at page 
3431. 
CHAIRPERSON:  34? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  3431. 
CHAIRPERSON:  3431 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is correct Mr Chair.  That based on 
20 
my reading of it appears to be an extract that is taken from 
the 2001 Regulations Public Service Regulations but I am 
not exactly sure what it is but it seems to be taken from the 
Public Service Regulations of 2001. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  I think Regulations we do not have to 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 116 of 231 
 
put – give it an exhibit number really as long as the index 
tells us where to find it.   
ADV HULLEY SC:  Then the next item we can ignore.  So we 
can ignore that.  Our next item would be at page 3434. 
CHAIRPERSON:  34? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  34. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And that would be Y8[QQ] I believe it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Double? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  QQ. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Have we done OO? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So OO was at page… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh we have – if we have done it it is fine. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  We have. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  QQ.  Alright QQ 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So this is QQ.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  It is – it runs until 3437.  So the next 
item would be at page 3439 and that would be Y8[RR].   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And that is a two page document.  And 
the next one would be at Y8 – sorry at page 3442. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are we about to finish this exercise? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  What I propose… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because this is something that I should not 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 117 of 231 
 
be doing. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  It is going to take – it is going to take a 
while.  Can I propose… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is there something that you and your team 
should be doing? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  We can do – we can do that separately 
Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I should not be doing this. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  I have got to the document that I wanted 
to identify so anything beyond this. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay let us get going. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair.  The – Mr Nhleko 
sorry just you will recall that we – before we took the 
adjournment, we have referred to… 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes Sir. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  A settlement agreement in relation to Mr 
Mbangwa’s situation.  If you would turn with me to a bundle 
which presently is marked Bundle H. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I think if we can from what – from my 
understanding of the issues we should not be detained too 
20 
long about them. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  We are definitely not I just want him to 
confirm that this was the document he is referring to.  Thank 
you Mr Chair. 
MR NHLEKO:  8H – yes Sir 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 118 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  If you can turn to page 3415. 
MR NHLEKO:  3415.  That is the – this is Exhibit Y8[MM] 
and that is the settlement agreement you were referring to 
before the adjournment, is that correct? 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes correct Sir. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Insofar as the meaning of that settlement 
agreement is concerned Mr Chair I am not going to debate it 
with the witness the settlement agreement is there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now I would like us to turn back to your 
10 
affidavit which is Y8[A]. 
MR NHLEKO:  Alright.   
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now you came in if I recall your 
testimony correctly you came through – you were appointed 
as the Minister of Police in May of 2014? 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And you set about establishing what you 
refer to as a Reference Group.  Could you explain to us how 
that Reference Group came about? 
MR 
NHLEKO: 
 No thank 
you very much Honourable 
20 
Chairperson and the members of the commission.  The – 
when I came in in 2014 there were a number of – matters 
that were also in the public domain insofar as the police 
were concerned some were institutional in nature, some were 
of a different sort of nature and so on.  But key was that I 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 119 of 231 
 
was new to the portfolio.  Now the National Development 
plan vision 2013 makes specific sort of areas of policing 
focus that needs to be looked into, driving the police service 
towards the attainment of those [indistinct 00:37:46] there 
are five of them.  The first one is that there is a need to 
strengthen the criminal justice system.  Secondly that the 
police service itself has got to be professional body and we 
have got to make it professional as a service.  The third one 
is that the police service has to be demilitarised that is one 
vision by the NDP.  The fourth area is that there is a need to 
10 
build 
safety 
as 
an 
integrated 
approach 
and 
building 
community [indistinct 00:38:29] in community safety.  So I 
think point 4 and 5 are intertwined in the – in a sense.  Now 
– so I needed to familiar about what the police service was 
all about and in this regard I engaged with a number of 
institutions internally but also including professional bodies 
outside of the – of the police service.  In that process there 
were 
a 
number 
of 
issues 
that 
then 
came 
out 
quite 
prominently.  There was an issue for instance with regards to 
what I categorise as the Human Resources Management 
20 
area and that pertained to the issues of – of a – the 
appointments, promotions and dis – and certain disciplinary 
matters that were there.  I will also just provide just a few 
examples.  For instance, in my first meeting with the – with 
the top management of the South African Police Service one 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 120 of 231 
 
of the generals stood up and introduced himself and said, I 
am General so and so but I am sitting at home I am not 
doing anything.  You know.  And I think that was alluded to 
the issue of restructuring that had taken place at the time 
and so forth.  But it was not only him I think there were – 
there was also another one – I may want to revisit this kind 
of detail.  For instance General Lebeya who was now with 
the – the Head of the Hawks was one of the people that we – 
you know was also engaged with in relation to a specific 
matter relating to Human Resources kind of issues and so 
10 
on.  On operational issues it was also this issue of the 
Rendition of the Zimbabweans.  The Zimbabwean Nationals.  
The third area that was quite prominent in the – in the – now 
the Renditions of the Zimbabwean Nationals let me just – 
briefly just take a step back.  It is a matter that even before I 
came in it was in the public domain.  I think there was an 
expose by the Sunday Times the criminal justice cluster at 
the time also even issued a statement in this regard.   
 
Advocate Mosing in the work that Werksmans eventually 
did within, you know, of the National Prosecution Authority, 
20 
also does refer to a meeting of top management there being 
addressed 
by 
the 
then 
Minister 
of 
the 
Justice 
and 
Constitutional 
Development 
specifically 
also 
about 
this 
particular matter and so on. 
 
So it was really a matter that was out there in the public 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 121 of 231 
 
domain.  Now on Crime and Intelligence, I think in my first 
week or two when I was there, there were a lot of things that 
came out of the Sunday newspapers pertaining to Crime and 
Intelligence and some of the issues that were also happening 
there. 
 
But one area of my major interest also was the question 
of the perpetually suspension of Mr Richard Mdluli.  Now you 
will appreciate Chair, in terms of the background that I gave, 
you know, which is a background in trade unions and 
industrial relations and all of that and so on.  
10 
 
That certainly it is something that from a labour relations 
point of view, you have to be concerned about somebody 
who is sitting at home and he is not being utilised effectively 
for the intended goals of what the institution is all about.  So 
for me that was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Also from simple the position of further 
administrator or minister, you would be concerned if there 
are people who are being paid, sitting at home for extended 
periods. 
MR NHLEKO:  Exactly.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR NHLEKO:  Exactly, we should. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR NHLEKO:  We should be concerned about that.  You 
know, it is either you arrive at a position where you clearly 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 122 of 231 
 
know whether this person is part of your labour force or not 
part of your labour force.  You know, it is... there is no in 
between when it comes to that. 
 
Now the fourth area which I found also, perhaps, I think 
for me, amazing, was that, you know, in 2014 where you still 
had issues of integration particularly, you had the people 
that were still being referred to as non-statutory forces. 
 
Now my understanding is that we had integrated and 
transformed as the South African Police Service and we are 
still continuing with that process of transformation. 
10 
 
So for me, I think it was even startling that there was a 
specific project called MSF (Man Statutory Forces) and so on 
which I found quite peculiar if I may it put it that way. 
 
And it did not sit well with me and I thought something 
needs to be... and there specifically, the major complaint 
was around issues of structure, issues of promotion and 
perceived salary discrepancies and so on.  And also, 
generally 
speaking, 
lack 
of 
progress 
with 
regards 
to 
integration of this, the non-statutory forces and so on.  
 
The last point.  There was a lot of talk about the 
20 
reviewal of the National Key Points Act and it was also made 
with the question of the then public protector’s report. 
 
And there was an anticipated referral of four specific 
issues for determination by the Minister of Police from the 
side of parliament who determined whether indeed those 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 123 of 231 
 
issues... they say it related and so on. 
 
So naturally, these were the five areas that were 
concluded upon.  And this part, it was... it involved quite... 
some extensive... a lot of work because one, you had to 
travel from province to province, basically, and engaging 
even with practitioners on that law in terms of how they 
perceive their work and so on. 
 
And secondly, the organisations that had a key interest 
for the work of the South African Police Service who also 
may interact with that, but also internally, the portfolios that I 
10 
was responsible for. 
 
And so all portfolios such as your DPCI for an example.  
The Private Security Independent Regulatory Authority, 
(PSIRA).  All those institutions within the police ministry that 
I was responsible for, I had to meet up with, go to and 
engage around their work and so on. 
 
The question was, at least for me was, so how do we 
attend to these issues?  Now... and without Chair, what we 
are debating, we know there were areas where I certainly 
needed the information and it was difficult to find information 
20 
from within the institution. 
 
But I also felt that you needed to have an objective view 
and objective sort of intervention of sorts.  So it became 
important that you need people that are less polluted by their 
environment, the intended environment, you know. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 124 of 231 
 
 
It is the same thing of you cannot ask me to investigate 
myself or check on my doings and so on.  It just does not 
make sense.  So you need somebody who from the... who 
looks from the outside in and be able to look into some of 
these things. 
 
And it was important that as minister then, I needed to 
able to articulate with a certain degree of clarity on these 
issues and particularly because they were matters of public 
interest. 
 
And because they were matters of public interest.  I also 
10 
had the leadership, sort of a role to play in clarifying those 
issues at a particular level and so on.  
 
Now... so I leaded the whole question of what hurdle do 
then use and what are enabling areas of... what are the 
instruments that can empower me as a minister then to be 
able to make these interventions and do some thorough work 
insofar as they were concerned? 
 
The first instrument is the Civilian Secretariat for Police.  
Now that instrument in terms of Section 3(e) and (j) of the 
South African Police Act 1995 states that: 
20 
“The Civilian Secretariat for Police has to provide the 
minister 
with 
legal 
services 
and 
advise 
on 
constitutional matters...” 
 
Remember, as Minister of Police in terms of Section 206, 
I think.  I think the lawyers will correct me.  You are 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 125 of 231 
 
appointed 
by 
Cabinet 
as 
the 
minister 
responsible 
for 
policing. 
 
And Section 207 says, in terms of the administration and 
control of the police portfolio with the South African Police 
Service.  That is with the National Commissioner but on the 
basis of the directives, the minister is responsible for 
policing.  The long and short of it.   
 
Both... two sections and the constitution talk to that and 
I suspect that when this law was drafted, it needed to give 
affect exactly to Section 206 and Section 207 of the 
10 
Constitution. 
 
Now the Section 3(j) of the South African Police Service 
Act speaks particularly and specifically to the Civilian 
Secretariat for Police.  It says that entity has to evaluate the 
form of the service and report to the minister thereon. 
 
Section 9(b) of the Civilian Secretariat for Police the 
2011 ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sorry, sir. 
MR NHLEKO:  Oh, sorry. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Before you continue.  This part of the 
20 
Reference Group, are you saying that Reference Group is 
part of the Civilian Secretariat for Police?  Sorry, I have got 
water.  Are you saying that it is part of the Civilian 
Secretariat for Police? 
MR NHLEKO:  No, I am not saying that. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 126 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Okay. 
MR NHLEKO:  But I am coming to that. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Okay. 
MR NHLEKO:  Because it then... it is a build-up towards 
responding to your question. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, I am sorry. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Hulley, you have been offered water? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  I do have water. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, you have got water?  Oh, okay.  
Alright. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  I think it is the water that caused the 
problem in the first place Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] 
MR NHLEKO:  I think he...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  It took my voice away.  It was cold. 
MR NHLEKO:  No, it is my eagerness to capture the 
Commission ...[indistinct] [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] 
20 
MR NHLEKO:  And that is why I am offering water. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs]  Well, I see he resisted your offer 
for water.  [laughs]  Okay, yes.  Let us continue. 
MR NHLEKO:  So am I satisfying your...? 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 127 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes.  No, continue.  You have answered 
the question.   
MR NHLEKO:  Okay, okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  You... at this stage, you ...[intervenes]  
MR NHLEKO:  I will just continue.  The legal instruments 
empowering the minister, you know. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sure. 
MR NHLEKO:  Of course, me then as a ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Basically, part of the point you are making 
is ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...you had a need for certain assistance. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You looked at legislation.  You found that 
legislation did permit you to access certain types... type of 
assistance. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you sought to put together a group of 
people with certain knowledge and expertise in order to 
assist you in performing your duties as minister. 
20 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes, correct Chair.  But it goes further. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:  That that kind of assistance, it cannot be 
located anywhere else. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 128 of 231 
 
MR NHLEKO:  It has to be located and housed ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:  ...with the civilian’s totality in the police.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR NHLEKO:  And that is why it is important to quote 
Section 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja, do that. 
MR NHLEKO:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright. 
MR NHLEKO:  No, thank you very much.  Section 9(b), the 
10 
Civilian Secretariat for Police Act 2011 states that the 
secretary... now, that is the Secretary of the Civilian 
Secretariat for Police. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, do not be too far from your mic. 
MR NHLEKO:  Okay.  No, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You can bring it a bit closer if necessary.  
Ja. 
MR NHLEKO:  I will try and kiss it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] 
MR NHLEKO:  Okay.  And it says: 
20 
“The secretary may do all that is necessary to 
perform the functions of the secretary ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Actually, I hear you better when you have 
got it closer now. 
MR NHLEKO:  Okay. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 129 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR NHLEKO:  No, thank you very much Chair. 
“...including requesting and obtaining information and 
documents relating to any matter under the control of 
the police service...” 
 
So, in other words, it is this particular institution called 
the Civilian Secretariat for Police that is allowed and 
enabled in law to obtain... to request and obtain information 
and documents relating to any matter under the control of 
the police service, okay? 
10 
 
So that is 
one particular instrument.  The 
other 
instrument we looked into was Section 12A of the Public 
Services Act which in essence states that: 
“Executing authorities as the Cabinet may appoint 
more or more persons under a contract whether in a 
full-time or part-time capacity:  
a) to advise the executive authority on the exercise 
or the performance of the executive authorities’ 
powers and duties...” 
 
Now Chair, I have identified the need in terms of what 
20 
were the topical issues within the police portfolio but I 
needed to get correct advice around issues that pertained to 
my performance and duties then as minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On the legal framework? 
MR NHLEKO:  On... yes, on the legal framework. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 130 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR NHLEKO:   
“b) 
to advise the executive authority on the 
development of police that will promote the relevant 
department’s objectives...” 
 
Suppose for an example, you had a situation where 
some of these human resources management issues that 
were there, were because of a gab in policing of whatever 
nature. 
 
So any person that would then advise, because the 
10 
minister would then say but there is this gab here, policy-
wise and therefore it needs to be rectified so that these 
problems should not occur in future.  I am just an example.  
It is a rough example. 
 
Lastly, the 12A(c) says: 
“c) 
to perform such other tasks as may be 
appropriate in respect of the exercise or performance 
of the executive authorities’ powers and duties...” 
 
So that is what 12A of the Public Services Act says.  The 
last area is an instrument called Part iii(g) of the Public 
20 
Services Regulation of 2001, which states that: 
“An executive authority may, within the relevant 
budget, employ person additionally to the approved 
establishment where: 
b) 
a temporary increase in work occurs; or 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 131 of 231 
 
c) 
it is necessary for any other reason to 
temporarily increase the staff of the department...” 
 
So in totality of all these particular instruments where 
enabling instruments, for me then as minister, to set up what 
is commonly referred to the Reference Group.  You could 
have called it any other thing I suppose. 
 
But we called it the Reference Group and it was under 
the auspices of the Civilian Secretariat for Police because 
that was the correct sort of area for them to be housed. 
 
Now... [throat clearing]  Sorry, Chair.  I think I do need 
10 
to elude to the composition of the Reference Group because 
one thing that disturbed me Chair is that it has been said, 
and I think this issue also comes out of Mr McBride’s 
affidavit, and I think when we began the Commission... 
[throat clearing]  Sorry. 
 
When we began the proceedings here, there is a 
formulation that the leader of... sorry, what do ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Hulley. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Mr Hulley. 
MR NHLEKO:  Mr Hulley.  Okay.  Ja, Mr Hulley. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m? 
MR NHLEKO:  The evidence leader.  Yes, I think that is the 
correct... the evidence leader.  You referred to a phrase, you 
know, 
of 
the 
Reference 
Group 
being 
a 
“hit 
squad”.  
Something like that.  Whether that arises out of Mr McBride’s 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 132 of 231 
 
articulations or whatever but there was that.   
 
And I think it is important to deal with that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I think he....  Mr Hulley ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  I was para-phrasing. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes, you were para-phrasing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes, I think that is the correct word.  Ja, para-
phrasing.  Now... and I am not suggesting that there is 
anything wrong with your para-phrasing but I do need to 
clarify ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just as a suggestion.  As I understood it 
was that as Mr Hulley understood there was a suggestion 
that you were using the Reference Group for certain agendas 
to get rid of certain people.  Ja. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes, exactly.  So that is why... with your 
permission Chair, I am getting to this area about, who are 
these individuals that we... that are referring to constituting 
the Reference Group. 
 
The five human individuals that we are referring to, 
possessed a variety of skills that we indeed required for the 
20 
task at hand and that would be identifying these areas of 
need. 
 
They possessed legal strategy planning of National 
Development of Intelligence and Security Work, as well as, 
the Institution of Former Skills. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 133 of 231 
 
 
Now, before I deal with the question of what is that they 
were, you know, basically required to do, in other words, the 
Terms of Reference as is constituted there.   
 
Let me deal with the preference of these human 
individuals.  The coordinator of the Reference Group was an 
advocate, Margaret Kruger.   
 
Now in terms of her academic qualifications.  She has an 
LLB with the University of Natal.  Insofar as the professional 
experience 
is 
concerned, 
she 
has 
an 
experience 
in 
conducting, leading and managing commissions, foreign 
10 
investigations and public and private sectors in South Africa 
and international donor organisations. 
 
Reviewing... she also has experience in reviewing and 
graph 
drafting 
organisational 
structures, 
financial 
management, systems, policies and procedures, codes of 
conduct ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sorry, Mr Nhleko.   
MR NHLEKO:  ...and physical ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  For the benefit of the Chairperson. 
MR NHLEKO:  Oh ...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  ...if you can identify the document... Mr 
Chair, I believe the witness is referring to Exhibit Y8 in... on 
page 3442.  It looks like Y8.  It is SS.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay what is the page? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Three, four, four, two. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 134 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Three, four, four, two.  Yes?  Okay 
continue. 
MR NHLEKO:  So I was on the point just citing that her... in 
the second area of her work experience is in reviewing and 
drafting 
organisation 
structures, 
financial 
management 
systems, 
policies 
and 
procedures, 
codes 
of 
conduct 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, before you proceed further.  I have 
got Margaret Kruger, the one you are dealing with now.  
Under academic qualifications, it is written LLB and then a 
10 
Baccas, 1979, University of Natal.   
 
If she got her LLB in 1979, there must be a prior degree, 
a junior degree too before that because in South Africa 
before even that time, as far as I know, you could not have 
LLB without a junior degree.   
 
So she probably has another degree.  I am just 
mentioning.  So she would have a junior degree, maybe BA, 
maybe BCom, maybe BProc or B Juris.  She might have been 
modest and not written it here. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes, probably.  Probably.  But also taking into 
20 
account Chair, this is just a summary basically. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.  That is fine. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The... what I am doing is that... you see, 
from a certain year after... I do not know which year, in 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 135 of 231 
 
South Africa we have an LLB which is a junior degree. 
MR NHLEKO:  Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Whereas as before, it was a post-grad 
degree.  So if you... if it is written LLB, it might be that it is 
the only degree, whereas with her it probably is not. 
MR NHLEKO:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, it is to accredited it. 
MR NHLEKO:  Okay.   
CHAIRPERSON:  No.  It is... ja. 
MR NHLEKO:  No, no, no.  I note that point Chair.  Thanks 
10 
very much.  She also has experience in the physical site 
inspections 
to 
ensure 
adequate 
control 
measures 
to 
management identifying risks. 
 
Now, Advocate Kruger, Margaret worked with the South 
African 
Police 
Services 
from 
1982 
to 
1988 
as 
an 
Investigating Officer, Senior Legal Official and Advisor to the 
Office of the MEC of Safety and Security in 1994 to 1996. 
 
But if I may also just mention that it is this last part from 
which she... because she was quite involved with the issue 
of... the transformation of the South African Police Service 
20 
from a legal point of view and a policy point of view in terms 
of changing its outlook and so forth. 
 
I think she has quite... she was quite extensively during 
that period, 1994 to 1996 and so on.  But also, the forensic 
experience, quite critical in terms of what we had identified. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 136 of 231 
 
 
Now, 
Mr 
Besiso(?) 
Richard 
Harding 
[01:03:50], 
possesses a Diploma in Military Science a Zimbabwe 
Technical Services from the Intelligence Academy, Basic 
Intelligence, 
National 
Occupation 
and 
Safety, 
Middle-
management Course, Project Management Course, Public 
Finance Management Course and Security Training Course. 
 
Now, she ideally would have been an instrumented 
person or... not instrumented, maybe critical insofar as, what 
were these things at Crime Intelligence?  For an example.  
Why were we experiencing whatever we were experiencing 
10 
there? 
 
So 
here is an extensive experience in Institution 
Security 
and 
Risk 
Management, 
as 
well 
as, 
Counterintelligence.   
 
Major projects include the investigation of corruption in 
Eastern Cape, 2002/2003, the integration of Intelligence 
Service between the year 1998 to 2000, including the 
establishment of the Provincial Intelligence and Committee 
and 
investigating 
violence 
and 
killings, 
including 
the 
Gumbo(?) Zola(?) Violence [01:05:02] and also working for 
20 
the Moerane Commission. 
 
The third person was Advocate Simon Molefe [01:05:12] 
who also LLB, Chair.  I made sure that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, it is fine. [laughs] 
MR NHLEKO:  [laughs]  With reference to my earlier quote, 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 137 of 231 
 
yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, he has given evidence in this 
Commission. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I think he said he obtained his LLB in 
2010 or thereabouts. 
MR NHLEKO:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So he did not say he did a prior... I think 
this is the new LLB if I am not mistaken. 
MR NHLEKO:  Okay. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR NHLEKO:  No, that is fine.  Thanks very much.  I am 
safe there Chair.  He has an extensive experience at 
progressive institutions including the ...[indistinct 01:05:51] 
and associate attorneys, 1979 to 1981.  Then at church, 
1981 to 1983, Methodist Church of South Africa, 1988 to 
1989, Centre for Black Economic Development, 1989 to 
1994.   
 
He also worked as CEO and Chairman of FK Investment 
Holdings, 1994 to 2003 and by then he was current... he 
20 
was... by then he was... sorry.   
 
Because I do not know what his situation now is.  He 
was the Parliamentary Liaison Officer and Spokesperson for 
the Deputy Minister Ramathlodi.   
 
The fourth person is Mr Zule Zulu [01:06:31] who 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 138 of 231 
 
possesses a Master’s in Business Administration, a post-
grad Diploma in Business Management, Bachelor’s Degree in 
Business Technology. 
 
He 
himself 
has 
an 
extensive 
experience 
in 
Organisational 
Development, 
Strategy 
Planning 
and 
Performance Management and Auditing, primarily in the 
public sector. 
 
He was quite active at some point, I am not sure now but 
with the various sort of government departments in the 
province self.  He was not at the time when I asked him to 
10 
also come here. 
 
The last person is Advocate Kulelane(?) Raymond 
Natenzu 
[01:07:15] 
who 
also 
has 
been 
mentioned 
somewhere.  He has an LLM... an LLM.  Sorry.  A 2006 
Criminal Law in Criminal Procedure, 2009 Labour Law, LLB 
1996.  
 
Ja, I think it is written by two words or maybe twice LLM.  
I suspect... no, I suspect so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Criminal Law.  Ja, Criminal Procedure.  I 
do not know. 
20 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes.  And then he has twenty years’ 
experience in the National Prosecuting Services.  Projects 
include SASSA Fraud and Corruption Project and the 
Department of Justice, Fraud and Corruption Projects and of 
course, the administration for that but essentially, those 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 139 of 231 
 
were 
your 
members 
of 
the 
Reference 
Group. 
 
Now 
...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sorry. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, I am sorry. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Just one question. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is the reference to administrator to a 
secretary? 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes, a secretary. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Okay.  So this particular document was 
compiled by the Civilian Secretariat for Police.  Is that 
correct? 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes, that is correct sir. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   
CHAIRPERSON:  And the people who are identified over 
here, each of them, did they come from outside the public 
service or were they already in the public service? 
MR NHLEKO:  No, they are a mix in a sense.  Let me just 
give you an example.  Advocate Margaret Kruger, if I am not 
20 
mistaken, I can be corrected on this one.  He was with 
Treasury in KZN.  Ja, I think he was working with the MEC 
for Finance if I am not mistaken.  That could be that. 
 
Now, Mr Harding, at the time when I asked him and he 
was the Security Manager in the Premier’s office.  Of course, 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 140 of 231 
 
Mr Simone Mulaudzi Nomfe [01:09:26] of course was with the 
Deputy Minister Ramathlodi.   
 
Mr Zule Zulu [01:09:33], I think he was a private... what 
do.. I do not know what they call him.  A private consultant of 
sorts.  I think he... I maybe also wrong there.   
 
And so... and of course Mr Kulelane [01:09:41, Advocate 
Kulelane Raymond Natenzu 01:09:47 were with the National 
Prosecutor Authority.  So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Most of them were within the public 
sector? 
10 
MR NHLEKO:  Ja, within the public service really.  With the 
exception... perhaps we can say, you know ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Why not? 
MR NHLEKO:  ...to the point where some ...[indistinct] 
qualification.  Mr Zulu, he was not in the public service. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR 
NHLEKO: 
 
But 
he 
was 
working 
with 
the 
public 
institutions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR NHLEKO:  You know. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And was this part of a recruitment 
process?  They... was it advertised to go through a 
recruitment process? 
MR NHLEKO:  No, it was not.  We needed to constitute a 
different scope and I at the time needed to identify the 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 141 of 231 
 
required skills.  So, as part of that process, I had... we 
identified these individuals and said, “Look, please come and 
assist us with regards to the issues.”  That I had spoken to 
earlier. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sure. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes.  But ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  How did you go about identifying those 
individuals? 
MR NHLEKO:  H’m.  How can I put?  It is... look, I cannot 
remember exactly how I must have gone about it.  I really 
10 
cannot say, except that when you are head hunting, you go 
and asking people. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You talk to people? 
MR NHLEKO:  You talk to people.  You say but who is the 
type of human character that can assist for instance around 
the issues such as the Human Resources if it is Intelligence 
or whatever and so on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR NHLEKO:  And then at time you will get to mix... it is 
almost like a head hunting exercise in Human Resources 
20 
Management. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of the people who made up the Reference 
Group as you have identified them, were there any of them 
that you knew before they came onto the... you knew at a 
personal level before they came onto... they came onboard? 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 142 of 231 
 
MR NHLEKO:  Well, I... for instance I knew Mr Harding, you 
know, the historical background, sort of.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes.  I did not know the advocate, Kruger. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR NHLEKO:  Then you get people, they will tell you:  “Oh, 
ja I know but you know this Advocate Kruger was involved 
with this and that and he is quite clued up around issues of 
transformation”.  As and when the South African Police 
Service began with the democratic government in 1994 and 
10 
so on. 
 
So I knew... I also briefly knew Mr Zule Zulu.  I knew him 
before 1994 as... we were involved in some particular 
structure particularly when I stepped down as ...[indistinct 
01:12:50] secretary from this end and went back to KZN and 
so on.  So ja, I knew some of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR NHLEKO:  H’m.  Similarly, also with regards to Advocate 
Natenzu [01:13:05].  He is a person that I have discovered 
through this head-hunting.  And so otherwise, I had not 
20 
...[indistinct] I had not known him before. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR NHLEKO:  So, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Hulley? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  [No audible reply]  
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 143 of 231 
 
MR NHLEKO:  Now, I think I have spoken to the issue of how 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Referring to the need. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Spoken to the legal framework. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you identified people through whatever 
process. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...you used. 
10 
MR NHLEKO:  No, we then did... when I say we.  Chair, by 
the way, you know, it is just ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  You mean ...[intervenes]  
MR NHLEKO:  ...it is a cultural issue that [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:  You mean I? 
MR NHLEKO:  I mean I, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes.  I must be careful because I am 
surrounded by lawyers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] 
20 
MR NHLEKO:  And there is a different meaning to almost 
everything you say.  Now, we then... I put together... let me 
try to get back to the individualistic language.  I then put 
together the question of the terms of reference. 
 
Firstly, 
the 
reference 
would 
gather 
all 
necessary 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 144 of 231 
 
background information and material in relation to each of 
the identified areas.  Now, the five areas that I had spoken 
to earlier on Chair. 
 
Secondly, that they were to invite inputs on the specific 
issues from police management and directly or indirectly 
from affected all involved individuals from within the service. 
 
This line is quite important because in the police and 
generally in the public service there is a regiment that is sort 
of approach to things but we wanted people to be free. 
 
So, in other words, for you, if you had an issue, you 
10 
know, you necessarily... you did not have to go to a 
supervisor to go and then say I am seeking for permission to 
go and talk to the Reference Group about the grievance that 
I have or whatever.  I am just making an example. 
 
So that is why we then broadened it out and said it is 
from police management directly or indirectly from affected 
all involved individuals from within the service. 
 
The third area.  They also needed to interview any 
relevant person and/or persons who may provide any 
information in connection with identified matters. 
20 
 
The fourth area.  They needed to conduct research, 
examine and analyse any vital material, document or media 
article relevant to each identified matter. 
 
The fifth area.  They were to conduct research and 
analyse 
the 
implications 
of 
the 
legal 
regulatory 
or 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 145 of 231 
 
government environment pertaining to the identified matters. 
 
Now, I think I made this example earlier on where we 
could delve into a particular matter area ...[indistinct] 
prevent so, dispute or whatever the case is but then you 
would end up identifying legislative gaps or policy gabs or 
procedural gaps of sorts. 
 
So this term of reference, it was actually to deal with it.  
The last area is that they were to compile reports in each... 
of each identified area.   
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
10 
MR NHLEKO:  So per each specific sort of the area they 
were... they needed to produce their points.  Now, the 
timeframe ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on.  Just one second Mr Nhleko. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are taking too long on this. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  I think so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am not aware that much was placed 
before the Commission in support of any allegation that Mr 
Nhleko was using the Reference Group or for to get rid of 
20 
people. 
 
My own recollection as we speak is that it might have 
been a one sentence or just very limited allegations 
somewhere but my recollection might not be good. 
 
Is there must that was said in support of the allegation?  
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 146 of 231 
 
I just do not want us to spend too much time on something 
that ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  What I had hoped is that we will not go 
through the entire... read... what Mr Nhleko was doing at the 
moment is to read ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  ...basically verbatim every aspect of the 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I think what we should do Mr Nhleko.  
We let Mr Hulley lead you in regard to ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  [Indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:  The important things because for example, 
he would tell you that... if it is, for example, Mr McBride who 
made this allegation, he will tell you what he... what Mr 
McBride put up in support of the allegation what did he say 
because that might give you an indication of what answer is 
enough to deal with that. 
 
If there is a lot that was said, you might have a lot to 
say.  If there was very little that was said, you might be able 
to summarise your response in regard to that.   
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I am just... I do not have a clear 
recollection that much was placed before me in support of 
the allegation.  Mr Nhleko wants to say something? 
MR NHLEKO:  Ja-no, thanks very much Chair.  I accept the 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 147 of 231 
 
point and I appreciate the standpoint by yourself as the 
Chair of the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  H’m. 
MR NHLEKO:  The only problem though is two levels.  The 
first one.  If you say by any other form, you know, even if 
you say half a sentence and then you say I constituted a 
group which is a... which should be perceived as a “hit 
squad” for an example, that talks to usage of an illegitimate 
institution of government for nefarious reasons.   
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I understand, ja. 
10 
MR NHLEKO:   So I’m saying that those are the 
implications. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR NHLEKO:   But the second point, Chair, I am sorry to 
[speaking in Zulu] it is – the second point here is that 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are doing like Ms Mokonyane as 
well. 
MR NHLEKO:   Oh, I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On Monday she would through in these 
20 
Zulu words. 
MR NHLEKO:   My apologies, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR NHLEKO:   Now the second area, I think there has got 
to be an appreciation that these matters as we deal with 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 148 of 231 
 
them 
before 
the 
Commission, 
they 
have 
also 
been 
ventilated 
at 
a 
public 
level 
and 
all 
sorts 
of 
misunderstanding about them there and so on.  So we also 
do need ourselves as members of the Commission, you 
know, perhaps excluding myself because I am not a 
member but we need also to be alive to the issue of the 
exercise as being conducted here, it serves there in the 
interest of the public to clarify some of these particular 
matters and that is no fault of the Commission but I am 
saying the reason why I would go to town about this, to try 
10 
and clarify this thing, is because you absolutely have no 
idea, Chairperson of the Commission, how many wrong 
things have been said about this particular matter and 
many others at a public level and so on.   
So it is that kind of balance so I am trying to also 
explain the dilemma …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no, I understand. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The point I am making is, it is not to say 
you should not respond because you were asked a 
20 
question, even if you are not asked a question there was 
this suggestion that was – that Mr Hulley referred to that 
there was a suggestion that the reference scope that you 
used, that reference scope for some agenda.  So all I am 
simply saying is, there might be no need for us to take too 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 149 of 231 
 
much time on it, it may be that – it is the kind of thing 
where you say one, I deny that I used the reference group 
for any such agenda, the reference group was a legitimate 
group, here was the need for it, the law permitted me to do 
it and this was their function.  Five minutes, they are done. 
 
So my concern was that we had taken quite long but 
I am not blaming you for that, I just want to make sure as 
we move forward, this is how we can deal with matters. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Mr Chair and of course important 
…[intervenes] 
10 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   If I may …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   If I may then, I… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   Then I agree with Chair that we 
should focus on specific issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   And then maybe also for Mr Nhleko to 
be brief, if Mr Hulley can maybe when he puts a question 
also make aware of what is it that was alleged. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   So that he able to answer that 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, no, no. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   But on this one I agree with the Chair 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 150 of 231 
 
that really then all what was said then was that he using 
this but nothing was put in the question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   So we can move forward. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, okay. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And keep in eye contact – most of the 
time when you respond to his questions you look at me but 
do keep an eye contact with him because he will also – you 
will be able – you will see when he wants to move to the 
10 
next question. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Very well.  Thank you, Mr Chair.  So, if 
I understand correctly, the process followed in appointing 
this reference group and you have deal with the legislation, 
the legislative framework and so forth, the process that 
was followed in appointing the reference group, if I 
understand correctly, started off initially out of a need that 
had been identified or certain matters that were prominent 
or what you referred to as burning issues within the SAPS 
at the time. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Your mic is off, you can keep it on, Mr 
Nhleko. 
MR NHLEKO:   Oh, thank you, yes.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now just briefly, that process, how 
long had it taken to conduct the process where you 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 151 of 231 
 
identified the burning issues within the SAPS? 
MR NHLEKO:   I cannot recall how long it took but it was 
quite a packed kind of problem because it did not, even 
although it dealt with the question of provincial visits and 
visits to various institutions and so on.  It could have been, 
I mean, two months or below two months or something like 
that, I do not know. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Sure. 
MR NHLEKO:   But I cannot recall exactly the period. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   No, fair enough.  And out of that 
10 
process came a need to establish a reference group. 
MR NHLEKO:   Correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   That you thought might be able to 
address some of those issues. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, sir. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And the process to appoint that 
reference group, in other words, to identify the relevant 
people, with the requisite skill set to go onto that reference 
group to meet the needs or to address the burning issues, 
how long did that process last? 
20 
MR NHLEKO:   Again, I would not really recall the specific 
period because there was work that the civilians iterate 
here for policy also needed to do in terms of just formal 
work for the actual appointments and so on.  There was a 
question of if myself then as minister having got to write 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 152 of 231 
 
letters to the principals of these - where the people 
worked. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, for them to be released for this kind of 
work. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And this reference group, was it a full 
time reference group or were they – those were within the 
civil service, were they required to attend to the normal job 
and attend to this? 
MR NHLEKO:   No, we – if I can remember, I think even in 
10 
the letters that I must have sent out I specified, you know, 
a particular time period, you know, in other words if I 
wanted you to come in and help whether it was for three 
months or four months, whatever the case was.  But I 
suspect it could have been – I must have said in those 
letters maybe three months.  I think so, yes.   
ADV HULLEY SC:   Sure. 
MR NHLEKO:   So they were fulltime for a particular 
duration. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I see.  And this reference group 
20 
ultimately produced, if I understand correctly, produced 
three reports, is that correct? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, it did. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And that was the sum total of what 
they did. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 153 of 231 
 
MR NHLEKO:   That was the sum total about it of – yes, of 
the three reports that it produced. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now you say that the first report that 
the – or one of the reports that they produced was the 
fitness of the National Commission to hold office, the 
National Commissioner of Police to hold office. 
 
The second was the secure in comfort report and 
the third was the illegal rendition of the Zimbabwean 
nationals. 
MR NHLEKO:   Right. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now that was, if I understand correctly, 
that was produced over a six month period, is that correct? 
MR NHLEKO:   No, I cannot recall the period really, 
whether it was six months or so but one of the points I 
wanted 
to 
mentioned 
earlier, 
before 
you 
came 
in 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, look this side, Mr Nhleko.  Although 
he is asking you questions you are telling me.  You are 
telling me your story and your answers. 
MR NHLEKO:   Okay. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the advantage if you look this side is 
that I can hear you and understand you better.  When you 
are looking that side sometimes I do not understand you. 
MR NHLEKO:   I thought the Chair was suggesting in must 
look at his beauty all the time. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 154 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, I was saying keep an eye on 
him but otherwise you look at me.   
MR NHLEKO:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You keep an eye so from time to time 
you have a look because he might be wanting to move to 
the next question. 
MR NHLEKO:   No, that is already, thanks very much, 
Chair.  The point I wanted to talk to earlier on.  These were 
five individuals and the scope of work was broad so one of 
the qualifications I gave in their appointment and in 
10 
respect of the terms of reference was that they were also 
at liberty to co-opt other people in different sort of fields of 
the areas that they were responsible for.   
 
So they broke up into different sort of focus areas, 
for an example, and then, of course, we co-opted a number 
of different individuals to conduct different areas of – so 
you will find that for instance the report dealing with the 
fitness of the National Commissioner is not produced at the 
same time with the report on the renditions or even the 
secure in comfort kind of a report pertaining to the four 
20 
aspects in effect to the minister by parliament and so on.  
So there is that kind of variance really, so I just wanted to 
clarify that point.  Thanks very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Can I take you back to the composition 
of the reference group?  You can keep your mic on, it does 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 155 of 231 
 
not disturb anything.  The one member of the group that I 
find strange to be included there is Mr Matengwa because I 
understand him to have been from the NPA.  It seems to be 
a little awkward but maybe it should not be like that that a 
member of the NPA, prosecutor, should be involved in 
advising the Minister of Police.  Was there a specific 
reason to get somebody from the NPA or you were looking 
for somebody who may have had prosecutorial experience 
and you found somebody within the NPA even though you 
could have found somebody who had been a prosecutor 
10 
sometime but was now practicing as an independent 
lawyer? 
MR NHLEKO:   No, Chair, the consideration was not the 
question of whether a person works for the NPA.  So in the 
same way that when I say I asked Adv Kruger (?) to come 
in, the consideration is not that he was …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Institution. 
MR NHLEKO:   Ja, he is working for a particular institution 
somewhere and so on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR NHLEKO:   I went to these individuals on the basis of 
their skill set and so that was basically the consideration. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But in the case of Mr Matengwa, was the 
skill that you were looking for a prosecuting skill or some 
other skill? 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 156 of 231 
 
MR NHLEKO:   A dynamic legal skill was …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Leadership? 
MR NHLEKO:   No, legal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Legal? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So it could have been a legal 
practitioner, is that right? 
MR NHLEKO:   It could have been a legal practitioner, a 
progressive one, progressive thinking. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
MR NHLEKO:   If we came across one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now it is a point I want to come back 
to at a later stage but for present purposes we know that of 
all the burning issues that you dealt with and you identified 
them earlier in your testimony and in your affidavit, the 
concern relating to Mr Richard Nduli and why he was being 
suspended and on suspension for such a long period of 
time, that was never addressed by this reference group, is 
20 
that correct? 
MR NHLEKO:   That is correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And was it ever addressed during your 
tenure? 
MR NHLEKO:   Look, there was a – let me put it to you this 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 157 of 231 
 
way, there were a lot of happenings at the time and some 
of the developments overtook others.  So I will give you an 
example.  At some point whilst we – the reference group 
was working they were also pressure points also relating to 
the individuals that constituted the reference group, so to 
cite one particular example, I think Adv Kruger, for an 
example, was also required for some work by her principal 
at some point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Work by? 
MR NHLEKO:   You know, by her principal. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR NHLEKO:   You know, so in other words, there were 
also work issues that she also needed to attend to at some 
point, so – and I think that also affected her time with us 
as 
part 
of 
the 
reference 
group 
and 
so 
on. 
 
So 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   What did you say, what institution was 
that, was she attached to? 
MR NHLEKO:   She was with the Treasury in KZN. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Treasury? 
20 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, the Treasury. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, you say she had some issues that 
took her time …[intervenes] 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 158 of 231 
 
MR NHLEKO:   That needed her attention back from her 
area of work. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR NHLEKO:   So I am making an example about how her 
availability was getting affected also by those particular 
pressures 
and 
so 
on. 
 
Now, 
that 
is 
one 
particular 
development but, on the other hand, the development 
around the question of the secure in comfort report, I think 
there were further developments, so may developments 
around that and so on and we therefore – the availability of 
10 
this group to be able to go through to, you know, around 
through the whole set of issues as identified and complete 
them got affected to some extent.  Save to say that, for 
instance, in the area of some human resources issues, 
they were able to advise in terms of how to deal with some 
of those particular matters, for an example. 
 
But the issue of the matters at Crime Intelligence 
and the perpetual suspension of Mr Nduli, they never got 
around to dealing with it. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now, if understand correctly, you would 
20 
have been the person responsible for directing which 
issues they should investigate and which issues not of the 
burning issues. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, I had identified them. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So the issues that they did get around 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 159 of 231 
 
to, they got around to because you had instructed them to 
do it, is that correct? 
MR NHLEKO:   No, not necessarily. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   No, I’m asking. 
MR NHLEKO:   Okay, when I am saying not necessarily, I 
think your formulation may not be correct there.  These 
people are assembled, we having identified the issues, that 
giving the terms of reference to look into those particular 
matters and so on and they started their work. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe let us put the question this way.  
10 
Out of the issues that you had identified as issues that 
they should attempt to – or did you list them according to 
priority to say this is the most urgent one, this is the 
second most urgent one or you just identified the issues 
and left it to them, how they dealt with them? 
MR NHLEKO:   In respect of, for an example, the secure in 
comfort, yes, because there were timelines also in terms of 
the resolution of parliament.  Yes, I did say, you know, this 
matter is quite urgent we need to respond to these 
particular issues and satisfy the resolution by parliament. 
20 
 
But it is also possible that I – and I think it is 
possible that I also spoke to them around the issue of the 
renditions particularly because they were queries that were 
thrown at me at a public level around the question of the 
renditions report and why, as Minister, I was not acting.  
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 160 of 231 
 
So they also did it to focus on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, as you can recall, it is those two 
issues that you might have said were urgent? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, I think so.  I think so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   If I understand you correctly are you 
saying that there were issues that they were required to 
deal with but never ultimately got around to dealing with? 
MR NHLEKO:   Of course. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And in respect of Mr Richard Nduli, 
10 
one of the Crime Intelligence concerns, was that one of the 
issues that they were required to address but never got 
around to addressing? 
MR NHLEKO:   Certainly. 
ADV 
HULLEY 
SC: 
 
 
And 
did 
they 
conduct 
any 
investigations and the investigation ultimately fizzled out 
or did they not get into it at all? 
MR NHLEKO:   There were some collection of documents 
here and there and so on but it was not a complete 
exercise. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes.  But ultimately, they did not 
complete their work. 
MR NHLEKO:   Ja, they did not. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And what I was asking earlier on is 
whether the perpetual suspension of Mr Richard Nduli was 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 161 of 231 
 
ever addressed during your tenure either by you personally 
– when I say you personally, I mean under your watch or, 
alternatively, that had been given to the reference group.  
Now we know the reference group did not deal with it so 
then the question is whether you addressed it at all? 
MR NHLEKO:   No, it was never addressed.  For me to 
undress it, the reference group needed to do some in-
depth kind of work in that area so that I could have a 
complete set of issues to deal with at my disposal. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I see.  And, if I recall correctly, Mr 
10 
Nduli, he had been on suspension at the time when you 
entered into office in May of 2014, is that correct? 
MR NHLEKO:   I do not think so.  When I got there he had 
already been on suspension. 
ADV 
HULLEY 
SC: 
 
 
Sorry, 
had 
already 
been 
on 
…[intervenes] 
MR NHLEKO:    No, I am saying when I got there in May 
2014 he was already on suspension.  
ADV HULLEY SC:    I see. And the reference group did not 
get around to it and you did not manage to get around to it 
20 
yourself.  How did Mr Nduli, as far as you were aware, how 
did he end up leaving the service? 
MR NHLEKO:   I do not know, I mean, he must have left 
the service when I was no longer there. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I see.  So throughout the period of 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 162 of 231 
 
your tenure Mr Nduli was not disciplined or subjected to a 
disciplinary enquiry? 
MR NHLEKO:   No. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now let us get to the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, as far as you can remember, was 
Mr Nduli on suspension from work throughout your term of 
Minister of Police from 2014 to whatever time you left that 
portfolio?  
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, I think throughout, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Would you not have – or who 
10 
would have been the right authority to deal with these 
suspensions or deal with the charges because you did say 
earlier on that, if I understood you correctly, the idea that 
somebody in the public services or anywhere actually 
should be on suspension for too long is just not on.  Who 
would have been the right person to deal with the question, 
was it you, of if a suspension is taking too long, what are 
the decisions to be made or what is it that needs to be – 
what decisions need to be made in order to bring finality to 
a suspension? 
20 
MR NHLEKO:   I think it would have been the National 
Commissioner at the time around those issues but it is just 
that I also cannot recall in full detail in terms of what 
essentially were the fuller some of happening around, you 
know, and pertaining to Mr Nduli, except that for me, I was 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 163 of 231 
 
– I never had clarity in terms of okay, so he is on 
suspension, why is he on suspension, what are the issues 
that are being dealt with there and how they are being 
dealt with and so on.  So it was something that, you know, 
we really never got around to deal with. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Mr Hulley and Mr Nhleko and of 
course, Mr Mokhari, if it’s not an area in regard to which 
we were going to look at, we may have not – we might not 
have to deal with it but, I mean, Mr Nduli’s suspension was 
in the public domain for a long time and we have got the 
10 
former Minister of Police here who could deal with that, but 
that is if, in terms of the arrangement, it falls within what 
he would be asked about if it does not – it may be that he 
might have to be asked to come when he is prepared to 
deal with it, if necessary. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I would have liked to know why 
somebody like that, you know, was suspended for such a 
long time but I think Mr Mokhari has got his mic on.  Do 
you want to say something, Mr Mokhari? 
20 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   Yes, indeed, Chair, I wanted to say 
exactly what you are saying that issues pertaining to Nduli 
are not issues that Mr Nhleko has been implicated by 
anybody. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 164 of 231 
 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   In respect of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   So it was just really coming as a 
surprise, that is why he is trying to rely on his memory.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no, that is fine. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   It is not something that he prepared 
himself for. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   Nor to even visit the documentation 
to refresh his memory. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, that is fine, ja. 
ADV MOKHARI SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, it is not …[intervenes] 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   No, I just wanted to get clarity.  Mr 
Nhleko raised it in his affidavit and It was something that I 
thought I should deal with. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   But I want to get onto the – some of 
the topics that …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, it also arises he said it was 
one of the issues he had asked the reference group to look 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 165 of 231 
 
at. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I think that is where it comes from 
and then you then ask the questions which issues were 
they able to deal with and it looks like they did not deal 
with his to completion, at least.  And that is what gave rise 
to the question.  But, of course, the question which one 
can ask simply arising out of that and anything that you 
might not remember that you might not remember, you may 
say so, is being the Minister of Police and having identified 
10 
Mr Nduli’s Richard Nduli’s suspension as an issue that I do 
not know if Mr Hulley referred to as once for the burning 
issues, I do not know whether you used the term. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It just seems strange to me that for the 
whole term the suspension should continue and you do not 
know exactly what is going on about why is this suspension 
taking so long.  I am just mentioning that you had 
identified it as an issue which needed to be attended and 
one – and I do not know if your term as Minister of Police 
20 
took five years, which would be quite some time.  You may 
be able to say something, you might not, but I am just 
saying one would expect that as Minister, just as you had 
identified the issue as an important issue to be attended 
to, if this group was not able to attend to it you would find 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 166 of 231 
 
a way to make sure you are informed as to why is this 
suspension of this man taking so long, why is he not facing 
a disciplinary hearing so that there is finality, what is going 
on? 
MR NHLEKO:   No, I accept that view, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR NHLEKO:   Save to say that I really on my part wanted 
an area where such issues could be properly processed 
before they could come over to me to then activate and so 
forth. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, no, no, that is fair – yes, that 
is quite fair enough. 
MR NHLEKO:   Ja, so that is basically what …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, that can be dealt with properly.  
Okay, alright.  Mr Hulley? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chairman.  So just to 
move on in terms of the chronology in your affidavit, you 
deal next with the Werksmans’ report and I want to get 
some context to that but to do so, we need to go slightly 
back in time because the Werksmans’ report is 2015 and if 
20 
we can just go back to 2014, you come into office in May of 
2014.  You appoint the reference group by the 1 October, if 
I recall correctly, you call a meeting with Ms Phiyega who 
is the National Commissioner and you inform her of your 
decision to appoint the reference group.  The impression 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 167 of 231 
 
reading your affidavit, the impression that I get from your 
affidavit is that you took the decision to appoint that 
reference group, is that correct? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, that’s correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And the further impression I get from 
reading her affidavit is that that decision to appoint the 
reference group was not taken in consultation with the 
National Commissioner or the top management, is that 
correct? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, it was not. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So by the time they learnt of the 
appointment of this reference group, that was a decision 
that you had already taken previously and you then 
informed them, you say on the 1 October of the decision 
that had taken, is that correct? 
MR NHLEKO:   That is very correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now the – so when the decision was 
taken to establish this reference group, that decision was 
obviously taken sometime before the recruitment drive took 
place, is that correct? 
20 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, that’s correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And whoever you – and you cannot 
recall now who you had spoken to, to identify the specific 
people that you thought would have the relevant skills but 
you would have spoken to certain people that you thought 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 168 of 231 
 
could identify the people with the requisite skills. 
MR NHLEKO:   I am sure I spoke to the different people 
out there. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And, but as you sit here right now, you 
cannot say who those people or person was? 
MR NHLEKO:   No, I cannot recall, you know, whose those 
people were and what the discussions were in relation to 
some of the individuals as contained in the profile for the 
reference group. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Sure.  So they then set about - the 
10 
reference group was appointed first – one of the first tasks 
that they performed, in fact almost immediately, was to go 
about interviewing the members of IPID in respect of the 
work that they had one in relation to the rendition matter. 
MR NHLEKO:   Look, I would not say that was the first 
thing, you know, there are a number of other things that 
they did at more or less the same time and so on.  As I 
said that they had broken up into different sort of focus, 
areas as well in relation to the work that I had assigned to 
them.  So indeed they also dealt with the question of the 
20 
renditions. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes.  Now they went to meet, if I 
understand correctly from the evidence of Mr McBride and 
Mr Sesoko and Mr Kuba.  They went to go and meet with 
the – the reference group went to meet with Mr McBride at 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 169 of 231 
 
the IPID offices to make enquiries into the rendition matter. 
MR NHLEKO:   Right, no, that is what I hear was the case. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay.  Now at that point in time before 
we 
get 
into 
the 
background 
related 
to 
their 
old 
investigation, 
at 
that 
point 
in 
time 
what 
was 
your 
understanding of what the rendition issue was about 
because when you came into office in May of 2014, 
according to Mr McBride and Mr Sesoko and Mr Kuba, 
there was a report that had been compiled by them.  Sorry, 
that had been compiled by IPID signed by Mr Kuba which 
10 
was dated the 18 March 2014.  In that report they came to 
the conclusion or the authors of the report came to the 
conclusion that there was nothing to implicate General 
Dramat and General Sibiya. 
MR NHLEKO:   Look, the sequence is such that – I think I 
was dealing with the question of the crime statistics, Chair, 
in September, we had just released them and the fellow 
who was an anchor there, I think it is an SABC station, 
then through this issue of the – of why, as Minister, I was 
not taking steps against General Dramat, General Sibiya 
20 
and others and so on as per the IPID report, you know, 
because it was a just a sudden thing that got thrown in, so 
I then said to the anchor that look, I was going to follow up 
on these issues to check what the situation was and so on 
and indeed …[intervenes] 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 170 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say this was now in September? 
MR NHLEKO:   Ja, I think it was around about September. 
CHAIRPERSON:   2014? 
MR NHLEKO:   Ja, 2014, when I have just – after releasing 
the crime statistics.  But remember that, of course, there 
was public awareness on the issue, okay?  The only thing 
that I had – that when O’Sullivan cited is this question of 
the report of the 22 January 2010 or 2011, I cannot 
remember, it is somewhere there.  Now – so it became – 
when the reference group started their work it became an 
10 
area of focus to then say but there are two reports and 
these two reports is one of General – is one of the 18 t h, 
they come to different conclusions but in the main the body 
is either the same or more or less the same and in fact the 
first report by the reference group identified that.  And 
then, of course, alluded to the transgressions that were 
committed in the process of the legal rendition of the 
Zimbabwean Nationals.   
 
And on the basis of that I then said look, I hear 
what is contained in the reference group report, you know, 
20 
I appreciated that they had done some work there but I 
also felt, Honourable Chair, that there was a need for 
further work, what actually happened and how what 
happened happened.   
 
So it was important to establish that and for me, the 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 171 of 231 
 
point to be established was why you had two reports, 
okay?  And therefore, if you deal with that question or why 
you had two reports, you must then take a step back and 
the step back is, who are the authors of the report and 
therefore, they needed to be engaged, they themselves, on 
the discrepancies as identified, and so on.  
 
And therefore, for me, that is how the issue of 
appointing Werksmans comes in, arising out of this report 
by the reference group to then say no, there is further work 
that needs to be done here.  So …[intervenes] 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Do you mind if I just take a step back 
before we get to the Werksmans – we are working way up 
chronologically to the Werksmans’ report.   
So the reference group had identified that there 
were two reports and when we talk about the two reports 
we are talking about the two IPID reports, one which was 
dated the 22 January of 2014 and the second which was 
dated the 18 March of 2014.  You may not know that but 
you know that there were two reports. 
MR NHLEKO:   Right. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now the first question is, where did the 
reference group find out about these two reports?  That is 
the first question. 
MR NHLEKO:   Where did they …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe let me ask what may be a prior 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 172 of 231 
 
question.  You have said that when you were asked by an 
SABC anchor in an interview it was somewhere around 
September 2014, but the one report was dated 22 January 
2014, the other one was March.  At what stage did you 
yourself become aware of the two reports?  Was it only 
after the reference group raised the issue with you or you 
were aware that there were two reports.  Maybe you might 
have read them or you might not have read them but might 
not have made – picked up anything of serious concern. 
MR NHLEKO:   I cannot remember the sequence, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:   Ja, in terms of …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Whether what went before or after the 
reference group. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, Chair.  I really cannot remember the 
sequence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, no that is fine, I just 
thought it might be important to know first how soon after 
these reports were released you may have become aware 
of their existence. 
20 
MR NHLEKO:   H’m h’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chair.  So just going 
back a little bit, we know as a fact that there were these 
two reports.  Like I say, one dated 22 January, one dated 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 173 of 231 
 
18 March 2014.  You had been on the SABC show where 
somebody, one of the talk show – the host had asked you a 
question about the rendition, is that correct? 
MR NHLEKO:   H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   The host did not suggest that there 
was a question of two reports or anything like that, did he?  
I am asking. 
MR NHLEKO:   No, he did not except that he alluded to an 
IPID report with the recommendations that General Dramat, 
General 
Sibiya 
and 
others 
were 
to 
be 
criminally 
10 
prosecuted. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now when you then appointed – and I 
am trying to understand the sequence, you appointed the 
reference group to raise this issue with IPID, is that 
correct, to investigate the issue and to go to IPID. 
MR NHLEKO:   To investigate, yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And to deal with it through IPID. 
MR NHLEKO:   To investigate as to how come we had two 
reports there. 
ADV 
HULLEY 
SC: 
 
Okay. 
 
What 
I 
am 
trying 
to 
20 
…[intervenes] 
MR NHLEKO:   And how they investigated, you left it to 
them.  No – yes, insofar as the reference group… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, the reference group, ja. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, yes, I left it …[intervenes] 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 174 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   How they went about investigating. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, how they went about it, really it was 
really up to them.  It is only with regards to when having 
gone 
through 
the 
reference 
group 
report 
that 
then 
Werksmans had to be guided by a particular set of terms of 
reference to then look into this specific issues as arising 
out of the reference group report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, I think Mr Hulley at this stage 
is interested in knowing what you asked the reference 
group to do about it, ja.   You said they must investigate it, 
10 
is that right? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you didn’t go into details as to 
whether they speak to IPID or not or how they investigate 
this? 
MR NHLEKO:   No it was really up to them in terms of you 
know the investigative work there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Mr Hulley? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you Mr Chair.  Just to 
understand at that stage where the reference group had 
20 
been given the instruction or the go ahead to investigate 
how these two reports had arisen you had not called upon 
IPID, or had you called upon IPID to give you an 
explanation as to [a] whether there were two reports, and 
[b] how that came about? 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 175 of 231 
 
MR NHLEKO:   I am not sure whether I did call IPID about 
the, about that, it is possible perhaps that I did, I don’t 
know, it is also possible that I may not have done so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I can say that for me when Mr 
McBride and the other IPID witnesses were giving evidence 
that was one of the things that I seemed to take note that 
none of them said the Minister asked us or asked the 
director or asked Mr McBride why are there two reports or 
that there was anybody that contacted them and said we 
have been asked by the Minister to find out why are there 
10 
two reports, so that was one of the things that I noticed 
they didn’t say in their evidence, but you are saying that 
you also, you can’t remember whether you conducted them 
or not? 
MR NHLEKO:   I really cannot. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Would it be fair to say that you as the 
Minister you – given that this was one of the burning 
issues relating to the rendition itself of that had been 
identified in your investigations before you got to the SABC 
20 
house sometime in September of 2014, this issue of the 
rendition had already been identified when you were 
conducting your initial assessments and meetings with the 
top management of SAPS. 
MR NHLEKO:   Ja, I suppose it would be fair maybe to 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 176 of 231 
 
assume that, I mean precisely because in respect of that 
and maybe other issues as well, they were already in the 
public domain that these are the things that happened. 
 
Ja, I think it could have been the case. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now because the – if I understand your 
testimony correctly, you’re saying that it was only pursuant 
to the discussion with the Talk Show host from the SABC 
sometime 
in 
September 
that 
you 
decided 
to 
start 
investigating 
or 
looking 
into 
this 
issue? 
 
Or 
do 
I 
misunderstand your testimony? 
10 
MR NHLEKO:   I am not sure whether you do ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well as I – I am sorry, as I understand 
the position there are two issues Mr Hulley, one is the 
rendition issue, that’s the general one and then arising out 
of the rendition issue there are the two reports. 
 
As I understand it the SABC anchor was aware of 
either both or one of the reports at least, and she or he 
said why are not doing anything about this rendition issue, 
is that right? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, yes, that is correct Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I just wanted to make sure that I 
know whether we’re talking about the reports or the actual 
rendition. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair.   Now would it – as 
the Minister of the police at that point in time there was a 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 177 of 231 
 
concern obviously on your part about the rendition issue, 
and there may have been a concern on your part about the 
two reports.    
MR NHLEKO:   Correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   You are not sure about, at that stage 
you’re not sure about whether there were two reports, the 
existence or so forth, that still needs to be – or that was 
still something that needed to be investigated, but as far 
as the rendition is concerned at that stage now in 
September of 2014, when this issue arose it was your 
10 
understanding that there – that General Dramat and 
General Sibiya had been implicated and this was a matter 
that had been in the public domain before then, do I 
understand that correctly? 
MR NHLEKO:   I don’t think I had that much before 
September 2014, in terms of you know I know that in 
general there has been publications that wrote about the 
issue of renditions and statements that were issued then 
before I came in, in May and so on, I know that. 
 
Now the question of the SABC anchor he spoke 
20 
specifically to, and in fact he had a copy, which necessarily 
I did not take out of his hands and he read a specific sort 
of recommendation and that recommendation was about 
General Dramat, General Sibiya, I don’t know who else, 
who had to be criminally charged and so on, and therefore 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 178 of 231 
 
he posed this question and said but you are the Minister of 
Police and why are you not doing anything about these 
issues. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And was a copy of the report made 
available to you and the report that I am imagining you’re 
referring to before we continue, I am imagining that you 
are referring to the report that had been compiled by IPID? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes it was an IPID report that he had. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Very well, and did he make a copy of 
the report available to you? 
10 
MR NHLEKO:   No he didn’t. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now did you – so you’re not sure 
whether you called upon IPID to chat about the matter, to 
provide you with a copy of the report, or to give you an 
explanation as to what the current state of affairs was. 
MR NHLEKO:   No I am not sure whether I did that. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay so then what we do know is form 
your affidavit and from the events that unfolded out of that 
is that this reference group then went in and started to 
investigate the matter. 
20 
MR NHLEKO:   Right. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now the reference group ultimately 
would have come back to you and reported to you on the 
question of the rendition matter and the two reports, is that 
correct? 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 179 of 231 
 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes they did. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now in relation to the – or let me ask 
you this, were these two issues dealt with in the same 
discussion or document with you or were they dealt with in 
separate documents or discussions.  Do you follow?  So 
we’ve got the issue about the reference group, sorry the 
issue about the rendition on the one hand and the issue 
about the rendition on the one hand and the issue about 
the two reports.  Now the reference group reported back to 
you, let me ask you firstly was the report back in a written 
10 
document or was the report back verbally or was it both? 
MR NHLEKO:   They issued the written report and I am not 
sure whether in your bundles they do have this report.  
They issued a report on – dated the 22 n d of November 
2014, and that is the reference group, okay, in which they 
deal with the whole set of matters in terms of what they 
had discovered in relation to the IPID investigation report.  
It goes into some little bit of detail and so it goes now, up 
until they conducted interviews with people that were 
somewhat cited in those particular reports and so on. 
20 
 
Now the – they then came to – I am trying to figure 
out, in terms of where do they, because they do talk about 
the two reports, for an example, and then they also dealt 
with matters of law insofar as the issue of the renditions 
was concerned. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 180 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, is that a report that is in the 
bundle or not? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Mr Chair the report is in the bundle, 
and it will be – if we could consider it is part of the bundle 
of documents that was handed up by Mr Moshleko’s 
representatives, it appears at page 3445. 
CHAIRPERSON:   3445? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I am just looking to see if it has got an 
exhibit number.  I believe we just about missed it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I’ve got it.  We have not given it an 
10 
exhibit number? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   The last one was Y8SS so this one Mr 
Chair should be Y8TT. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:   But if you go back two pages 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The report addressed to the Minister of 
Police from the reference group dated 22 November 2014 
on 
the 
subject 
of 
Zimbabwean 
National 
Renditions 
appearing at page 3445 will be admitted as exhibit Y8TT. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So this is the document Mr Nhleko that 
you are referring to? 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes that is the document I am referring to 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 181 of 231 
 
and specifically the recommendations as contained on 
paragraph 53.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   Paragraph 53? 
MR NHLEKO:   Ja, of that very same report.  I don’t know 
whether you are finding it. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Page 3460.  Okay if you can – there’s 
a bundle of documents which is Y8, and it’s Bundle  H, this 
would be in Bundle H. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I may have missed what you said Mr 
Hulley, I was still looking at paragraph 53 at page 3460, is 
10 
that where we are? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   That is where we are at the moment Mr 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, yes Mr Nhleko? 
MR NHLEKO:   They made recommendations, okay, they 
made the following recommendations on paragraph 53. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:   It is recommended that the Minister of 
Police should consider provisionally suspending Lt General 
Dramat as the National Head of the Directorate for Priority 
20 
Crimes and investigation pending investigations on few 
outstanding aspects and the composition and constituting 
of an enquiry into his fitness to hold office on the following 
basis.  That Lt General Dramat and DPCI Officers acting 
under his management and supervision and/or control 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 182 of 231 
 
and/or guidance and on instructions undermined ... 
1. Undermined the legislative authority of the Minister of 
Justice and the South African Judiciary to make a 
determination and adjudication on the extradition of 
the Zimbabwean Nationals who were suspected of 
murder 
and 
robbery 
committed 
in 
Zimbabwe 
by 
unlawfully deporting the Zimbabweans. 
2. That DPCI failed to comply with the South African 
Mutual Legal Assistance Act and Extradition Act of 
1962, Act 67 of 1962, sorry, read with such protocols 
10 
and mutual legal assistance on criminal matters and 
extradition. 
3. Bringing the international image of the Republic of 
South Africa 
into 
disrepute 
by 
contravening 
the 
sundry protocols on extradition, mutual and legal 
assistance and the United Nations Convention on 
torture by being co-perpetrators and accomplice on 
torture 
and 
murder 
of 
Zimbabwean 
nationals 
committed by DPCI officers and Zimbabwean Police.  
4. Committing 
criminal 
law 
offences 
including 
20 
kidnapping, defeating the ends of justice, forgery and 
fraud. 
5. As a co-conspirator and accomplice in the commission 
of the said Common Law offences they misled the 
Minister of Police and Parliament by stating that the 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 183 of 231 
 
Department of Home Affairs deported the Zimbabwean 
Nationals well knowing that it was the DPCI under his 
management, 
which 
rendition 
the 
Zimbabwean 
nationals for the alleged criminal offences. 
6. Bringing the international image of the Republic into 
disrepute 
by 
executing 
unlawful 
deportations, 
disguised 
the 
extradition 
and 
enforced 
human 
disappearances. 
The Minister of Police should consider issuing the directive 
in terms of Section 207[2] of the Constitution to the DPCI 
10 
head and/or National Commissioner that Major General 
Sibiya and Lt Colonel Malulege be suspended pending 
internal 
investigations 
on 
their 
involvement 
in 
the 
renditions, contraventions of certain protocols and National 
Legislation on Extraditions, mutual legal assistance and 
common law offences of kidnapping, defeating the ends of 
justice and fraud and forgery.   
 
The 
source 
documents 
are 
as 
follows; 
IPID 
Progress Report, the CI Report to the Minister in response 
to Parliamentary questions, protocols on extraditions and 
20 
Mutual Legal Assistance Acts, national legislation on 
extradition 
and 
mutual 
legal 
assistance 
on 
criminal 
matters, as well as the UN Convention on torture. 
 
So those in summary with the recommendations by 
the reference group, but somewhere in the body of this 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 184 of 231 
 
very same report that they brought to my attention, they 
alluded to the question of the two reports. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay. 
MR NHLEKO:   Here they specifically dealt with what it is 
that needed to be done according to them in relation to the 
involvement of DPCI in the rendition of the Zimbabweans. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So if I understand you correctly what 
you’re saying is that the reference group had the two 
reports, they had the two reports before they – when they 
made this decision, is that what you’re saying.   The two 
10 
IPID reports. 
MR NHLEKO:   Ja, they pointed out that there is the 
question of the two IPID reports. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And we will go through that in a 
moment, but if I also understand you correctly you say that 
the – this particular document which had been produced by 
the Reference Group this document had been available to 
you – available for your consideration.  Is that correct? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes it was. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now what I am trying to understand is 
20 
there’s two reports and I have no doubt that you have seen 
the two reports, is that correct? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes I have. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   The first report as you have said 
recommended that there should be a prosecution of Mr – or 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 185 of 231 
 
General Dramat and General Sibiya whereas the second 
the report came to a different conclusion, and that different 
conclusion specifically was that there should be – that they 
were not – they could not be implicated in the various 
crimes that the first report had identified, is that correct? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   What – the first concern or issue that I 
want to discuss is was this confidential report that had 
been 
compiled 
by 
the 
reference 
group, 
they 
were 
reviewing, effectively reviewing the work of IPID is that 
10 
correct? 
MR NHLEKO:    In what respect, I don’t think so.   
ADV HULLEY SC:   Well IPID had come, IPID was the body 
that was established in terms of the constitution and in 
terms of the legislation, to investigate criminal conduct 
which may have been committed by police officers, is that 
correct. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes.   
ADV HULLEY SC:   Is that your understanding sir? 
MR NHLEKO:   Right. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And IPID had in fact done so, is that 
correct? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And they produced two reports, is that 
right?  
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 186 of 231 
 
MR NHLEKO:   They produced one report sir. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   They produced one report? 
MR NHLEKO:   They produced one report and that report is 
the report of the 22 n d. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   But at this point in time the – you 
hadn’t yet established whether there was one or two, your 
understanding based upon something you’ve read in this 
document 
was 
that 
there 
in 
fact 
two 
reports, 
do 
I 
understand that correctly? 
MR NHLEKO:   From this report yes, they then identified 
10 
that, essentially, there were two reports that – of the 
investigation that were by the same institution with 
different conclusions. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay, now, let’s deal with the two 
different scenarios.  Let’s take scenario one which is, that 
there’s one report.  On scenario one, there’s one report, 
what is the – what should now be done about the existence 
of this one report, that report recommends that General 
Sibiya and General Dramat, amongst others, should be 
prosecuted, what should be done about that? 
20 
MR NHLEKO:   Look at the conclusion of that report my 
understanding is that – and it’s also something that 
transpired, is that they then reported or referred that 
report, the National Prosecuting Authority. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes, and that is, of course, what ought 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 187 of 231 
 
to have happened? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now, there’s – if that ought to have 
happened and hasn’t happened, for argument sake, hasn’t 
happened what is it the reference group is doing in relation 
to the rendition issue because that issue, if I understand it 
correctly, has already been dealt with on scenario one by 
the – by IPID. 
MR NHLEKO:   Look I think the reference group, angled 
into the issue in relation to the allegation of the two 
10 
reports because they also then needed to advise the 
Minister in terms of, indeed, the two reports and if so, 
exactly what is the detail around there, the question of the 
two reports and so on but that had nothing to do with them 
or myself trying to review, for instance, the IPID report, it 
had everything to do with the question of, yes, there are 
two reports and indeed, rendition occurred and these were 
the circumstances under which, perhaps, allegedly it 
occurred. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Can I – don’t forget your next question 
20 
Mr Hulley can I – yes, I think I’ve given up Mr Nhleko 
you’re like looking at that side.  Well I know that it’s 
because the questions come from that side. 
MR NHLEKO:   Sorry, Chair, my apologies. 
CHAIRPERSON: Let’s take a few steps back what are the 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 188 of 231 
 
reporting, what were the reporting lines in relation to any 
work done by IPID, did the – we know that the top position 
at IPID would be the Executive Director, or if there is no 
Executive Director the Acting Executive Director, who did 
the Executive Director of IPID report to?  Did he or she 
report to the Minister of Police or was there somebody else 
that they reported to?   
MR NHLEKO:   The Executive Director…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I know there is the question of their 
independence as well, so that – I just want to establish the 
10 
– how come any report from them comes to you and I 
guess the starting point is, do they report to you, would the 
Executive Director submit reports to you, what exactly was 
the position?  
MR NHLEKO:   No, the reporting lines were very clear, I’m 
saying the reporting lines were very clear, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR NHLEKO:   The reporting lines of an Executive Director 
of IPID there’s a direct line to the Minister of Police. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
20 
MR NHLEKO:   Now, as a result of which, for instance 
there are regular sort of reports and/or issues of approval 
that get referred to the Minister to approve in terms of 
investigative powers for IPID and SARS and so on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, would it, therefore, be correct to say 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 189 of 231 
 
that from time to time as the Minister of Police you would 
get reports from IPID? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As to the work that they were doing? 
MR NHLEKO:   Exactly, including the summary of reports 
for an example referred for prosecution and so on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay. So if there were matters that 
they were referring to the NPA for prosecution they would 
make sure that you know about those, in terms of reports? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, in terms of the – whether it was 
10 
weekly or otherwise, but it was quite regular. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The reports? 
MR NHLEKO:   The reporting arrangement, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: Okay, alright and this kind of report that 
we’re talking about would have been one of the normal 
reports that would come to you or not really?   
MR NHLEKO:   I suppose so, but I think that we should 
take into account, Chair, that when I came in there were a 
number of other processes that had taken place around 
this, for instance, if you peruse briefly on documents, 
20 
you’ll see that long before I came in, round about 2012 or 
so, the Secretariat had compiled a report around this 
issue…[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   Of rendition? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, of rendition and referred it to the 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 190 of 231 
 
Minister, then my predecessor and so forth. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay. 
MR NHLEKO:   And I think in that report it pointed to the – 
I think the Minister then, my predecessor needed to decide 
whether the report was to be referred to Police Agency 
such as DPCI or something or IPID.  I think, he must have 
decided that the matter needed to be dealt with by IPID 
and that’s how it landed there. 
COMMISSIONER:   So I’m saying – already there had been 
that kind of work and interaction around the question of the 
10 
renditions. 
CHAIRPERSON: Yes okay.   
MR NHLEKO:   So, when I came in, you know, I’m almost 
mid-stream because there are other things that had taken 
place. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, Mr Hulley? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you Mr Chairman.  So, the IPID 
had already conducted that investigation and they – it 
resulted, you say, in one report?  They contend, of course, 
Mr McBride, Mr Sesoko and Mr Kuba contend that there 
20 
was an initial – well Mr McBride and Mr Sesoko say they 
know nothing about the first report, the 22 January report, 
they say they were aware of the subsequent report which 
was the 18 March report but Mr Kuba signed the first 
report, which was the 22 January report.  Now, insofar as 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 191 of 231 
 
that – like I say, insofar as the first report is concerned, 
the 22 January report, and we’ve used the language of the 
first report and perhaps let’s operate on that basis for 
present purposes.  That report, as you understood it, and 
as you testified a moment ago, that was the only report, it 
was the report, the second report you say was not – well I 
imagine you say it wasn’t a genuine report? 
MR NHLEKO:   The general report…[intervenes]. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   No genuine not January, genuine 
report. 
10 
MR NHLEKO:   Oh okay, no I’m saying that precisely on 
the strength of the investigation that we conducted then 
through Werksmans.  Now, the assertion is made for an 
example, that – and I think as and when we delve into the 
detail of the Werksmans reports and the interviews that 
were conducted we will clearly see that, you know, at some 
point there is admission to knowledge of the existence of 
the 22 n d of January report by Mr McBride at some point, he 
did not know about that and so and so but there is that 
element into that but also what has been advanced was 
20 
that the, for instance of the latest sort of articulations that 
I’ve heard was that the 22 n d January report was a draft 
report.  Now – which in itself is also not true because Kuba 
who was lead investigator at that time, who started long 
before Mr McBride assumed this work and I coming in later 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 192 of 231 
 
in 2014. In October 2013 he produced one draft report 
followed by another draft report in November and they were 
specifically referred to as such.  Now,…[intervenes]. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Sorry if you don’t mind, and we’re 
getting back to this but I think maybe we’re talking at 
cross-purposes.  I understand the point you making but 
you’re 
talking 
about 
what 
was 
discovered 
after 
the 
Werksmans report was produced, I’m going back before 
that, in other words I’m dealing with the time – at the time 
that the reference group had been appointed, I’m dealing 
10 
with that point in time. 
MR NHLEKO:   Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So my point is that when the reference 
group had been established and the reference group had 
started to investigate the issue, at that point in time there 
was certainly – it was understood at best, that there was, 
either, one report or that there were two reports.  Your 
understanding, if I understand correctly was that there, in 
fact, were two reports that were available to the reference 
group, do I understand that correctly? 
20 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now, with the two – given that there 
were two reports that were available, one of which would 
have conflicted with the other, as I understood you to say, 
in other words they came to different conclusions.  We’ve 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 193 of 231 
 
looked at the scenario of what would happen if there was 
one report in other words the first report and that first 
report had to go off to the NPA as you correctly pointed 
out.  The first report had, in fact, been referred to the NPA 
as you understood it and yet nothing has happened as far 
as that’s concerned because by September, you’re still 
being questioned about this by the SABC, correct? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now on that scenario what is it, as the 
Minister, what is it that you do in relation to – on the 
10 
understanding 
that 
there’s 
only 
the 
first 
report 
that 
recommends the prosecution of these two people? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry Mr Hulley don’t forget your 
question.  Are you dealing with the stage after the 
reference group had raised some issue about there being 
two reports? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay can I just go a little bit back.  
When the reference group raised the issue of there being 
two reports, what issue were they raising with you, 
20 
precisely what was it that they were raising with you?  
There are two reports and so what? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   No, the issue raised by the reference 
group was how come you had one report with the body of 
it, you know, by and large, similar to the other one but with 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 194 of 231 
 
a different set of recommendations, as opposed to the 
second one for example.  So, for an example the first one 
referred 
to 
the 
implicated 
people 
as 
needed 
to 
be 
prosecuted but then the second one there’s then a different 
recommendation that exonerates those particular people 
that are implicated in the first report.  Now – and therefore, 
the critical question was how come you had such a 
situation, how did that situation come about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the two reports have different dates. 
MR 
NHLEKO: 
 
 
Yes, 
they 
may 
have 
different 
10 
dates…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, at this stage I just want to – I want 
you to capture for me, what you understood the issue to be 
that the reference group was concerned about and what 
issue – what questions you posed to them, whether you 
shared their concern.  I mean if you come to me, you say, 
here are two reports one is dated January the other one is 
dated 18 – but there is some difference between them, the 
first thing that comes to my mind is, they are different 
reports, they have been signed on different dates, let’s go 
20 
deeper into the issue, what is the issue?  Whereas if you 
give me two reports, signed on the same day, dealing with 
the same subject matter, then I might say what’s going on.  
So I just want you to capture for me what was conveyed to 
me as the issue that they were concerned about, did you 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 195 of 231 
 
share their concerns and why did you thing, whatever it 
was, was a concern and then move forward from there. 
MR NHLEKO:   No Chair I shared a similar concern by the 
way…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let’s finish with what they raised, the 
issue they raised and the basis for their concern. 
MR NHLEKO:   No their concern was you have two reports 
speaking to the same subject matter, one report is of the 
20 t h – no 22 n d January the other one is 18 t h of March.  The 
contents, they – look the same, but the recommendations 
10 
they are not the same so – and the question was, so how 
would you – because I hear the point that the Chair is 
saying – is raising, I mean, your point is only applicable, 
for instance, in my view, one report on something and one 
report on another then two different subject matters and 
two different contents and so on but in this instance you 
have…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What I’m saying is, the moment the 
reports are signed on different days, that says to me, there 
might be a reason for the difference because the one was 
20 
on another date the one was on the other date, the one 
was on the one date, the other was on another date, 
therefore – that’s why I go to the question, what was the 
issue they raised, what was the basis for that concern, 
then we take it from there? 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 196 of 231 
 
MR NHLEKO:   No, ja I think then in that regard, Chair, in 
terms of what you’ve just said I’m coming to exactly my 
position, that position is then clarified further in terms of 
the 
further 
investigative 
work 
that 
needed 
to 
then 
establish, is there a reason or reasons why you would have 
these two reports and what informed that, okay and that’s 
where Werksmans comes in, you know and we were later 
shown the differences between the two reports.  What was 
deleted in the first report to constitute what is now being 
referred to as the second report. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But before you asked Werksmans to do 
an investigation on it, did you, yourself read the two 
reports to see whether you might understand why there are 
these differences even though the two reports relate to the 
same subject matter and most of what is contained in the 
reports is the same or did you read it or did you get 
someone to do an Executive summary for you to say, these 
are the important parts of the two reports? 
MR NHLEKO:   No the two reports, Chair, were brought to 
my attention. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Let’s take a comfort break. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I think the witness needs a comfort 
break Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, well I was going to – I was aware 
that we have been going on for some time, I was going to 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 197 of 231 
 
say let’s take a comfort break but obviously I took longer 
than – we are at nine minutes to five, we will take the 
break now, a comfort break, after that I certainly can go 
until six, but maybe I should check whether – I know we 
have another witness tomorrow but the witness tomorrow is 
supposed to be short I think, let me check whether even 
proceeding 
tomorrow 
morning 
is 
a 
possibility 
with 
everybody or whether there is any problem.   Mr Mukhari? 
ADV MUKHARI:   From our side we are available. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are available, okay, Mr Hulley you 
10 
are available I know that and I guess what your counsel is 
saying applies to Mr Nhleko?   It does, it does, okay.  Then 
we must – maybe we will take the short break the maybe 
we can go up to six if we haven’t finished then we can 
continue tomorrow morning. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let’s take a 15 minute break, we 
will resume at ten past five. 
 
We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
20 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue. 
MR NHLEKO:  Could I make a point before we continue 
Chair?  On two things.  In fact I have had a relook at the… 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 198 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  One second.  Has somebody switched on 
the air conditioner?  Oh is it a heater?  I do not want to be 
unfair to anybody who might be feeling too cold if it does 
warm give us some warmth but just at sometimes it 
interferes with .. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  The recording. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Me hearing the witness properly.  But if 
there is some [indistinct 00:00:54] I know the one time I said 
it is making me cold but somebody else was feeling that it 
was making the place warm.  Okay let us continue. 
10 
MR NHLEKO:  Thank you very much Chairperson.  You will 
recall that before the break I referred to one thing and that is 
that the report by Reference Group in the body when I read 
through the recommendations that in the body they do 
mention the question of the two reports and I think is 
incorrect.  For the record I think we need to correct that.  
Because in the body now when I look at this within the body 
they do not say that.  However what I can confirm is that 
because they briefed me about this report you know in the 
one on one kind of sessions and so on but indeed they… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  When you say about this report you mean 
their report? 
MR NHLEKO:  Their report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR NHLEKO:  This one.  They briefed me about this report.  
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 199 of 231 
 
They took me through it and then they pointed out that there 
is an allegation of the question of the two reports that are in 
existence and so on.  And I think it – there is a point that 
they share also earlier on in the – in their engagement.  You 
– I think you wanted some clarity on and I think it does talk 
to that.  Because with them the only thing I said to them was 
there is this question of the rendition that is alleged to have 
taken place please look into it.  So it was broad.  And they 
did this report starts off with the work by DPCI I think they 
refer to that.  They also refer to the work particularly of IPID 
10 
and the Kuba Report – the Kuba Report and so on.  So – the 
– I apologise for mentioning that in the body there is 
reference to the question of the two reports – no there is not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There is not? 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  But what you are saying is that in 
their verbal briefing to you they did mention. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes they did mention them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not in their written reports. 
MR NHLEKO:  Not in the written text yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja.  And – and at that stage their 
concern was that there were two different recommendations. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the verbal report they gave you. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 200 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Verbal briefing and then in the verbal 
briefing they said we are concerned about there being too – 
of there being different recommendations in regard to the 
two reports in the verbal briefing? 
MR NHLEKO:  They – they said that there is an allegation of 
two reports and specifically that the other report has got a 
different set of recommendations.  Yes.  Well – no that was a 
matter to be looked into. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But as you understood the position, they 
had seen the two reports at the time they gave you a verbal 
10 
briefing? 
MR NHLEKO:  I am not sure that they had. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They might not have [indistinct 00:04:19]. 
MR NHLEKO:  I do not know because they – they – the 
matter to me was presented as an allegation of the two 
reports. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So – so would it be correct then to 
say Exhibit Y8[TT] which is the report they gave you on the 
20 
rendition that the written report does not deal with the 
existence of two reports it just deals with the issue of a 
rendition that is all? 
MR NHLEKO:  No it does not.  What it does it is more of an 
assessment report. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 201 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR NHLEKO:  The way it – the way you look at it – around 
the rendition issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright.  So – so I get the impression from 
what you are saying that other than them saying to you in 
the verbal briefing that there was an allegation of there 
being two reports with one with recommendations that are 
different from the other.  Other than them saying that there 
10 
was not much they told you about these two reports at that 
stage, is that right? 
MR NHLEKO:  No there was not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There was not okay.  Alright.  You can take 
it from there Mr Hulley.  I just want to see how the issue of 
the two reports moves from point A up to point whatever. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes thank you Mr Chair.  Now just to – 
you yourself had not seen either one of the two reports at 
the time of this – one of the two IPID reports at the time of 
the Reference Group’s Report? 
20 
MR NHLEKO:  I am not sure whether I had. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  You – but you knew from what the 
Reference Group had told you that there may be two reports 
in existence. 
MR NHLEKO:  Right. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 202 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  One report which came to one conclusion 
and another report that came – appeared to come to the 
opposite conclusion. 
MR NHLEKO:  Hm. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now as far as the – as far as the 
Reference Group’s report is concerned the Reference Group 
files a report which is dated the 22 November they provide 
you with that report. 
MR NHLEKO:  Hm. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  It would be important of course to locate 
10 
the IPID reports to verify at that stage what the conclusion is 
that has been reached by – by IPID.  Would that be correct 
to say? 
MR NHLEKO:  I think you are correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now … 
CHAIRPERSON:  May I come in and say?  Having been told 
what you were told by the Reference Group in the verbal 
briefing about an allegation of two reports. 
MR NHLEKO:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What did you do about that? 
20 
MR NHLEKO:  I think I must have done enquiries about the 
question of [indistinct 00:07:34] allegation and indeed 
eventually I saw two different reports. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Eventually you obtained them? 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes.  Yes I did. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 203 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay and you read them. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or executive summary where it was given 
to you. 
MR NHLEKO:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You read them? 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes I did read them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Take it from there. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair.  So perhaps that last 
part you did get the two reports? 
10 
MR NHLEKO:  No eventually I did. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Okay. 
MR NHLEKO:  Get the reports. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And you considered both reports? 
MR NHLEKO:  I read them. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  May I ask where – where did you get the 
two reports from if I may ask? 
MR NHLEKO:  I have no recollection in terms of how I got 
them. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  But anyway, you get the two reports. 
20 
MR NHLEKO:  Hm. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And the two reports are they both 
signed? 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes they were – they were signed copies. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now the two reports come to two different 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 204 of 231 
 
conclusions.  The first report comes to the conclusion that 
there 
must 
be 
criminal 
proceedings 
instituted 
against 
General Dramat and General Sibiya and the second report 
comes to the conclusion effectively exonerating them. 
MR NHLEKO:  Right. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  You – what do you make – what do you 
do now?  You have got two reports which come to different 
conclusions how do you decide at that stage now when – 
sorry – when – firstly when do you get the two reports as far 
as you can recall?  When do you get the two reports?  You 
10 
obviously need to get them. 
MR NHLEKO:  Right. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And you do get them – when do you get 
them? 
MR NHLEKO:  When do I get them? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  The two reports that is right? 
MR NHLEKO:  Around about that period but I would not know 
specifically when. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that would be – I mean we know that 
20 
the – the – your interview with SABC where the [00:09:38] 
the issue was September. 
MR NHLEKO:  In September. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the report of your Reference Group on 
the rendition is dated 22 November 2014. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 205 of 231 
 
MR NHLEKO:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I take it that the verbal briefing that they 
gave you that you talked about would have been when this 
report was available.  So it would be probably after this date 
– after the date of this report?  After the date of the 
Reference Group’s report on rendition. 
MR NHLEKO:  Ja look as I said earlier on some of the issue 
I would not be able to sequence them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:  And –which came first and so on. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:  Whether I had those reports before the 22 
November. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:  Or beyond or something. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR NHLEKO:  I would not be able to sequence that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So… 
MR NHLEKO:  But the point is in the briefing this matter is 
mentioned about the question of the two reports. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR NHLEKO:  And that it is a matter that needed to be 
looked into.   
CHAIRPERSON:  So is the position that you are not able to 
tell at this stage whether the verbal briefing at which they 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 206 of 231 
 
told you about the allegation of their being two reports where 
they make that allegation you cannot tell whether that was 
before this report of theirs that is the Reference Group 
became ready or whether it was after? 
MR NHLEKO:  It is difficult to say Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is difficult to say no. 
MR NHLEKO:  Ja it is difficult to say. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that is fine. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But would it be correct to say whatever 
10 
date it must have been it is likely to have been somewhere 
towards – certainly after September maybe or towards end of 
September/October/November thereabout at some date that 
you cannot remember?   
MR NHLEKO:  Possibly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Possibly ja. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair.  Now I am just trying 
to understand at this stage how the aid to the best of your 
20 
knowledge how did the Reference Group compile their 
report?  What did they have available to them to compile the 
report insofar as you are aware? 
MR NHLEKO:  I think in this report they do refer to issues 
that – they do refer to some issues and activities that they 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 207 of 231 
 
undertook including the question of a speaking to certain 
individuals or interviewing them.  I think there is reference to 
that effect that there are certain individuals that they also 
spoke to. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:  Hm.  And that they also did an analysis of an 
IPID report.  I do not see it here.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   You are going to have to be assisted.  
Yes. At page … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Exhibit Y7. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  This is one of the historic bundles. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I think this one was before… 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Which is page … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was before we said they must label the… 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As bundle but okay Y7 what page? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  At page 141.  This is a letter Mr Nhleko 
which is dated 4 November.  It is signed there by Minister of 
Police.  Is that your signature at the bottom of the page? 
MR NHLEKO:  Page 141? 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Nhleko do not speak too much away 
from the microphone.  I think you might have to bend it 
towards you. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes – no sorry Chair.  Yes it is my signature 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 208 of 231 
 
Sir. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now just I think maybe just read the 
content of this letter so that you can understand the 
relevance of where the report may have come in. 
MR NHLEKO:  It says: 
“The Minister of Police has in his possession a report from 
Crime Intelligence and dated 27 September 2012.  The 
allegations are those of murder, kidnapping and theft.  The 
cases were reported under the Diepsloot police station case 
number 390/27/2010 B I think it looks.  The content of the 
10 
report suggest that there are contraventions of international 
laws pertaining to how the above-mentioned matter was 
handled.   
 
The said matter was referred to IPID in 2012 for 
investigation.   
 
In this regard, the Executive Director of IPID is hereby 
requested to provide the Minister of Police with copies of the 
dockets in colour, exhibits thereto, progress reports, and the 
final report in this matter.  The requested documents will 
enable the Minister of Police to discharge its constitutional 
20 
responsibilities in terms of Section 207(2) of Act 108 of 1996 
and advise concerned constituencies accordingly. 
 
They have requested documents should be delivered on 
or before the 28t h of November ...[indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  Would it be fair to say, based upon this 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 209 of 231 
 
document, that this document was sent to IPID pursuant to 
your discussion with the Reference Group? 
MR NHLEKO:  Maybe.  It is possible.  I do not know.  It is 
possible, yes.  H’m? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Well, what I am asking you is that the... 
has the Reference Group approached you before this letter 
went off and asked you to send off the letter calling upon 
IPID to produce the docket and the different reports that they 
have produced? 
MR NHLEKO:  H’m.  No, it is possible that it could be a 
10 
matter that I was out of that briefing... engagement. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now ...[intervenes]  
MR NHLEKO:  [Indistinct]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  So at this point in time... this is now the 
24t h of November, you met with the... oh, sorry.  You got a 
report from the Reference Group.  According to the contents 
of this letter, you have also got a report from Crime 
Intelligence? 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes, but that is a report, the 2012 report that 
had been received by the minister there.   
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:  So it was the in the ministry in a sense. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sure. 
MR NHLEKO:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now... but at that point in time, you have 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 210 of 231 
 
got the Crime Intelligence report and you have got the report 
from the Reference Group. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  You do not have the docket, correct? 
MR NHLEKO:  Alright. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Is that right? 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes, I think that is correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And would it... and I surmising now, but 
would it be fair to say that the Reference Group also does 
not have the docket? 
10 
MR NHLEKO:  Maybe.  They did not, except that... I think in 
the... at that time when we worked and they gave me a 
preferential decision, I think there was reference to the fact 
that they had sighed some documents at IPID itself. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  A sight of documents at IPID? 
MR NHLEKO:  H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Okay.  Now, you then received pursuant 
to 
this 
letter, 
you 
received 
the 
letter 
on 
the 
26t h of November... 
a 
letter 
on 
the 
26 t h 
of 
November 
...[intervenes]  
20 
MR NHLEKO:  H’m? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  ...from IPID.   
MR NHLEKO:  Correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  That is two pages further on which is at 
page 143 of the same bundle, Mr Chair. 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 211 of 231 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  [No audible reply]  
MR NHLEKO:  Alright. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Is that correct? 
MR NHLEKO:  Ja, that is correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now, they would have provided you, that 
is IPID, would have provided you with a complete copy of the 
docket at that stage. 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes, I can... sorry.  I cannot recall whether 
they did, really.  But I note this letter. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  If I understood your... or if I understand 
10 
your evidence correctly, you had the 24 November letter. 
MR NHLEKO:  H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sorry, report.  Sorry, the 24 November 
letter.  You had the 22 November report. 
MR NHLEKO:  Right. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  The 22 November report recommended 
that there should be a suspension of Dramat and Sibiya. 
MR NHLEKO:  H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  But as far as IPID was concerned, you 
had... you might not have had the two reports at that stage 
20 
but assuming that you did have the two reports... and it is 
possible that you had the two reports.  Is that correct? 
MR NHLEKO:  Possible. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Well, what... you know that the Reference 
Group had their discussion with you and had already 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 212 of 231 
 
indicated to you that there were possible two reports? 
MR NHLEKO:  H’m.   
ADV HULLEY SC:  So what I am trying to understand is, 
when did the Reference Group ask you for all, at least 
informed you about the two reports, the two possible reports 
that there were? 
MR NHLEKO:  When did they do it?  Sorry? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  When did the Reference Group... in other 
words, what time was that meeting where they gave you 
feedback? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think he could not remember earlier on 
what or when exactly when I asked him.  Is that correct Mr 
Nhleko? 
MR NHLEKO:  Yes-no, that is very correct ...[indistinct] 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  You could not tell me whether it was before 
or after ...[intervenes]  
MR NHLEKO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...the interview at SABC. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes and I think, as I eluded to this point 
20 
earlier on, that sequence in... I cannot remember which 
came first and whatever and so on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you, Mr Chair.  So you have got 
this decision or this report from the IPID... sorry, from the 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 213 of 231 
 
Reference Group. 
MR NHLEKO:  H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  You may or you may not have the two 
reports from IPID. 
MR NHLEKO:  H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  On the 6t h of December, you give a notice 
to General Dramat of your intention to suspend him.  What is 
that notice of intention to suspend based on? 
MR NHLEKO:  The contemplation to suspend was on the 
basis of the recommendation of the Reference Group as well.   
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So ...[intervenes]  
MR NHLEKO:  The first recommendation of the report by the 
Reference Group speaks specifically to that issue. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sure. 
MR NHLEKO:  H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  But it is obviously important to have the 
two IPID reports because on the face of it, on the 
24t h of November, on your documentation that you got in 
your possession at that point time, you only have a Crime 
Intelligence report at that point in time.  Correct? 
20 
MR NHLEKO:  Ja.  Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  You do not have a complete docket.  Do I 
understand it correctly? 
MR NHLEKO:  H’m.  Look, as I said Chair.  Look, it is 
difficult for me to follow the sequence of the documentation 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 214 of 231 
 
and the happenings at that time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:  So... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, well if you ...[intervenes]  
MR NHLEKO:  You know ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
... 
you 
cannot 
remember, 
you 
...[intervenes]  
MR NHLEKO:  Yes, in terms of what you locate a particular 
report in relation to the timeframe and so on, it is 
...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, you do the best you can to remember. 
MR NHLEKO:  Ja, it is really difficult. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or give an estimate of when it might be.  
That is fine.  And if there is something that might remind 
you, then we can look at that. 
MR NHLEKO:  [No audible reply]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  The point I am making is, when the two... 
when IPID responds on the 26t h of November 2014, IPID 
provides you with a further bundle of documents which is 
part of the docket.  In fact, they provide you with a complete 
20 
docket.  Is that correct? 
MR NHLEKO:  I am not sure whether it was complete but the 
...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:  Okay, let us ...[intervenes]  
MR NHLEKO:  ...I cannot even recall the amount of 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 215 of 231 
 
documentation.  That must have been provided there.   
ADV HULLEY SC:  Let us lead through this document.  It 
says: 
“With reference to your request, on the date of the 
24t h of November 2014, kindly note that the docket 
CAS390/07/2010 is incorrect as the docket CAS 
number investigated by IPID is 390/07/2012. 
We assume that this is the docket referred to in your 
correspondence as the Reference Group requested 
same. 
10 
Indeed, the Reference Group indicated to Mr Kuba, 
(who was the investigating officer) that they will 
request the docket through your office...” 
 
Do you see that? 
MR NHLEKO:  Right. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now let us just pause at this point in 
time.  On this... did you ever respond to this letter to Mr 
McBride? 
MR NHLEKO:  I also do not know whether I did respond to 
the letter.   
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  He goes on to say in the following 
paragraph under the heading “background” that: 
“The IPID started the investigation in this matter in 
November 2012.   
In the course of the investigation, IPID cooperated 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 216 of 231 
 
with members of Crime Intelligence and in particular 
Colonel Kongwe. 
The same colonel started with the investigation and 
brought the docket to the IPID reportedly at the 
behest of the Minister of Police. 
The investigation was also conducted in consultation 
with the two advocates from the office of the NDP, 
Advocate Anthony Rassie and Advocate Billie Moletse 
[00:26:28]. 
The 
two 
advocates 
were 
involved 
with 
the 
10 
investigation before the investigation was handed to 
the IPID. 
Indeed, they remained intimately involved with the 
investigation throughout. 
This included direct investigation with certain aspect.  
Progress and preliminary reports were provided to 
them by the investigating officer. 
As a result of the decision of the previous acting 
Executive Director, Ms K Mbeki, Mr Kuba was 
instructed that the investigation be conducted in 
20 
collaboration with Colonel Kongwe since he had 
started the investigation. 
The investigation of IPID included various statements 
already obtained by members of Crime Intelligence 
and following up on leads, some of which were 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 217 of 231 
 
provided by Crime Intelligence. 
During the course of the investigation, reports were 
made to the acting executive director and the office 
of the then minister was also appraised of the 
progress of the investigation. 
During the course of the investigation it became 
apparent to the IPID investigators that the leaks to 
the media contained intimate knowledge of the 
investigation were made. 
At 
the 
conclusion 
of 
the 
investigation, 
10 
notwithstanding several other preliminary reports that 
were written on this matter, the IPID did a thorough 
analyses of all the available evidence and made 
recommendation to the executive director for his 
consideration. 
It must be noted that IPID considered other charges 
against those involved but thought it prudent to wait 
for the decision of the NDPP. 
They conclude (under the heading “conclusion”) the 
executive 
director 
after 
careful 
and 
thorough 
20 
consideration of the report approved the report with 
recommendations to the National Director of Public 
Prosecutions and the SAPS National Commissioner. 
The recommendation with the entire docket and 
evidential material was forwarded to the office of the 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 218 of 231 
 
NDPP on the 14t h of April 2014 and on the same day 
a disciplinary recommendation was forwarded to the 
Office of the National Commissioner. 
Your offices are hereby handed copies of the docket 
that was forwarded to the Office of NDPP. 
It says IPID is still awaited the decision of the 
National Director of Public Prosecution in this matter. 
Similarly, we have not received the SAPS’s report on 
the initiation of the disciplinary proceeding against 
Lieutenant Colonel Maluleka [00:28:44]. 
10 
The executive director and the investigation team will 
be available to brief the minister on this investigation 
at any time convenient to the minister...” 
 
Did you call for that meeting with them for them to brief 
you? 
MR NHLEKO:  No, I cannot recall whether I called for a 
meeting.  I have no... absolute recollection of that.   
ADV HULLEY SC:  Well, let me ask you a slightly different 
question. 
MR NHLEKO:  H’m? 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  You cannot recall that you have called for 
the meeting.  You recall whether you in fact met with them, 
with IPID? 
MR NHLEKO:  I do not recall the... calling a meeting with the 
investigating team.   
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 219 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now you have got two reports, one of 
which we know exonerates mister... sorry, General Sibiya 
and Dramat. 
MR NHLEKO:  H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And one of which implicates them.  You 
have also got the report of the reference group.  You have 
made a decision, if I understand your testimony correctly, 
you have made a decision to suspend General Dramat on the 
6 December based up the report of the reference group 
which, according to IPID, was not based upon the docket 
10 
because they did not have the docket at that point in time.   
 
Now the question is, if the reference – if IPID is 
correct and the reference group did not have the docket and 
the reference group could at best only have based its 
decision on a Crime Intelligence report that had been 
compiled 
in 
2012, 
in 
other 
words 
long 
before 
the 
investigation had been completed, the investigation was 
completed or had come towards a conclusion in late 2013 
entering into 2014. 
MR NHLEKO:   But remember that the report of the reference 
20 
group also does touch upon the IPD investigation, it does 
make an assessment of that indirectly in terms of the report 
produced by [indistinct] 31.21 then.  So it does refer to that 
and 
on 
the 
basis 
of 
that 
they 
then 
make 
specific 
recommendations in terms of what then the Minister should 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 220 of 231 
 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Nhleko, shall we do this.  You 
look at him when he asks the question but you turn and look 
at me when you give the answer. 
MR NHLEKO:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   because I am struggling to hear and I must 
hear your answers. 
MR NHLEKO:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR NHLEKO:   No, I keep on apologizing for this, Chair, it is 
10 
only that I just …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no, that is fine, I can understand. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   If you look at the report of the reference 
group, the report talks about certain interviews, if you turn to 
page 3450, that is EXHIBIT Y8TT and it says that: 
“On 
the 
22 
November 
2014 
Lieutenant 
Colonel 
Maluleke was 
interviewed by a member of 
the 
reference 
group. 
 
He 
was 
confronted 
with 
the 
following questions.” 
And then they set out a list of questions. 
20 
MR NHLEKO:   Okay.   
ADV HULLEY SC:   They say, paragraph 22, that: 
“On the 10 November Mr Kuba the officer in charge of 
the 
investigation 
was 
interviewed. 
 
During 
the 
interview it became clear that he was supportive of 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 221 of 231 
 
the conspiracy theory against Lieutenant General 
Dramat and despite the abundant evidence explaining 
his involvement.  He has also accepted the police 
officials implicating General Sibiya of deliberately 
misdirecting the investigation officer.” 
So those are the two interviews that have been conducted.  
One on the 22 November with Lieutenant Colonel Maluleke 
and one on the 10 November 2014 with Mr Kuba.  Do you see 
that?   
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, I do see that. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now where else did they either interview 
or get further documentation from as far as you are aware, 
even if it is based on what you have seen in this report? 
MR NHLEKO:   I would not be able to respond to that 
question. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay. 
MR NHLEKO:   Now, according to the evidence of Mr. Kuba 
and Mr. McBride, they testified to the fact – and it is 
contained in the affidavits as well, that when the reference 
group left their offices which occurred sometime in October 
20 
of 2014, the reference group indicated to them that they are 
going to go over to the Minister and ask the Minister to 
request the documents from IPID.  So the reference group 
must in fact have done so, must have in fact have 
approached her and said we do not have the docket and IPID 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 222 of 231 
 
has not made it available to us.  Would that be correct? 
MR NHLEKO:   Maybe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then look this side when you give the 
answer. 
MR NHLEKO:   Oh, ja.  I am saying maybe, I really would not 
have detail thereof. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   If you indeed had the two reports when 
you decided to suspend Lieutenant General Dramat and 
Sibiya, would it be fair to say that you had decided to accept 
10 
the reference group’s report over their two reports or over 
the second of the two reports?  In other words, the March 
2014 report? 
MR NHLEKO:   Look, I had no reason to doubt the work of 
the reference group really.  They will just – whatever they 
produced in terms of the assessment they made around the 
investigation report that was at their disposal and perhaps 
other documents that they have must have looked into and 
they made recommendations to me as the Minister and I had 
to – I acted on those recommendations. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Did you have reason to doubt the reports 
of IPID? 
MR NHLEKO:   Look, when the allegation came through 
about the question of the existence of the two reports, with 
same content but different sort of set of recommendations, 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 223 of 231 
 
for an example, you are bound to begin to ask certain 
questions one of which is the question of why you have two 
reports. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And what conclusion did you come to on 
the 6 December of 2014 insofar as those questions.  Did you 
ask yourself the questions but what conclusion, what answer 
did you provide to those questions? 
MR NHLEKO:   I do not know about the 6 December but the 
fact is if you are asking in relation to the issue, I have just 
posed about the allegation of the existence of the two 
10 
reports it required further investigation. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And that obviously had to take place 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe before you go further, Mr 
Hulley, I was going to want to talk to that and I have alluded 
to it before.  Having read the two reports, because you do 
say you did read them, your concern you said, I think, was 
the same as that of the reference group. 
MR NHLEKO:   Correct.. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Namely the different recommendations in 
20 
regard to certain people I think but the body of the report to 
a very large extent, being the same, is that right? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And was there anything – did you apply 
your mind to what it was that may have been different in the 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 224 of 231 
 
second 
report 
that 
might 
have 
explained 
why 
the 
recommendation about, for example, I think General Dramat 
and General Sibiya, why they gave that recommendation?  In 
other words, did you look at the report and apply your mind 
to the reasons they were – the second report was giving for 
saying or not recommending that they be charged as 
opposed to the first report which said that General Dramat 
must be charged and gave certain information about that. 
MR NHLEKO:   No, Chair, the issue for me is that I really 
needed assistance in unpacking that particular issue, you 
10 
know?  And for that reason, then that is how I then 
commissioned further work for an investigation but with 
pointed sort of terms of reference as opposed to a, you 
know, a broad sort of general approach around the question 
of either the renditions and the allegation of the question of 
the two reports. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I understand what you are saying to be 
that you are saying that the fact that there were different 
recommendations in the two reports in regard to the same 
subject is what was of concern to you but as to the basis, 
20 
you did not go into that but the fact that there were these 
different recommendations was in your view enough for you 
to justify asking for an investigation.  Is that what you are 
saying? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes.  No, it was enough for me, Chair, to 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 225 of 231 
 
then say but how do you come to different recommendations? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:   On the same body of work conducted at some 
point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:   And, of course, another report produced later 
on at a point and so on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NHLEKO:   And I think it would become clearer in terms 
of what then transpired in terms of that work in particular to 
10 
establish the question of the existence of the two reports but 
how it came about, that particular situation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me put to you what my expectation 
would have been.  My expectation would have been since the 
Executive Director of IPID reported to you, my expectation 
would be that you would pick up a phone or get somebody in 
your staff to say call Mr. McBride, I would like to see him, I 
would like to discuss, him to explain to me these different 
recommendations, he might come alone, he might come with 
his team, or write to him so that you hear what he has to say 
20 
or what they have to say because their explanation might 
make it unnecessary for you to ask somebody to investigate 
but if they give you an explanation that you have difficulty 
with that maybe you could ask somebody to investigate, so 
that would be what I would have expected you to do.  Do you 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 226 of 231 
 
want to comment on that?    
Just pick up the phone and say Mr. McBride, I have 
become of these two reports, there is something strange 
about these two reports to me, this one recommends this, 
this one recommends that, it is the same subject matter, 
come and see me with or without your team, let me hear 
what the story is. 
MR NHLEKO:   No, I – perhaps that is another way of 
looking at it but in my opinion, the fact that we had to 
respond to the issues that were already out there at a public 
10 
level and that I had to constitute a body that needed to look 
into those particular issues and asked them, amongst other 
things, of course, the issue of the renditions that it needed 
to be looked into precisely because there was still a matter 
that was hanging out there in a way.  
 
Now the mere fact that the reference group acted in 
the manner in which it did in terms of whether it wanted 
further information and/or documents and so on, by an 
extension, that was the Minister of Police requesting that 
information.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   But of course that …[intervenes] 
MR NHLEKO:   So it boils down to more or less the same 
thing.  I mean, I accept your view and your angling into that 
matter and so on but the fact is that we had asked that – I 
had asked all institutions, for instance, the following and 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 227 of 231 
 
then the Minister of Police to cooperate with the work of the 
reference group because we needed to look into the range of 
these particular issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, I accept that if the reference 
group asked for certain information in order to do their work 
and to advise you, whatever, whatever information  they got, 
obviously 
would 
be 
of 
benefit 
to 
you 
in 
terms 
of 
understanding 
issues. 
 
But 
I 
understood 
you 
to 
– 
I 
understood the position to be that the reference group had 
not asked IPID for an explanation of did I misunderstand 
10 
that?  I did not understand that the reference group asked. 
MR NHLEKO:   No, I was actually just making a general 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, ja, okay. 
MR NHLEKO:   To then say it is possible that in the work 
that they were doing, looking into this thing, there are things 
that they requested from the side of IPID, for instance, for 
them to be able to do their work and conclude in whatever 
manner that they needed to.  My point though is that the 
fact that the reference constituted by the Minister had to 
20 
do that in response to the issues at a public level in which 
they had been ventilated.   If the reference group came to 
you and said look there is this information that we are 
requiring and you haven’t been informed for an example 
that there is this work that has been conducted and so 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 228 of 231 
 
forth, either by extension and the interpretation is that it is 
the Minister of Police that is looking for that information. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no I understand that.  I am saying 
what or rather let me put it this way, what I don’t 
understand is why if there is – you have some query about 
these two reports you don’t ask IPID to explain to you 
before you instruct a law firm to investigate I would have 
thought that the first thing to do is to say let me hear what 
they have to say, because they might satisfy you in which 
case you don’t have to incur the expenses of lawyers to 
10 
investigate or if they don’t satisfy you, you might have 
good grounds to say well let me get somebody else to 
investigate, so I am saying my expectation would be that 
you would first ask IPID for an explanation before you 
could get the matter to be investigated, but I think you 
were saying earlier on you understand that, but you 
considered that you should ask for an investigation. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There is nothing you are able to add 
there? 
20 
MR NHLEKO:   No there is nothing that I am able to add. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR NHLEKO:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Hulley? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair.  So just going back 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 229 of 231 
 
briefly to that, the reference group, if I understood 
correctly had made, or had told you when you met with 
them and they had given you a briefing on what happened 
and of their report, given you some feedback, they spoke 
about the fact that there might be two reports, correct?  
MR NHLEKO:   Correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now so even that, at that point in time 
when you met with the reference group it wasn’t clear that 
there were in fact two reports, whether there was one 
report, whether there was two reports, but it appeared that 
10 
there were two reports but they might conflict with each 
other. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes, in their briefing that’s what they 
alluded to yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well Mr Hulley we are at two minutes to 
six, if you want to wrap up you may, if ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, I will just wrap up on this 
particular point, thank you Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And of course, if I understood you 
20 
correctly Mr Chair your background was for many years in 
the trade union environment where you were accustomed to 
the concept of consultation. 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And if I recall correctly when you first 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 230 of 231 
 
entered the ministry that is now in May of 2014 you had 
spent a lot of time doing exactly that, as you have said you 
spent time consulting with all the senior management to 
find out what the problems were, correct? 
MR NHLEKO:   Yes I did. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And just on this particular issue you 
accept that it would be rather strange if you hadn’t 
consulted with Mr McBride to find out what was the 
explanation for the two reports? 
MR NHLEKO:   Do I find it strange? 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I am suggesting to you do you accept 
that it would have been somewhat strange if having been 
told 
about 
the 
existence 
of 
two 
reports 
you 
hadn’t 
consulted with him about it? 
MR NHLEKO:   I don’t know, maybe under a different set of 
circumstances really but by then I think I had already 
commissioned the reference group to look into a range of 
these things and advise me accordingly. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you Mr Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay it is six o’clock, we are going to 
20 
resume tomorrow.  I think we can resume at ten because I 
don’t know what your estimation of how much time you 
would need but I would imagine that we should not be than 
– what – one and a half hours, two hours or am I being too 
optimistic? 
27 JULY 2020 – DAY 238 
 
Page 231 of 231 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I think that might be a bit optimistic, it 
may be preferable if we started at nine o’clock Mr 
Chairman, I know there’s the issue of Mr Kuba has got to 
come in a little bit later on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, what is your estimate of how much 
time, I know we are now at what – dealing with one of the 
real issues, so ... 
ADV HULLEY SC:   My estimate of the time it will probably 
be about another two, two and a half hours. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think let’s start at ten because I 
10 
may have some matters to attend to before ten, let’s start 
at ten, let’s resume at ten, we will do the best we can, all 
of us, to finish timeously without – to finish timeously and 
still do justice to all the issues that need to be dealt with. 
 
Okay, we will adjourn now and we will resume at ten 
o’clock tomorrow morning. 
 
We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:    All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 28 JULY 2020 
