 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
28 AUGUST 2019 
 
 
 
DAY 151 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 2 of 278 
 
PROCEEDINGS COMMENCE ON 28 AUGUST 2019 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Mokoena, good morning everybody. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Dukwana. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Chair we are ready to proceed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay before we proceed I just want to deal with one 
issue.  Since the passing away of the late Mr Gavin Watson the 
commission has received a number of enquiries from the media on 
10 
whether or not it was intending to call him to give evidence and whether 
there are any steps it had taken to that end.  We have not been able to 
issue a media statement but I have decided that I will give the 
response now and the response is that yes indeed he was one of the 
people that the commission intended to give an opportunity to come 
and give evidence and put his side of the story before the commission 
and be questioned by the evidence leaders and the commission.  But he 
had not been called to give evidence as yet and no date had been 
arranged.  But what had been done is that either last week at some 
stage or the week before that I had signed what we call a Regulation 
20 
10.6 Directive that is a Directive that the Chairperson is empowered in 
terms of the Regulations to issue to a person that may have information 
that is relevant to the terms of reference of the commission and in 
terms of that Direct – of the – in terms of the powers given to the 
Chairperson under Regulation 10.6 the Chairperson can direct a person 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 3 of 278 
 
to appear before the commission or to furnish an affidavit or statement 
in regard to certain matters.  In the case of the late Mr Gavin Watson 
the Regulation 10.6 Directive that I have signed was not one that 
required him to appear before the commission as yet but it was one that 
required him to furnish an affidavit dealing with the various matters that 
had been dealt with in the statement of Mr Agrizzi and the personnel of 
the commission had already been in touch with his attorneys and 
attempts were being made to arrange for the Directive to be served on 
Mr Watson.  But I understand that he – his attorneys had indicated that 
the service should be on them.  The Directive had not yet been served 
10 
at the time of his passing on.  I think that we will limit our – what we – I 
have to say to simply that – and we do that simply because there have 
been a number of media enquiries with regard to this and I hope that 
this clarifies it.  Thank you.  We may proceed. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Mr Dukwana yesterday when we 
adjourned you were just about to deal with the main topics and the first 
topic that you have identified is the one that you call the Asbestos 
Eradication Audit, am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  And you are dealing with same 
20 
from page 12, am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now I was quite intrigued with the 
heading that you were giving to that topic.  You call it the Asbestos 
Heist.  Could you please explain to the Chair why you chose to coin it 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 4 of 278 
 
in that manner? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Thank you.  Chairperson I use – I chose to 
refer to this because of the manner the whole project was – was 
created as well as how it came about and also the fact that it created 
an impression that it wanted to address a particular problem that is 
experienced by very, very poor people who are staying in the houses 
that still have asbestos roofing.  And the fact that the whole thing – the 
motivation for the whole thing was the – it created an impression of 
people who were worried and concerned about the health hazards of 
such a condition can create for people who are staying in houses that 
10 
have a roof – asbestos rooves.  But it will be clear as we continue that 
the intention was not for – for what they had motivated this project but 
it was something else in terms of syphoning resources of the – of the 
public,. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now could we now proceed to deal 
with the specific facts which are contained in your statement but firstly 
could you give the Chair the background facts which are material and 
relevant to this Asbestos saga? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Chairperson the person that – that played a 
pivotal role in this – in this situation is a person well known to me even 
20 
before the – this pro – this project.  They had one project that together 
with a partner then not this one Mr Mogwera that did not go any further.  
And he is from my home town Welkom and we – we usually meet and at 
some stage he was the same person who intimated, who brought this to 
my attention the project itself and he was very excited at the time in – 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 5 of 278 
 
when he was talking about this.  But he was talking about this project 
having had the approval from the – the Free State Government.  And it 
was at that time that because of my activism in the ANC they were 
looking for an opportunity also to expand to some provinces and he was 
asking a favour from me to help him get to other provinces.  But I 
wanted more details on the project itself because one also values your 
– ones credibility in the sense that you do not want to introduce anyone 
to people that you would know and introduce something that is 
untoward.  And then I asked some – some of the details pertaining to 
this project and they were not forthcoming and I did not continue.  But 
10 
it was during our interaction that he informed me with all the details 
and the people that were involved from the – the person that yesterday 
we were told we should not mention – the person was mentioned to me 
and when he mentioned the person he used the initials and I wanted to 
know why – who is this person and he was saying where are you living; 
do you not know this person?  And then – and you are in government 
but you do not know this.  Then I – I actually was surprised that he 
would mention such and the relationship that they had.  And every time 
he was talking to people who were involved in this he was using initials 
and this would give the background to why I was confident and why I 
20 
am still confident that what he – he said to me relates to these people 
that I mention here and also the facts that would demonstrate that why 
also I believed so.  So this is the background that I give to this kind of 
a problem – of a project. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  When we come to that individual 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 6 of 278 
 
because I think that I do not want us to miss it from the record always 
refer to him as Mr X. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  So that at the appropriate time when the 
time comes when we are able to deal with the full names we can 
attribute that to Mr X.  It will be much more easier that way.  So 
whenever that you want to mention his name say to the Chair you 
remember Mr X is the one that did ABCD.  That will help us to trace the 
facts. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Can I indicate Chairperson I am sorry Mr 
10 
Mokoena. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That one of the motivations that the late Igo 
as we called him Mpambani – Mr Mpambani was – he quickly when he 
mentioned – he quickly indicated to me that no we do not need money 
from the Provincial Government we can – you know – we can actually 
source it from the National Government as we have done with this one.  
So – and I am talking this Igo; the late Igo is a very, very intelligent 
young person. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Mpambani. 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Mr Mpambani. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Very, very intelligent Chairperson and I 
understood some of the eagerness to do this the way they have done 
this because of the previous failures in the province in attempting to do 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 7 of 278 
 
some projects and they were let down and some monies were requested 
from them and at the time they were not willing to play and they went 
under sometime.  And you can imagine when you are a business person 
and they were up there and their business empire collapsed and this 
also was giving them an opportunity to rise again.  So I could 
understand his eagerness to get this rolled out to other provinces but I 
will come to that at the appropriate time.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  I will be referring you to a number of 
documents.  For now we will not deal with the details or the contents in 
10 
full of those documents but to assist you to sketch the background 
material to the evidence which you are adducing before the Chair.  The 
first document that I want us to visit is on page 39.  It is page 39 Chair 
and once you are there Mr Dukwana if you can identify that document 
for the Chair? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Chairperson it is – it is – the heading has a 
black – a Blackhead Consulting and Diamond Hill Trading and it has 
Free State Province Eradication of Asbestos Audit Report all towns.  
And it has the emblem of the Free State Province.  Free State 
Department of Human Settlement and the final audit report eradication 
20 
of asbestos rooves on houses within the Free State Province and plus 
R300 000.00. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  So this will tie up with the topic 
that you are addressing today before the Chair, am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are correct. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 8 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And this document as you have correctly 
stated it was drafted by an entity called Blackhead Consulting, am I 
correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are correct Sir. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  And may we then turn to page 
[intervention]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it bears the date of 13 t h February 2015? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Oh yes.  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It is dated so Chairperson. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  That is important Chair. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That is 14 t h February 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now if you may turn to page 42 and you 
will see that on page 42 you will find a heading Executive Summary.  
Immediately thereafter there is a sub-heading Project Background.  If 
you can read those two paragraphs into the record so that we can 
appreciate – so we can appreciate. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It – the Executive Summary Project Summary 
20 
Background. 
“Blackhead Consulting and Diamond Hill formed a 
joint venture and were appointed by the Free State 
Department of Human Settlement as Blackhead 
Consulting JV to assess and qualify the entire stock 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 9 of 278 
 
of 
low 
and 
density 
residential 
housing 
accommodation with rooved asbestos in the Free 
State Province with the ultimate aim of eradicating 
these asbestos rooves.  The assessment results will 
enable the Department to formulate a plan to replace 
the affected rooves with environmentally friendly roof 
covering to guarantee the citizens of the Free State 
a healthier livelihood and an improved quality of 
life.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  And these accord to also you 
10 
recollection pertaining to these Asbestos Heist as you refer to it? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes Sir. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now we will come back and deal with the 
sequence I just wanted to paint a picture around certain documents.  
Can I refer you to page 107?   
CHAIRPERSON:  What page? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  107 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  107. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  107. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And as you have done with the previous 
document if you may please also identify the document and also 
mention the date of the document? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  This is written on the – on the letterheads of 
Black – Blackhead Consulting – Consulting Engineers and Project 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 10 of 278 
 
Managers.  It is dated the 28 t h May 2014 addressed to the Department 
of Human Settlement Free State with the address: 
“Dear Sir / Madam.  Request for appointment on risk, 
audit 
and 
assessment, 
handling 
of 
hazardous 
material 
[removal], 
and 
disposal 
of 
asbestos 
contaminated rubble in the Free State Province.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  So this is the document by 
Blackhead requesting to be appointed and it was addressed to the 
Department of Human Settlement as you have said. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now if you may turn to page 109.  109 
Chair.  And you will see there is also a paragraph which is dedicated to 
deal with the background material and would – did you have an 
opportunity to read what is contained under there heading “Background’ 
and whether that – would that also accord to what was contemplated at 
the time? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes I have read this and as we will continue 
we will demonstrate that it was just used to motivate and make sure 
that there is some concern, real concern for the people of the province 
when it is not so. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is relation to which paragraph at 109? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  It is page 109 Chair in relation to the 
entire contents under heading “Background”. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Oh okay. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 11 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  109. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have got the page I thought it may – I thought it was 
a particular paragraph? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Paragraph – okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now if I may refer you back Mr 
Dukwana to your statement with particular reference to page 12?  Now 
we before we deal with any specific paragraphs under that – on that 
page can you explain to the Chair who is Mr Mpambani and who is Mr 
Soddi and whether or not are they still alive? 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The – as I indicated earlier Chair that Mr 
Mpambani were together with Mr Soddi were – had a joint venture and 
they submitted their proposal to the Free State Department as a joint 
venture and the – and the unfortunate thing is that Mr Mpambani was 
mercilessly gunned down – gunned down in Sandton on the 22 n d June 
2017.  And this is the person as I say I knew him very well and also you 
have his business partner Mr Edwin Sodi.  I must indicate that I have 
never met Mr Sodi personally but I believe he is still alive and you 
know my problem is I have thought that you know with this – this kind 
of a project the – the commission should also subpoena him to explain 
20 
the – the genesis of this project.  And now as we speak Chairperson 
there are legal proceedings instituted against the estate of Mr 
Mpambani by his partner Sodi at the high court Gauteng local division 
in Johanneburg.  And I understand that the amount in issue is the last 
payment of R77 million part of the R255 million that was advanced by 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 12 of 278 
 
the Free State Department of Housing and Settlement.   
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Was – was that amount part of the 
monies which were dedicated for this asbestos scheme? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The R77 million. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  No – I am – yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The R77 million is part of the R255 million 
but that was the final settlement that was paid for this project. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The R77 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  So – so as – from what you are saying it 
10 
seems that you are saying that out of the R255 million was paid to the 
joint venture or to Blackhead and there was – or what was paid was 
R255 million less R77 million or the whole of it was paid but there is 
R77 million that is still in issue? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The whole amount was paid Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that – the whole amount being R255 million? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Was paid in batches.  The whole amount 
R255 million was paid to this joint venture. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  But it was paid in batches. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And this was the last payment the R77 
million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That was made? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That was made to add up and make it R255 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 13 of 278 
 
million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And make it R255 okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Meaning the whole – the amount was paid 
but the last payment to make the R255 million was the one that 
amounted to R77 million and this is the one that was – that was 
contested in fact. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That the other partner wants about half of 
that money. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm okay. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now if you turn to page 13 of your 
[intervention]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe – I am sorry Mr Mokoena.  I take it that this 
project related to houses in the Free State Province that were provided 
to – to citizens or residence by the government?  I take it that it related 
to the removal of asbestos on the rooves of houses that were provided 
to people by government maybe RDP houses, maybe township houses 
and so on or is that not so, it was much wider than that? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Can I just indicate Chair.  During the – the 
dark days of apartheid some of these settlements, the houses that were 
20 
built then most of them were rooved in asbestos.  In Kutlwanong where 
I come from my family house is four roomed house that had an 
asbestos roofing.  In the whole entire area of Polokwane it was 
asbestos roofing and you will find these all over and the most – you 
know the most important thing also is that in each and every 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 14 of 278 
 
municipality you will find records of these things.  They would know 
exactly where these asbestos houses are and – and you would also 
understand in fact even in the – in the goldfields area some of the 
pipes [indistinct] and all the pipes that were there were asbestos 
cement pipes and that created a problem especially with regard to the 
fact that there is movement.  It is a mining area and these movements 
create cracks and in some instances you have a challenge.  But also 
there was a – there is a time limit to the asbestos roofing.  If you go to 
some houses because they are old, they become ruffled and then you 
got this product coming out and inhaling that I am told that it is very 
10 
dangerous for human beings.  And that it was band it is no longer 
supposed to be used.  And I understood that the intention of the project 
was to take away these and – and build new rooves that will not be 
asbestos.  And even for disposal of these – this asbestos material 
needs 
a 
particular 
process. 
 
You 
cannot 
just 
dispose 
them 
anywhere.used.  And I understood that the intention of the project was 
to take away these and – and build new rooves that will not be 
asbestos.  And even for disposal of these – this asbestos material 
needs a particular process.  You cannot just dispose them anywhere. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but my question was whether the project was 
20 
aimed at the removal of asbestos rooves from houses that had been 
provided by government whether it was the apartheid government or the 
new government or whether the idea extended to private houses.  So 
did your – or is that something you never got to understand? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  They were doing all houses that were built 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 15 of 278 
 
using asbestos and to my recollection there is no house that I know 
that – that it is a private house built by a private individual that has 
asbestos house.  Most of these houses were municipal houses or local 
government houses. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now at the time when Mr Mpambani 
you say that he was killed in Sandton was he still the member or the 
member of the Blackhead? 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Consulting? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes, yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  There is a further document that I want 
to refer you to Mr – if you may turn to page 94?  And if you are – if you 
can also identify that document for us? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  This – this document is from the Department 
of Human Settlements Free State Province addressed to the Chief 
Executive Officer Blackhead Consulting Company that is the JV.  And to 
the attention of Mr Edwin Sodi.  And it – the heading there is 
20 
“Instruction to Perform Work in PW/-001[phase1] Audit and Assessment 
of Asbestos of Housing Units”. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Oh yes and if you turn on page 95 and 
who signs the letter? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The letter here is - I do not know if it is his 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 16 of 278 
 
signature - but it is signed by Mokhesi, N Mokhesi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I see that - I think the first sentence of page 94 in 
that letter seems to give (foreground noise) to the question that I asked 
a few minutes ago. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  It seems to be addressing that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Chair there appears to be - Mr Manyi 
might want to say something to the - to the Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Thank you Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Come forward. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Chair will recall that the - yesterday myself on 
record.  Sorry, Chair.  I apologise for that.  Chair will recall that the 
record yesterday reflected that I in presence of Mr Simile Bala (?) SC 
on behalf of the DG of the Free State Government and also on my own 
private instructions on Mr Seoe as well.  I have just received 
instructions from the HOD that has been - just been mentioned by the 
witness before you that the notice contrary to what was placed on 
20 
record yesterday by the evidence leader that all the people that were 
mentioned including Mr Mokhesi received the note - necessary notice. 
Unfortunately it transpired and it was confirmed this morning 
that Mr Mokhesi has never received it and it was posed to the evidence 
leader that indeed the notice went to an incorrect wrong address and as 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 17 of 278 
 
a result Mr Mokhesi did not receive the notice and has just been - 
drafted a letter that has been to the Commission stating that fact that 
Mr Mokhesi has not received the notice. 
The Chief Director of the department is before - is in the 
attendance of the proceedings.  We just wanted to bring that to the 
attention of the Chair that indeed … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  As much as it has been placed before - on the 
record yesterday Mr Mokhesi has not received the notice and as such 
could not adequately respond to the allegations referring to him. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  Thank you.  I - I take … 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Mokoena the legal team has not had a chance to 
apply their minds to the (intervenes)? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Not at all Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  It was the only thing but all that we have 
Chair as per schedule that was received from the secretariat and all 
efforts were done and the names obviously and the addresses are not 
thumb sucked.  So there is an indication that there is an email that was 
20 
provided … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Email address and according to what we 
have submitted in good faith is - is that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 18 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  26 days before this hearing … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  A notice was sent in the name of 
Mr Thabo to Thabo - to Thabo Mokhesi and - and there is an email 
address but to the extent that it may be found that the email address is 
incorrect.  We - we still have to verify those facts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  We assure Mr Mokhesi that his rights will 
still be maintained.  He will be entitled to file any other thing and to 
contest whatever evidence.  He can still even apply to cross-examine 
10 
this witness or to exercise any of his rights. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  My understanding is that - the idea was just to 
place on record  
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And to do nothing more. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Nothing more sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Just so that maybe if and when he - if he 
responds late or that could be understood. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Definitely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  In fact Chair the - the name that has been 
mentioned is an incorrect name.  His name is Nthimotse and not 
Thabo Mokhesi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  So it went to a wrong person altogether Chair. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 19 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So - so you say he is Head of Department and 
he is this surname but the name is wrong? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Indeed so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes; but - but am I correct to say you just wanted to 
place it on record so that maybe if he takes time before he responds 
that would be understood? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Indeed so Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  As - also because the - it might emanate that 
the allegations that are going to be made against him will be - will be of 
(indistinct). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  That will also be part of - you know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Against his rights really to have responded 
before … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR MZWANELE MANYI: 
 
Those 
allegations 
were 
made 
of 
an 
implicating nature. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Indeed so Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 20 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Chair we understand.  We will make sure 
that 
CHAIRPERSON:  (Intervenes). 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  He is afforded all his rights … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And we will not take any issue should he 
want to participate in these proceedings … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And if it is the wrong address he … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And he wants to participate … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  He would be allowed to do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  I think what - what should be done is somebody 
in the legal team must investigate the - the allegation that it went to a 
wrong address and then at some stage I must just be informed what the 
position is. 
ADV PHILLP MOKOENA SC:  We will make sure that before the end of 
today … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  All that is been done Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  At this can permit us to proceed … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  With evidence Chair.  Mr Dukwana we 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 21 of 278 
 
were at the - at the stage where we are dealing with page 94 if I am not 
mistaken and the Chair was confirming that some of the paragraphs 
that you have read also addressed the issues that he was asking you.  
Am I correct? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  I - I was saying that the first sentence of the 
letter at page 94 seems to address a question that I put to … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Dukwana.  Namely it says: 
“The IPW-001 serves to instruct you to audit all 
pre-1994 Government issued housing units.” 
10 
So … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It does look that it related to houses that were 
provided by Government. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes and then I was referring you to page 
94 before we had to deal with this - the issue of the savings and you 
said on page 94 the - the name that is - is indicated as the person who 
is the author is Mr N Mokhesi.  Am I right? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are right sir. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And he is also indicated as the Head of 
20 
Department at the time? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now crucially and to this letter it is also 
the date.  If you can mention to the Chair what is the date of the letter. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  2 December 2014. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 22 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes and speaking under correction and I 
know that you are the person who might have knowledge.  Please assist 
me.  Would I be correct that from 15 December onwards one would not 
find any building or construction you know processes being undertaken 
during that period? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Normally Chairperson having worked in 
Government the - when it comes to 15 December most contractors you 
know … 
CHAIRPERSON:  They shut down? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  They shut down … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  For the holidays … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And they will start in January. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Around mid-January … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  In most cases … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or not necessarily? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It will be the first week of January. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, first week of January? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  In fact you will see also every time we plan 
anything you make sure that December is - is you know everybody 
slows down and in January because you are dealing also with the 
financial years the Government one - the Provincial Government and 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 23 of 278 
 
National I think it is April and then June it is - it is Local Government. 
So people make sure that because you know you are losing 
time in December and January.  So normally people wake up in 
February and start working seriously in February.  So December and 
January are actually - sometimes we refer to them as dead months.  
Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now would it make sense that an 
instruction is given on that date?  If you look at the date and you - I 
mean you correlate that date with what you have stated to the Chair. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes.  There will be nothing untoward because 
10 
during that time it depends what - what day Government would you 
know operate at a - a skeleton staff but in most cases and also with the 
Provincial Government especially with the Executive Council when it 
goes to the 15 t h most of us - it depends who would have indicated that 
we will be available. 
After the - the 15 t h most of the people are on holiday.  There 
will be a skeleton staff that is operating in - in Government.  It does not 
necessarily mean that Government closes down. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I - I do not know whether Mr Mokoena you intend to 
20 
ask him to read this letter.  It seems to be … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes definitely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Quite important. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  That is the - that was the next thing in 
line.  Now if you turn back to page 94 and take us through the contents 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 24 of 278 
 
of that letter and please where necessary please you know be at large 
to comment. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Paragraph 1: 
“Audit assess and GPS all pre-1994 Government …” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay.  I am sorry Mr - I think you must start 
where it starts: 
“This IPW …” 
Then one will understand it proper. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Oh. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Before … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  “This IPW-001 serves to instruct 
you to audit all pre-1994 Government issued 
housing units as follows:  one, audit assess and 
GPS all pre-1994 Government housing units in the 
province at a rate of R850,00 VAT exclusive per unit 
up to a maximum of 300 000 units.  This is the total 
value of the money 255 million VAT exclusive 
hereinafter to be referred to as the total project 
cost will be payable for all audited units and it 
20 
should be noted that all asbestos units are 
expected to be audited in the province.” 
Now Chairperson this is very important to understand why I 
said this is a heist.  We assume that nobody knows how many of these 
units are and the intention there is to make sure that we eradicate 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 25 of 278 
 
these units and that is what you want as - as a province.  Now you 
cannot limit it to 300 000.  You cannot also - this cannot be a magic 
number. 
It must be understood why they ended to 300 000 and I will 
tell you it is because of the amount that was given was 255 000 - 255 
million for this.  So people had to work this thing backwards.  If it is 
255 million that we have.  You then divide that by R850,00.  It will then 
give you the maximum units that will be 300 000 units exactly. 
Now what these people - what this is happening here and the 
- and - and the price rate is given there and - and you expected that all 
10 
asbestos units will be - should be audited.  If - the question is - if the 
asbestos units go beyond 300 000 what will be the case … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  But in this case what is very interesting is - 
is that you - you are saying people should go and audit and the amount 
is this.  Chairperson the Constitution demands of Government 
especially those who are given the responsibility to be - to be very 
efficient, effective economical and in terms of dealing with the public 
purse. 
Now this could have been done the other way.  The - every 
20 
municipality has ward committees.  It has ward councillors.  If you do 
not have this kind of information at your disposal either coming from 
the Provincial Government or local municipalities this could have been 
guarded.  The information could have been guarded using the people 
that are there at the local level without paying a cent and having done 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 26 of 278 
 
that and having done that you will then know how many of the houses 
are asbestos. 
Then you can do the GPS that you want to do but also we are 
living in a - in a very interesting time - in - in interesting times.  You 
can actually Google this and you can get all this information you know 
using desktop research.  You can do it and you will get all the details 
but I am just saying it is very interesting that the figure put up here the 
total number of houses audit - that should be audited. 
It means you just counting these houses.  You pay - per 
house you pay R850,00 to do the auditing and just to make it look very 
10 
expensive you put in the GPS thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is this GPS - audit asses and GPS all pre-1994 
Government housing units in the province? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  (Intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Audit - audit that one understands.  If the idea was to 
remove all asbestos.  What would be there to assess?  Is - is the 
position not that you simply needed to identify all the housing units that 
had asbestos or if you had a limitation on the number you identify 
300 000? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Chairperson this is - this is … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or do - do you understand what it means this asses 
to say it must be assessed?  What were they supposed to assessed - to 
assess? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I think the - you know the Chairperson the 
more you probe into this you will find the reason why we are calling it a 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 27 of 278 
 
heist.  The - if you - you audit you assess meaning you identify these 
houses and you are able to locate them using the GPS.  You would 
know where these houses are and you would know the structure.  Some 
of these houses would be - the foundations would be poor etcetera. 
So if you were to remove the - the roof - the roofs you would 
also affect the - the structure - the whole structure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that is where the assessment comes in … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To say it is not enough to just identify that this 
particular house has asbestos.  You have got to also look at the whole 
10 
unit and see whether if you remove the asbestos you are not going to 
affect the whole structure or - so that you - you can see whether you 
may end up having to replace the whole house or something. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes.  What - what you will find in the whole 
thing Chairperson is - is that the - these people who get into a house 
and some of the houses people would have made some improvements.  
This neighbour would have an asbestos roof.  This one would not 
necessarily have that one.  Now what is very interesting to look into the 
matter is if I am the person given the task to do the - the audit or the 
assessment. 
20 
You - there is no need for you to - you just look at the roof 
and you find it is not asbestos.  So you would not get paid the 850 for 
just doing that but getting to the asbestos house you identify the 
asbestos house.  You will then take the photos etcetera of this 
asbestos house to exactly know what the conditions are of the house 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 28 of 278 
 
but for you to get into a house and then you - I mean you can just go 
and you know in the township you have - this township has 200 houses. 
You then go to the 200 houses.  This - this number relates - 
the 300 000 relates to all the provincial - the houses in the Province of 
the Free State in the five districts that we have in all the municipalities.  
Surely you have more than 300 000 houses.  So specifically for you to 
be - to - to be very efficient and effective in doing this what you will 
then do you would gather the information as - as a responsible 
department. 
You will gather the information even before you give the job 
10 
to the people.  You would know that you have got these houses and you 
will direct them to say in the Free State we have so many of these 
houses that - that are asbestos.  Then you can direct them to do their 
assessment etcetera but here all that was done go - it is - you know it 
is easy. 
You go every house and people will say in Welkom we - we 
went for 50 000 houses.  We only found - as an example - we only 
found 300 houses with asbestos but the rest is also covered in terms of 
being paid because you have done - you have just audited - you know 
you identified the house and then it is asbestos and then you do that. 
20 
So it is not asbestos but it is a number.  Once you get to 
300 000 the project is done.  So the - the whole thing itself is just a 
scheme to justify what actually these guys were looting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I just want to make sure I understand what the points 
are.  You seem to want to make a certain point with reference to the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 29 of 278 
 
choice of the figure 300 000 … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And - and the amount 250 million.  I - I - would it not 
be normal to first say how much budget have we got that we can put 
aside for this kind of project and if you say well we can put aside 255 
million.  Say okay 255 million and then say how many housing units are 
there that require this kind of project.  You identify them. 
Maybe if the - if the amount that you have set aside will be 
enough to do all of them then that is fine but if the amount that you 
have set aside will not be enough to have all of them done then you say 
10 
out of 400 000 we will only be able to do 300 000.  So I just want to 
check whether there is something I missed. 
I would have thought that that is - there would be nothing 
unusual about that approach. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  No that the - in the normal circumstances it 
will not be (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Under normal circumstances it will not be? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Under normal circumstances. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  But in this case what I am trying to drive at 
20 
is you have a Department of Human Settlement in the Free State.  You 
have municipalities.  You have this - this noble idea of removing the 
asbestos houses.  The first normal thing that you will do to make sure 
you get the best for the money as a province before you give it to any 
other person to do this specialised thing. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 30 of 278 
 
You will then identify all the houses that have asbestos in the 
province.  The - the likelihood - say it - it gets to - you find that you 
only have 60 000 Chair or you have 100 000 of these houses that are 
asbestos roofed houses.  Then it means the amount of money that you 
would have budgeted would not - would be more than enough for you to 
do this but if you start the project and I am - I am saying this if there is 
no urgency and you create that urgency I am - I am about to be in - in 
September I will be 55. 
I stayed in the asbestos house.  I was born in that house and 
I stayed there up until I moved out in 1993 and there has not been any 
10 
urgency.  I think - I do not think there will be any urgency in this case. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  So what I am trying to say Chairperson is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The - the department being a responsible 
department … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Would get the information and gather the 
information without paying this amount of money. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With - without … 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Without paying? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And then it would help them if they find that 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 31 of 278 
 
they have a certain number of these asbestos houses.  Remember it is 
the - the whole thing is not about auditing.  The most important thing is 
removing them.  So you do not focus an auditing as such.  Spend a lot 
of money on auditing the houses.  You - you want to make sure that you 
have these houses. 
You have identified them.  You have - what we call ward 
committees.  They work with ward councillors and these people would 
know their wards and they would be able to say in Ward 10 in Welkom 
and Matjhabeng we have 20 of the asbestos houses and they can give 
you the addresses. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Then - and then you are able to go out and - 
and do a - an advert in this case that you intend eradicating these 
asbestos roofing and you are calling for people.  In this case there is 
competition and you will get a better price deal for this but for you to 
decide from the beginning that you only - you have 255 million and go 
and audit. 
So what these people did they because it - you stipulate that 
you must audit 300 000 houses.  So they went out and - and did exactly 
that.  They went out and audited 300 000 houses.  You will see as we 
20 
get to the report itself it will tell you of the 300 000 houses audited so - 
so many of them are roofed in asbestos.  So what I am trying to give to 
the Commission is that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Taking the total amount - number of houses 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 32 of 278 
 
the figure and the price will tell you the whole story of the - of the 
project. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Ja.  If … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Mokoena I guess that maybe we should let 
him read the letter … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And finish it before commenting. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that it will be much easier and then you … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Chair yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Can comment after. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  He can comment after but Chair because 
of this questions that you have posed maybe let us clarify them at this 
point … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And if allow him to do that because … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  A number of things arises from what 
Mr Dukwana has said. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now would one understand your 
evidence better if you look at the figure 300 000.  That as at this time 
there was no information at the disposal of either the department or the 
very same entity but indeed there is a need or there are 300 000 
houses at least where you need to replace that asbestos. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 33 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yet and amount has also been placed. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes.  It is clear there was no - there was no 
information in the - in the department for that. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now in line to that because Chair 
has asked you also relevant questions.  Turn to page 107 which might 
also clarify some of the questions that the Chair was - was putting and 
the answers that you proffered but they might be better explained with 
what you see in paragraph 1 of that letter.  If you can just read that 
letter - paragraph 1 of it only. 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Ja.  Chairperson this paragraph here the - 
the one that is headed: 
“Request for Appointment on Risk …” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  “…Audit and Assessment Handling 
of Hazardous Material, Removal of Disposal of 
Asbestos Contaminated Rubble in the Free State:  
we have the pleasure in submitting our request to 
be appointed on risk basis for the following:  the 
assessment audit of houses, roofed using asbestos 
20 
material, the handling and disposal of asbestos 
sheets to an approved designated disposal site.  
The scope of the work entails the physical door to 
door counting, safe removal and disposal of 
asbestos 
contaminated 
building 
rubble 
and 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 34 of 278 
 
asbestos sheets from various townships across the 
Free State.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  So would that also be inline in 
what you are trying to convey to the Chair as to what was envisaged in 
the appointment? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Certainly sir. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now maybe let us then do as the 
Chair has proposed and proceed from paragraph 3 so that we can put 
the entire contents of the letter in and thereafter have the opportunity 
to comment on any other specific paragraph in that letter. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  He had not gone to two if I remember correctly.  Had 
he done two? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That is what I am reading. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  No to paragraph 2.  You are right Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  From paragraph 2. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Paragraph 2 reads: 
“The commencement period for the appointment will 
be 
effective 
from 
1 December 2014 
to 
20 
31 March 2015 or earlier.” 
Number three: 
“You are expected to submit a completion report 
within two weeks from the date of completion of the 
project.” 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 35 of 278 
 
Number four: 
“40 percent of the 50 percent of the total project 
cost 51 million VAT exclusive is payable on 
commencement.  That is on 1 December 2014 
subject with submission of a valid tax invoice and 
valid tax clearance certificate.  60 percent of the 50 
percent of the total project cost 76 500 000 VAT 
exclusive 
cost 
will 
be 
payable 
as 
progress 
certificate number two on or before 1 March 2015.” 
And number six: 
10 
“40% of the 50% of the total project cost R51million VAT 
exclusive is payable on commencement that is on the 1 
December 2014 subject to submission of a valid tax invoice 
and valid tax clearance certificate.  60% of the 50% of the 
total project cost R76 500 000 VAT exclusive cost will be  
payable as progress certificate number two on or before the 1 s t 
of March 2015 and – number six 40% of the 50% of the total 
project cost that is R51million VAT exclusive will be payable as 
a progress certificate number three on or before the 1 s t of May 
2015.  60% of the 50% of the total project cost R76 500 000 
20 
VAT exclusive will be payable as progress certificate number 
four subject to submission of the final project’s Board on or 
before the 1 s t of June 2015.  A minimum liability insurance of a 
million is required.  I hope you’ll find the above in order of 
your respective purposes. Regards M Moghazi the Head of 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 36 of 278 
 
Department, signed the 2 n d of December 2014.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Now let’s go back to page 94 and allow 
you to comment on any of the paragraphs that appear in there. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Can I – before I address this Chairperson, if 
you look at paragraph two the commencement period for the 
appointment will be effective from the 1 s t of December 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   And then the letter is dated the 02/12/2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   I’d leave that, that it’s normal also but in 
10 
this case I don’t understand the reason that you don’t appoint them 
from the date that you signed the contract then,  you know, the 1 s t of 
December – what comes first is the 1 s t of December 2014 and then you 
sign this on the 2 n d December 2014, so I’m just saying it would have 
been normal, in fact if the – that the Head of Department would have 
given the commencement date on the 3 r d or the 2 n d when they received 
the letter but to commence on the 1 s t of December and then the letter is 
signed out.  Meaning on the 1 s t of December they don’t have a letter 
and then the 2 n d of December you sign it already. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well part of what it raises might be the question of – 
20 
the question you raised earlier as to what was so urgent, why did things 
have to be done in such a rush. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   But also fundamentally Mr Dukwana the 
point that you’re certainly making, go to page 94, is that clearly, if this 
is an instruction letter to perform certain duties, it says from 2 n d 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 37 of 278 
 
December then one would expect that any appointment cannot precede 
this instruction, am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   You’re correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes you see that when you go to 
paragraph two the period appears to be the 1 s t of December a period 
when there was no any instruction that could have been – that could 
have gave them the mandate to do anything, is that the point that 
you’re making? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   That’s the point that I’m making. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Now any other issue you wish to 
10 
comment? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The – you’ll remember Chairperson that 
when they made their proposal they were asking to be appointed on risk 
and the question that has been worrying me is that on commencement, 
these are people, when they come to you they say we can do it on 
risk…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And on risk meant what? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   I think they might have indicated that they 
are prepared to take the risk, they will commence and then you’ll pay 
them at a later stage. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   So in other words without any deposit or advance 
payment? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Without any deposit or without an advance, 
this was – they offered to do that when they were asking for this but 
even before that, you saying the first payment will go on the 1 s t or is 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 38 of 278 
 
payable on commencement, the 1 s t of December 2014.  When you sign 
this thing on the 2 n d of December 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but also if one looks at what they were going to 
do in terms of how you explained it at least as I understand it, the 
initial task would be to identify the housing units with asbestos roofs 
and maybe at the same time do the assessment that you talked about.  
I would have imagined that once they had done that then the next 
phase would be the removal of the asbestos from those identified 
housing units.  So one wonders why it was important that – or what 
justification there was that they should be paid before they could do 
10 
any work at all.  Sometimes the justification for some payment in 
advance might be that they will incur costs in terms of material, I don’t 
know if there would be any significant cost for just doing door-to-door 
to identify the houses and assessing and therefore why they wouldn’t 
be required to first perform certain tasks and once they have performed 
those tasks and the department is satisfied that those tasks were 
performed satisfactorily then they get paid, is that something you are 
able to comment on? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   That is what I said under normal 
circumstances some of these things will be best explained and one will 
20 
understand but because of may things that are abnormal that are 
happening things like this you look at them carefully and want to 
understand and as I say Chairperson, I’m finding it very difficult to 
reconcile the fact that I come and I say, appoint me on risk to do this 
and then you appoint me but you then go out to say I’ll give you money 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 39 of 278 
 
in advance and if we don’t see anything wrong then I don’t understand 
because the fact that I come to you there were no plans to do this in 
the department itself and it means that the whole project was also not 
budgeted for by the department itself.  It’s an unfunded mandate that 
but the issue is, as the Late Mr Mbambo indicated that they got money, 
they were able to source money from National.  So it means because 
now we have – and it was for that reason that they were saying appoint 
us on risk because they were assured that they would be paid.  So it 
means these people were prepared to spend whatever needed to be 
spent and then approach Government and say, the same reason that I 
10 
said, and say, we have these houses and these houses now need to – 
we need to assess them and do work but the audit part it’s an easy 
way, you can actually, as I say, you can audit houses you have 1, 2, 3 
tables here but that one is broken and then that broken one needs to be 
fixed.  So you then go to the – to whoever fixes the thing and say, now 
fix the one broken table but for you to take all this three tables we have 
done this now we need money for all the three tables, these ones are 
not broken but you’re getting paid the same amount just because I was 
able to count that there were three and I pay you but the most 
important thing that is very critical  here to understand is, how do you – 
20 
as I said there’s no urgency, number one, the person comes with an 
unsolicited bid, you don’t have – it was not budgeted for and the person 
says to you, appoint  me I take the risk, I take the risk away from you 
as Government let me perform this but when you appoint the  person 
who came to you with all this, you then point out how you will pay him 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 40 of 278 
 
or that person even before they commence.  You sign the letter on the 
2 n d of December, the commencement is the 1 s t of December and then 
you say I’ll pay you from the 1 s t of December, I’ll pay you this amount 
of money and it’s not just any amount Chairperson, this is R51million of 
public money that I’m giving to you.  You have not even started, I give 
you the R51million all that you might have done is give me a guarantee 
of a million then I give you R51million.  You have a person who gives 
you a million and as a guarantee you still want to give R51million 
before he even commences and this argument, I’m making it 
deliberately Chairperson, you will see at a later stage the same Head of 
10 
Department raising a point that you can’t pay a person that a person 
has not performed and this is the same person who deposed the 
affidavit to the fact that you can’t pay for a service that has not - or 
goods that have not been delivered but you do the same thing.  So I’m 
just saying there is a lot that is not right with this project. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Now with reference to that letter on 
page 94 is there any other thing that you wish to raise before I put 
some of the questions which I also seek clarity from you? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   No that’s all. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Now what confuses me Mr Dukwana is 
that if you turn to page 95 of that document, you will see that in 
paragraph six and seven there are further amounts which the 
department appears to be committing itself to pay and within – referring 
to certain milestones and it also provides the date of the payment of 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 41 of 278 
 
those amounts, can you see them? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes I do. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Let’s take the first one being the 
amount which would be paid of R51million on or before the 1 s t of May 
2015, alright.  Now having that in mind, let’s go back to paragraph two 
on page 94, I thought that the period of appointment it’s only for a 
period of, I think, it’s less than three months taking into account 
December, am I right? 
MR 
MXOLISI 
DUKWANA: 
 
 
Reading 
it 
Chairperson 
is 
the 
commencement period for the appointment will be effective from the 1 s t 
10 
of December 2014 to the 31 s t March 2015 or earlier and with that in 
mind how does one then get payment as provided for in paragraph six 
beyond the stipulated period of the contract?  It explains why I refer to 
it as a heist Chairperson, I give you the timeframe January 1 s t – 31 s t of 
March but still there are dates beyond the contract or whatever that I 
gave you – I gave up until the 31 s t of March 2015 but the same letter 
I’m saying to you I will give you R51million that will payable as 
progress certificate number three on or before the 1 s t of May.  That will 
be after the whole project would have been – supposed to have been 
finished and remember what I said Chairperson…[intervenes]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well maybe before you get there, maybe between 
you and Mr Mokoena somebody can give me clarification.  I don’t seem 
to have any problem with payments that come after the date of 
completion of the project because I’m assuming that normally you 
would let them finish the project and then you must have time to 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 42 of 278 
 
inspect whether they have done the job properly and with or without 
that, as long as they are finished the job if they are happy that you pay 
a month later and so on then that would be fine, is there something I’m 
missing.  If you built my house, if I asked you to build my house and 
you finish it today, we might have an agreement that you let me have 
your final invoice within 7 days or tomorrow but I have 30 days to pay 
the final invoice, that’s after you’ve finished the house. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   I think the normal thing is that I work and 
then say I work in January and then I give you a certificate and then 
you go out and you pay me for the work that I would have done, the 
10 
progress certificate.  What I’m also trying to point out Chairperson is 
the determination of the figure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Determination of? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The figure, of the figure itself, say I make 
an example…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but that might be a different point, I just wanted 
to make sure that there – I’m not missing any point that either you or 
Mr Mokoena was making about payments happening after the 
completion of the project but if I’m not missing anything it’s fine. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Let’s go to paragraph six Mr Dukwana, 
20 
this does not seem to suggest that this will be the amount paid for the 
work already done, read the entire paragraph six with the emphasis on, 
will be payable as progress certificate.  Would one understand that the 
progress certificate would entail work that must be done during that 
period for one to be entitled to that amount? 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 43 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Correct sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh so that’s the – refers to progress certificate to 
say there seems to be a contradiction because the one paragraph says 
the completion date of the project is 31 March but another paragraph in 
the letter seems to contemplate that beyond that date there will be work 
continuing and therefore there will be progress…[intervenes]. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes and entitlement to further amounts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes now I understand. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Now let’s deal with paragraph seven on 
the same basis and look at the period and look also at what was that 
10 
amount supposed to be advanced for, if you can read it and also 
comment on it in line with paragraph two…[intervenes]. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   This is the 60% of the 50% of the total 
project cost that will be R76 500 000 VAT exclusive that will be payable 
as progress certificate number four subject to the submission of the 
final report on or before the 1 s t of June 2015. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes, now I seek clarity also – maybe let 
me allow you to comment in relation to what you’ve said before, before 
I move to another point.  Would that be in accordance with the normal 
processes of the department to pay a service provider beyond the 
20 
period of the stipulated – of the contract and also for – I mean the 
amount as indicated in paragraph seven? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Normally Chairperson once you have done 
your project in some instances you’ll find that you will be paid but 
before they give you the final settlement they want to go back and see 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 44 of 278 
 
if everything has been done and if they are not happy with that, they 
will then from the final settlement that they need to give you, they will 
take what they believe they need to take and then give you everything 
that is due to you but as I’m saying here, this seems to determine – it’s 
pre-determined that from this period you would have done – you should 
have done 40% in terms of counting houses and then we will pay you 
this 40% of this we’ll pay you this.  It’s actually very, very vague, this – 
the whole thing that is written…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I wanted to also ask you, what is this thing of 
talk about 40% of 50%, 60% of 50%, what is this is this a normal way of 
10 
calculating what will be paid to a contractor, why are they not talking 
about whatever percentage as we all know percentages. Percent of the 
whole amount, I mean they’ve said the whole amount is R255million, 
why are they not simply saying when you have done 20% of the houses 
then you will be paid 20% of the R255million, 20% of the whole amount 
or something like this, what is this 40% of 50% of the total project cost, 
60% of 50% of the total project cost, 60% of the 50% of the total 
project cost? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The simplest thing just to simplify it, you 
have – it is payable in four batches.  In tis case you have 300 000 
20 
units, so what you do half of 300 000 would be 75…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes I understand that part, I’m asking whether this is 
normal, the normal way in which Government departments maybe 
particularly in the Free State, how they wold communicate or calculate 
amounts paid.  You were an MEC for quite some time, you probably 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 45 of 278 
 
would know or – was this a normal way of calculating what would be 
paid to a contractor or is it something you were seeing for the first time 
as well? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   This is very interesting, this is why, 
Chairperson, I wanted to just to show you what I understand by this and 
why I say – here the 50% if you take the 300 000 houses and then you 
have 150 000 the 50% of whatever, we are talking…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no I’m saying that part I understand, I 
understand how you would work it out that I understand, what I don’t 
understand is – I mean obviously 40% of 50% is 40% of half of 300 000 
10 
units or if you talk about the amount it’s 40% of half of R255million but 
it’s a very strange way of calculating anything, I mean – but maybe it’s 
just because I don’t know.  So what I was interested in is whether in 
your experience, this is not something unusual to calculate things, 
make calculations like this? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   That’s why I was saying it’s vague, it’s open 
to abuse but it’s not normal that you do this.  The fact is Chairperson, 
what you do, you appoint a person to do a particular job, as the 
progress report comes in, if I have done – this month I would have 
done, say I would have done 20 houses, you will then pay me 20 – for 
20 
the 20 houses and then you go and do it. So – but if you pre-determine 
it and you say you do this, we pay you this much.  So I’m saying, I 
don’t understand it quite clearly how this was structured and why it was 
structured. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay thank you. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 46 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   While we’re still trying to clear that 
confusion Mr Dukwana, while you’re opening page 94 could you also 
simultaneously open page 112, open page 94 and page 112.  Now if you 
look at page 112 would I be correct that this was the tax clearance 
certificate which was submitted in line with this project? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes sir. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   And it was submitted by the service 
provider in question, would I be correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes you’re correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Now what is the expiry date of this tax 
10 
clearance certificate, if you look at the top left-hand side, you’ll find he 
date? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The date there is – I don’t know 
what…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   28 January 2015, isn’t it? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Ja it would appear that the approved 
date…[intervenes]. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Expiry date 28 January 2015. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   And the expiry date would appear to be 
28 January 2015. 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Am I reading it correctly? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes sir. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Now compare that – that period of the 
validity of the certificate of the tax clearance certificate with paragraph 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 47 of 278 
 
two on page 94 and can you wish to comment on comparing the two 
dates? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The commencement is from the 1 s t of 
December to the 31 s t of March and then the expiry date of the 
clearance certificate is the 28 t h of January 2015 meaning that by the 
time you pay everything you would not have a tax clearance certificate 
that is in order. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well isn’t the requirement that at the time you ask to 
be given work by a Government department or you put in a bid  you 
must show proof that you are tax compliant as at that time? 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   That’s correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In which case this would have shown that at the time 
they were appointed they were tax compliant. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   They were yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja and if there’s a requirement that later on while the 
work is continuing they must show that might be another issue isn’t it. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   I think the responsible thing to do is also to 
– once you appoint these people you’re aware of this and you then 
point it out to them that this and they should submit also their tax 
clearance certificate that would be in order say – it’s annual that they 
20 
would say you should do that I don’t – no I don’t think that they 
submitted the same certificate for those.  So I’m just saying these are 
some of the things that need to be followed up. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Let’s deal with it clearly, go to page 94, 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 48 of 278 
 
I mean paragraph two there’s no ambiguity on the specific period of the 
contract that is relevant. So as at the time when this [indistinct] 
dispatched it is quite clear between all involved that it’s for this 
duration which you’d be required to render certain services, am I right? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   You are right. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   And also the payment that are going to 
be paid there’s no ambiguity from paragraph four to paragraph seven as 
to when are they going to be paid those amounts?  All that I’m saying if 
you have that in regard when these instructions are issued and the tax 
clearance certificate which is submitted, it clearly shows that it will 
10 
expire two months even before the conclusion of the contract. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   It is correct and I think it’s a responsibility 
of whoever was working with this to point it out also that this will be the 
condition to pay other amounts of money or show the certificate that 
will be compliant. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  But the Chair also raises something 
important.  It says that normally and usually when a bidder submits a 
tender document one would submit it with the relevant documents 
including a valid tax certificate, am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes you are correct. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Was there any tender in regard to this 
specific project? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  There was no tender. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now if we can move on and may I refer 
you to page 96 and if you may identify that document for us? 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 49 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The Service Level Agreement entered into 
between Department of Human Settlement herein represented by 
Ntimetzi 
Mokesi 
in 
his 
capacity 
as 
Head 
of 
Department 
the 
[Department] and Blackhead Consulting [intervention]. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  I am sorry Mr Mokoena I did not hear the 
page. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Page 96 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  96 okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  I apologise yes.  Page 96 Mr Dukwana 
already has read the name of the Department on record and indicted 
10 
that this was the Service Level Agreement between the two entities or 
the two organs that are actually indicated in that letter, am I right?  In 
that contract? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA: Yes you are correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Just one second.  Yes we may proceed. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And if you may please turn to page 97 
and at the bottom you will see there is this clause number 2.  If you can 
read what that clause conveys? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The working relationship on page 97? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Yes. 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   
“The working relationship.  The Department appoints 
the service provider to assess audit houses rooved 
using asbestos material, handling and disposal of 
asbestos sheets to an approved designated disposal 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 50 of 278 
 
sight.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  And while you are on page 98 what 
is the duration of the contract? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   
“The agreement commences on the last party signing 
and terminates on the 31 s t August 2017.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now let us see if we can be able to 
see as to when did the parties sign so that we can be able to know 
when it commences or – when it will terminate.  If you go to page 103 is 
there any signature appended on that – appended in that page? 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes there is a signature. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Is there any date? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  No. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Okay.  Let us turn to page 104.  Is there 
any date that one can see? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  No Sir. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now let me refer you back to page 
98. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  The signatures which – on page 103 the signature 
that is just above the word signature of department do we know whose 
signature that is?  Do you know whose signature is? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It looks the same as the one that was – that 
was reflected on the appointment letter.  That letter that we just read. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 51 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  The appointment letter? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I think is it on page 95 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  94 – 95? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  95. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Page 95 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  95. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  If you check 95 the Head of Department and 
103 would be the same signatures. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  But they do not look the same they hey?  Or they… 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  They seem. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I do not know whether it is because one – one is 
– is smaller than the other but if you look at the two they seem to be 
quite different.  But I do know that sometimes when I sign many 
documents not all my signatures look exactly the same.  So – anyway – 
okay now I – I see – so that is this signature and there is no signature 
for a witness, is that right? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And there are no dates that are 
reflected. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And there are no dates that are. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And that it is in line Mr Dukwana also 
with what you have said that the agreement on page 98 – that the 
agreement commences on the last party signing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 52 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And terminates on the 31 s t August 2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now bearing that in mind that we are not 
able to find that clarity could you please open – while you are still 
opening page 98 also go back to page 94.  Now can you comment about 
the two durations that are reflected in relation to the same subject 
matter? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The first one on page 94 is from 1 s t 
December 2014 to 31 s t March 2015 or earlier and then the duration on 
this one the Service Level Agreement is – terminates on the 31 s t August 
10 
2017. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Can you explain?  Do you know what 
was happening?  I mean we have two different durations of the 
contract.  The one reflected in the appointment and the one in the 
Service Level Agreement? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  In our discussion the – with the late Mr 
Mpambani was that they were doing – they were going to do this in 
phases.  It will be the first phase and then the second phase.  So I – I 
would assume that it would have been the fact that it goes to 2017 it 
would have been to accommodate the 2017 thing which would be the 
20 
second phase.  Because he was saying the first phase was going to 
deal with the auditing of the houses and the second phase will be the 
removal of the asbestos houses – of the roofing.  But as you would 
understand as you would see here this is not what actually transpired in 
the long run. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 53 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  But also if you have regard to page 94 
do you have any other letter of instruction or appointment that suggest 
that this period went beyond this period stipulated therein? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The – the instruction letter here that was 
given to the Chief Executive Office one believes Chairperson would be 
after signing the Service Level Agreement you will then issue a letter 
that would – also give the instructions.  There is – or use the Service 
Level Agreement.  So I do not understand this in terms of you having 
the instruction to perform the duty and you give this – what it means is 
they will then have to come back also and have the period that will be 
10 
designated in terms of what work will then be dealt with.  If you check 
that one there it goes out with the Audit and Assess and GPS and it 
ends there. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  But if you check at the – at the Service Level 
Agreement the – when they – when they tell exactly what they want to 
do if we can read what the responsibility of the parties were. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well that is what I wanted to ask you about because 
when you talk about phase 1 and phase 2 I was wondering whether – 
how that would work out because I understood you to say the 300 000 
20 
houses would be all the houses and I thought that their task in terms of 
the letter of appointment was not just the auditing and assessment but 
it would also be – include the removal.  So – but when I look at the 
responsibilities it looks like there might be a problem.  Do you want to 
deal with that? 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 54 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I think if Chairperson we – we can also go to 
the page 98 and the – what the – each responsibilities would give some 
clarity to what I would be saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes just tell us about them.  You can read them. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The – if you read what the service providers 
must do and then the responsibility of the Department.  I would like to 
read the responsibility of the Department out? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   
“The Department” 
10 
That 4.3 – 4.3.1 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   
“The Department shall pay for the services of the service provider in 
accordance with the cost breakdown as agreed and approved in 
instruction to perform work.” 
So this goes to that instruction Chairperson.  Instruction to perform 
work and the breakdown is this one.  It has these dates.  So then the 
confusion in this case would be you have the duration of this Service 
Level Agreement and you have the responsibilities of the parties in 
20 
accordance with this Service Level Agreement.  And this Service Level 
Agreement refers to the instruction letter that has specific dates.  The 
1 s t December 2014 to 31 s t March 2015.  The Service Level Agreement 
however terminates on the 31 August 2017 and the Department here in 
4.3.1 says: 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 55 of 278 
 
“The Department shall pay for the services of the service provider in 
accordance with the cost breakdown as agreed and approved 
instruction to perform work and appoint signing of the appointment 
letter.” 
And this was the letter that we talking about. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but are you referring to the letter at page 94? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  94. 
CHAIRPERSON:  When you say talk about the appointment letter?  
Because it does not seem to me – it does not seem to me that that 
necessarily refers to that letter but it may be.  There is nothing in 4.3.1 
10 
that says which appointment letter they are talking about.  Could it not 
be an appointment letter – a new appointment letter that may have 
been envisaged would be given to them or that may have been given to 
them other than the one of – of – at page 94?  Because are we not in 
2017 already now? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  We are not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or they may be referring to it.  I would simply have 
expected that they would identify it by saying appointment letter dated 
this and that and that.  If – it would have made things much more 
easier.  But of course if there was no other appointment letter this was 
20 
the only appointment letter maybe one should read it to refer to it. It is 
just strange or one would have expected them to annex it as an 
annexure to the agreement to say appointment letter annexed as 
whatever or addendum number – addendum number whatever.  That is 
something you might not be able to help me with. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 56 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you are saying you read that paragraph to refer to 
that letter at page 94 that is how you read it? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The – I read it this way Chairperson because 
there is – we do not have any letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Any other letter. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Or instruction letter other than this one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, no that is fine I was just saying – I was just 
saying maybe we should not immediately assume that it refers to that 
letter but maybe it does.  But let us work on the basis that it refers to 
10 
that letter if there is no other letter and then you can proceed with the 
comments you want to make. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I feel comfortable that way. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now after having dealt with those 
number of documents may I refer you back to your statement with 
particular reference Chair to page 13.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe let me say this before you proceed Mr 
Mokoena and both Mr Dukwana and yourself can say something if you 
have something to say.  If – if it is correct to read this paragraph as 
20 
referring to the appointment letter at page 94.  Is the position not 
therefore that the whole thing becomes nonsensical because the letter 
at page 94 talks about the duration that starts on the 1 s t December 
2014 goes up to the – and goes up to the 31 s t March 2015 and this 
memorandum is being signed in 2017 unless there is a clause in this 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 57 of 278 
 
memoranda – in this agreement that says those dates in that letter 
must be read to mean a different – different dates.  Is that something 
that you – you aware is being addressed or is that something you do 
not know? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I hope the head will provide some clarity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is alright. 
MR 
MXOLISI 
DUKWANA: 
 
But 
as 
I 
am 
saying 
Chairperson 
[intervention]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Some of the questions I may ask are questions that 
you might not know about but I am only asking in case you know.  And 
10 
if you do not know you just say you do not know and at some stage we 
might get clarification. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  From the documents at our disposal that 
you have furnished the commission with let us attempt after we have 
dealt with all this confusion to sketch a chronology from these 
documents.  Let us do so by reference to page 107.  Because the dates 
will be quite revealing.  That is dated – you have already told the Chair 
that it is dated the 28 t h May 2014. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes Sir. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And this is a request that is being made 
20 
to the Department by the service provider, am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  So at least from what we can gather this 
is where we can trace the – when the request was made, am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes you are. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 58 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now let us go to page 105.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that 101? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  105 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  105 okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  That would be the letter dated the 1 s t 
October 2014. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes Sir. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  It will – it says that appointment as 
profession resource team, can you see that? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes I can see that. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Can you read paragraph number 3? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   
“You will be expected to sign as Service Level 
Agreement with the Head of the Department or his 
duly designated official.  The contract will stipulate 
among others the duration of the contract, payment 
arrangement and other general conditions.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   
“You will be issued with an instruction to perform 
20 
work based on an approved project milestone for 
each phase to be completed.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  So even the instruction letter that you 
have referred to surely must be borne out of the contents of this letter, 
am I right? 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 59 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are right. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  So we are still on track with the 
chronology.  Let us go to page 96.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you go to page 96. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  96. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Mokoena.  Ja no I was just noting the signature at 
page 105 on that letter. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  It appears to be consistent. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I seem to pick up that they are very … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Variations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja they are all kinds of variations. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But as I say … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  It might be depend. 
CHAIRPERSON:  When I sign… 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Whether you sign on a Friday or Monday, 
Saturday or whatever day Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I sometimes think that it might be very difficult for 
20 
anybody to – who is looking at my different signatures to say it is the 
same person who signed. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now from page 105 let us go to page 96 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 60 of 278 
 
and that is now the Service Level Agreement which is referred to that 
letter that you have just alluded to – to the Chairperson, am I right? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are right. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And we know that we do not have any 
dates in this SLA but at least it was subsequent to the letters that you 
have dealt with? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Mokoena.   I think I – I lost you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  It was page 96. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am still at 105. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  It was page 96 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  96 yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  96.  It is the Service Level Agreement.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Mr Dukwana has already testified on it 
and we have referred to page 103 and 104 during his earlier testimony 
and clearly established that there were no dates.  But at least one can 
find comfort in knowing that they should have been – it should have 
been concluded subsequent to those letters.  Am I correct? 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Before any payment could be made you – 
you should have the Service Lever Agreement. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now what would follow from what 
we are having now go to page 94.  Then this is the document that tells 
you about [intervention]. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 61 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Mokoena. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At some stage I had asked and I think Mr Dukwana 
had said he was going to read the responsibility of the Service Provider 
and the Agreement but he sought to start with the responsibility of the 
Department and I think did not go back to – it to deal with the 
responsibilities of the Service Provider. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe you can decide whether he answers the 
question that you are putting to him now. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  No it is fine Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or he clears that first. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  I think while we are still [intervention]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  While you are still want the question to 
be dealt with maybe it is appropriate to do so.  Let us go to page 98 Mr 
Dukwana. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And for completeness you touched on 
clause 4.3 but – may – can you please read 4.1 and 4.2 so that we can 
20 
have the entire responsibilities being recorded? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   
“The responsibilities of parties. The service provider 
shall  
4.1.1 Execute the project in line with this agreement.  
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 62 of 278 
 
The approved instruction to perform work and the 
applicable legislations and regulations. 
2. On becoming aware of any matter which are 
materially changed or has changed the scope or cost 
or timing of the service – of the services of the works 
the service provider shall give notice to the 
Department. 
3. Not undertake any work without the necessary 
instruction to perform work signed by the Head of the 
Department or the delegated official.  Provide the 
10 
Department with a cost breakdown of the services 
connected with the project.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  So if you look at that clause that is 4.1 which is 
supposed to set out the obligations of the service provider and you are 
looking at establishing exactly what they were obliged to do it seems 
that you can only find that within clause 4.1.1 which is they were to 
execute the project in line with this agreement the approved instruction 
to perform work and the applicable legislations and regulations.  Now it 
can only be – it would mean that you would need to find the approved 
instruction to perform work. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is what would tell you what they were supposed 
to do. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And this becomes to the extent that it might be 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 63 of 278 
 
correct to read that instruction to perform work to be a reference to that 
letter at page 94. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It would mean that the work they were supposed to do 
under this agreement is the same work that was given to them in terms 
of that letter.  In other words what you may have thought of when you 
talked about phase 1 and phase 2 might not be applicable because one 
would have thought that if they had done the identification for example 
then the second – the phase 2 should not talk about them doing any 
identification.  It should talk about them doing the rest of the job. 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Chairperson the reading of 4.1.1 together 
with 4.1.3 that the service providers should not undertake any work 
without the necessary instruction to perform work signed by the Head of 
the Department and this would mean this one.  I would assume it means 
the one that we talking about the instruction to perform which was 
signed by the HOD and with this you would believe that the service 
agreement that – that is here we talking about what is written in the 
agreement.  I was merely voicing out the discussion that I had that it 
was not – the project was not entirely to – to audit and – etcetera the – 
but it was also to eradicate, remove them and go and store them 
20 
somewhere or bury them somewhere.  So that is why he said it was in 
phases to me.  So when I was saying that I was just assuming that it 
might actually. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The fact that it goes to 2017. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 64 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  But the clarity is that before you do all these 
other things. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  This is something that you would have dealt 
with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And I am saying this Chairperson because as 
we will continue the – the other thing that I wanted to point out at some 
stage in 2010 there was an instruction from the office of the Premier to 
10 
make sure that – I was still in government then – in the executive 
council that no contract should be entered into before it is taken to the 
service level – to the State Law Advisors in the office of the Premier. 
And there was a directive written to all the HOD’s, the CFO’s and as 
well as the Supply Chain Managers to that effect that every contract 
before you enter into it must have gone through the process.  So one 
would assume that the same should have applied in this case but if 
ignored it explains some of the difficulties in understanding.  Because 
the law advisors would have pointed out the problem in the whole thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Mokoena. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  This is – I am just mentioning this to you obviously Mr 
Dukwana will hear.  Clause 4.1.2 which Mr Dukwana referred to which – 
no, no 4.1.3 which says the service provider shall not undertake any 
work without the necessary instruction to perform work.  Maybe 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 65 of 278 
 
creating more problems if one says there was already an instruction to 
perform work. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Well Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You see. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  No I am painting this chronology to 
demonstrate the serious anomalies in terms of the dates.  And Mr 
Dukwana if [intervention] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Clearly there is no letter that is talking 
about Phase 1, Phase 2 Phase 3.  You do not have any other 
10 
instructions other than the one that is on page 94. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  True. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  In terms of sequence of the dates and 
what is being read there is nothing else that one can say that there 
could have been any other instructions beyond what is contained in this 
documents.  Am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Exactly. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now the period that is clearly 
identified is the one in paragraph 94 and that will be in conformity with 
what the Chair has now read that you cannot perform any work without 
20 
any other - without proper instructions. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are correct sir. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  But yet when you go to the same Service 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 66 of 278 
 
Level Agreement you find a different duration and on a contract that 
does not have any signatures - it does not have any dates.  Am I 
correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now I want now to move and - and 
just to clarify you said that this is the project of 255 million on a simple 
letter that you have seen.  There was no open tender. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  No.  There was no open tender. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now I want to refer you back to 
your witness statement with particular reference to page 13. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  So - I am sorry Mr Mokoena.  Without the - this 
agreement does not itself specify how many housing units it was talking 
about. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One would have to go to some other document if 
applicable … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To find that out if there is anything. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Exactly Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, okay. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Mr Dukwana do you want to ventilate 
what the Chair is saying? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It is correct Chair.  That is why I am saying 
there is a problem in - in relation to this and clearly I do not think the - 
the attorneys in the - in - legal advisors in the department or the - the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 67 of 278 
 
State Law Advisors especially with regard to the instruction that was 
given at the time by the Office of the Premier. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now page 13 of your statement.  If you 
can read the contents of paragraph 42 and you may comment when you 
deem necessary to do so. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  “The letter of …” 
42: 
“The letter of appointment followed appointment 
followed a five paged proposal from Sodi that was 
dated 28 May 2014 for the request for appointment 
10 
on risk audit and assessment, handling of a 
hazardous 
material, 
removal 
or 
disposal 
of 
asbestos contaminated rubble in the Free State 
Province.  For ease of reference I annex hereto all 
these other copies.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes and you say that this is what 
culminated in the Government paying 255 million? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Ja.  When - when you have dealt with the 
systems and as Government if I - you can imagine a five page proposal 
netting you 255 million.  It is very interesting that they just made that 
20 
proposal and then the 255 million was paid. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes and you make certain observations 
in paragraph 43.  If you can take us through that. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  “This project was a brazen act of 
corruption executed by State Officials in concept 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 68 of 278 
 
with the business persons at the behest of the 
Premier of the Free State Mr Magashule at that 
time.” 
We will also demonstrate why Chairperson we are saying that. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now from paragraph 44 that is 
where you are now detailing specific transactions and the monies which 
might have paid to different beneficiaries and if I understand your 
statement very care - very well is that these are the monies which 
emanates from this asbestos project.  Am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are correct sir. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes and we should be alive to certain 
names that you have not mentioned.  Mr X because we are now - we 
are now about to deal with those issues.  Now before we deal with the 
specifics you mentioned specific names in the paragraphs.  You make 
reference to people like Ms Morake.  Where was she employed? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  In the Office of the Premier. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And do you know for how long roughly 
was she employed in that office? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  When I was … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Was it a long time? 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  When I was in - in Government she was still 
there … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And I do not - and she is still there even 
now. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 69 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  You refer also to Ms Cholota.  Who is 
she and where was she working? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Ms Moroadi Cholota was working in the 
Office of the Premier as the Premier’s PA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Cholota is Ms Moroadi is that the correct …? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Moroadi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that the correct pronunciation?  I got it wrong. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Moroadi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  Yes and Ms Moroadi is Ms Ipeleng … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Morake. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Morake.  Okay.  They both worked in the Office of the 
Premier? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now you preface that transactions with 
paragraph 44 on page 14 of your statement.  Could you please read 
that paragraph and we will then turn to deal with the specific annexures 
to that? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Paragraph 44: 
“Mr Mpambani was in constant communication with 
20 
the Personal Assistant of Premier Magashule that is 
one 
Ms Moroadi Cholota 
referred 
hereto 
as 
Ms Cholota.  Ms Cholota would communicate on 
behalf 
of 
Mr Magashule 
all 
his 
request 
or 
instructions with substantial financial implications 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 70 of 278 
 
and no business entity could sustain in its 
commercial wellbeing and for ease of reference I 
annexed all these annexures marked 2DM9, 10, 11 
and 12 and 13 as copies of the emails between 
Ms Cholota to Mr Mpambani.  It will be noted that in 
some of the emails one Ms Ipeleng Morake shall be 
referred to as Ms Morake from the Office of the 
Premier 
features 
prominently 
in 
executing 
instructions 
on 
behalf 
of 
Mr Magashule 
via 
Ms Cholota.” 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  You being annexing those 
documents from page 113.  If you may please refer to that document.  
Could you please ID that document for us? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  This is the email the subject there is 
(indistinct) document 2.  Is it from Moroadi Cholota in the Premier’s 
Office and the - the email address is premier@fspremier.gov.za to 
igo@diamondhill.co.za.  Igo Mpambani and mpambani@yahoo.com.  
The date is the 25 t h - 2015/08/12 and the time is 10 past one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  So this email is sent from the office of 
20 
the Premier to the service provider that you have mentioned 
Mr Mpambani … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  The one who you say - who you said was 
involved in the asbestos … 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 71 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes.  Yes sir. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Skip? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes sir. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now there is also an email at the bottom 
and I think that is what we have to start with in order to go to the one 
on top.  Take us through the one on - on the bottom.  It is from who to 
who? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  This one is from Refiloe Mokoena and it - it 
is 
from 
the 
address 
- 
email 
address 
maeto@refiloe.maseza@gmail.com (?) 
sent 
on 
17 July 2015 
to 
10 
premier@fspremier.gov.za 
and 
the 
subject 
there 
is 
(indistinct) 
document 2 and … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  (Intervenes) - sorry.  Yes.  You want to 
say something. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And it reads thus: 
“Dear Premier, herewith please find the document 
for purposes of setting my daughter’s university 
account …” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Settling. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  “…of settling …” 
20 
Yes. 
“…my daughter’s university account.  Please know 
that the annual fees payable after receiving the 
scholarship is approximately US$2 400 …” 
CHAIRPERSON:  24 000. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 72 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  24. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  “…24 298.” 
That is US Dollars. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  “The semester amount payable 
before 31 July 2015 is however US$12 149.  Kindly 
go to the link provided in their email and use the 
following access code to pay namely user name is 
given there and the password is given.  Please 
acknowledge receipt and let me know if you will 
10 
also be paying for her travelling and living 
expenses as well.  I take this opportunity to thank 
you from the bottom of our heart for your 
assistance.  I have no doubt that my daughter will 
make good use of this opportunity.  God Bless, 
Refiloe Mokoena.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now before I pose questions could you 
explain the contents of this letter.  What was happening? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA: 
 
The 
- 
the 
person 
referred 
here 
is 
Ms Mokoena - Refiloe Mokoena.  At some stage she had a distinct act - 
20 
opportunity acting also as - as a Judge in the Free State and 
sometimes in Gauteng and ended up at SARS.  Currently she is under 
suspension at - at the - I think at SARS. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now I - I am - I am much more - you 
know concerned with the contents of the email.  What was being 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 73 of 278 
 
conveyed and what was supposed to happen? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It is clear that this was directed to the 
Premier and one would assume that they might have met to discuss this 
and she was following up on the matter because of the way this is 
written and even thanking the Premier in advance and this was asking 
for 
payment 
of 
schooling 
or 
annual 
fees 
of 
the 
- 
of 
Ms Refiloe Mokoena’s child. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Do you know why such a request would 
be made by Ms Mokoena to the Premier? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I have no idea because I - I think that as we 
10 
will be dealing at a later stage with these scholarships or bursaries one 
would think that any - any deserving student but also a clear criteria 
should be set up for any person to do this.  It will go through the 
normal processes. 
The question I do not understand is you will see Chairperson 
this one when it is directed to the Premier and taking into consideration 
the - the Free State prides itself in making sure that there is - there are 
- there is a lot of kids who are studying abroad and - and here at home 
and there is a bursary - there is a program and we will deal with that. 
One would understand that it will be common purpose that 
20 
there whole thing would go through the normal process and deal with 
this in that particular way.  Send it over to the people who are dealing 
with the - with the - with all these things.  In this case it will be as we 
will see later it will be the Office of the - the DG but Ms Morake is 
actually in the Office of the Premier but is working more in - with regard 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 74 of 278 
 
to the international scholars - bursary holders. 
She is a - but in this case we still working - dealing with the 
letter that - the email that was sent to the Office of the Premier for this 
request. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So are you saying that the Provincial Government had 
a special scholarship or bursary fund that it used to assist or sponsor 
over - students from the Free State Province who would be studying 
outside of the country? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  When I was still - I do not know if this has 
changed Chairperson.  When I was still in Government as - as MECs for 
10 
instance I would have a - a - you know an opportunity to give bursaries 
to at least 10 kids and in that it was stipulated that my children - my 
relatives or any person close to me should not be considered.  It was 
that condition. 
So you will be allocated 10 kids to - to allocate bursaries to 
and - and that was a condition.  It should not be any person related to 
me in anyway and then the - the - then there was this scholarship 
program that was given to - to children in the - in the Free State and as 
we will deal with this we will demonstrate that how the whole process 
went about but the - the issue is the - I found it strange that the person 
20 
would go straight to the Premier. 
Unless the person knows the Premier or the former Premier 
and you know will direct that but under - under normal circumstances 
you would direct your request to the Office of the Director-General in 
this case. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 75 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but my question is - was whether to your 
knowledge the Provincial Government had a special bursary fund or 
scholarship that was for students who were studying outside of the 
country? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes it has - it has that program. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It had that program? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes.  It has the program. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was that separate from what you have just told me 
about namely that an MEC would be allocated like 10  
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It - it … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Students or was that part of the whole program? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Your 10 students become part of the whole 
funding thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it was for both inside the - studying inside and 
outside or only outside? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  In our case - say in my case I never funded 
any student going abroad. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I would give the - the - these to students who 
are studying at home. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Inside the country? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Inside the country. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But was there a limitation to say you can only use 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 76 of 278 
 
this allocation for students who are studying in the country or you - you 
can - it is up to you whether you also assist somebody who is studying 
outside the country?  Was there any limitation on that as far as you 
remember? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes there was - there was Chair.  You - we - 
the - that was determined at the Office of the Premier of the students 
who would go abroad.  It started as only those who were going to Cuba 
at the time for medicine.  Then it included many others but for all other 
kids we will then be allocated 10 but also you have got the top 100 kids 
and - and all these other things that were offered. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now you have explained the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Mokoena maybe we should take the … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Oh, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Tea - tea break.  It is quarter past.  We will take the 
short adjournment and resume at half past 11.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes let’s proceed. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Thank you Chair.  Mr Dukwana just 
before the tea adjournment we were still dealing with the document on 
page 113. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   We have now explained the bottom part 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 77 of 278 
 
of the email, now what I want to understand from you that there is an 
email on top, do you know why would this request be dispatched to Mr 
Mbabane who is a service provider? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry Mr Mokoena you said there is an email on 
top at 113. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   At 113 yes, if you look there’s a line 
Chair dividing the two emails. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, has he read that email, do you want him to read 
it first or not. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Read the email to contextualise. 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   This email is from Morali Cholota to Ego, 
that is Mr Mbabane, it was dated the 12 t h August 2015 and it goes on to 
say, 
 
“Good day this was the initial request sent to the Premier 
regards, Morali Cholota”. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it was sent at 10 minutes past one, 13h10. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I seem to think that the other one you read was also 
sent more or less the same time. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   It was 11h50 AM. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay, alright thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   On a different date Chair meaning that 
the one on – at the bottom seems to have preceded the one on top. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes oh ja and they are on different dates and 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 78 of 278 
 
different months. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Now my question Mr Dukwana, why 
would that request that was made to the Premier as per the bottom 
email now being sent to the service provider? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   One can only conclude, Chairperson, before 
that, that – before concluding, the Free State as we said has a bursary 
programme and it’s meant for kids who are – who cannot afford but who 
are – who qualify to get the bursary and one would understand the 
10 
logical thing to do, once you get this kind of a bursary if it comes after 
the deadline you have closed issuing the bursary you would – as a 
responsible person you would indicate like that, that you would not be 
able to help avoiding a situation where there’s a service provider doing 
this and you then ask favours from the service provider. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m not sure whether that’s an answer to Mr 
Mokoena’s question.  I understood the question to be whether you are 
able to say why Ms Cholota would send this request to Mr Mbabane? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   I thought I gave a context Chair, to say you 
have a bursary scheme and I don’t understand why this one specifically 
20 
would go to Ego. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh so your answer is, you don’t understand why it 
was sent or would have been sent to Mr Mbabane, that’s the answer? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay well Mr Mokoena I was looking at the subject, 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 79 of 278 
 
the email from Ms Mokoena has a subject, [indistinct], the one from Ms 
Cholota to Mr Mbabane doesn’t seem to have a subject, am I right? It 
doesn’t seem to identify the subject. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   It has. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that because it was attaching the one from Ms 
Mokoena? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   It’s referring to the one below Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It’s referring to the one below okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   One trail of email. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes but we can also deal with other 
documents Chair to give you that, if you may turn to page 117 so that 
we can understand the subject matter, what is that document? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   It’s the [indistinct] college 8 May 2015 it’s 
written 
to 
the 
person 
Masiza 
who 
stays 
at 
this 
address 
in 
Johannesburg. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes and it’s from that [indistinct] college 
am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes you are correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   And the amount – what is the total 
20 
amount? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The total amount here is 12 149. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Okay if you turn to page 113 would that 
amount accord to what you see in the bottom email, the second 
paragraph? 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 80 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes this one in the email Refiloe Mokoena 
stipulates, even clarifying here the amount is 12 149 it does not show 
whether it’s dollars or rands but here it specifies the dollars US Dollars 
12 149. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Now having regard to that sequence of 
documents may I refer to another, on page 118 if you could please 
identify the document and please read the contents into the record. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The subject is Payment from Moroadi 
Choloto, the Premier’s office to Ignus Mbabane and it’s dated the 18 t h 
of August 2015, 
10 
 
“Good morning, proof of payment received and acknowledged, 
 
thank you very much, regards Moroadi Choloto, Personal 
 
Assistant to Premier office of the Premier and dating 
 
everything that is there”. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes there appears to be another email 
at the bottom if you can also read it. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   This one came before that one it was – it’s 
written from – it comes from Mr Ignus Mbabane sent on the 17 t h of 
August 2015 to Moroadi, PA Premier Free State, CC Moroadi, PA 
Premier Free State, subject payment. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   So from that trail we’ll see that there 
was initial request it goes to the office of the Premier and it’s sent to 
the service provider and the said provided does pay amount. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes the service provider here in this email 
says – confirms he says, 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 81 of 278 
 
 
“Good day kindly find the proof of payment for 4000 Dollars, 
 
regards Ignus Mbabane”. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the request from Miss Refiloe Mokoena at page 
113 which was addressed to the Premier is dated 17July 2015, and the 
email from Miss Moroadi Choloto  an assistant in the Premiers office, 
her email to Mr Mbabane is dated 12 August 2015 and it says this was 
the initial request sent to the Premier and we are to understand that 
the request is the one of Miss Refiloe Mokoena and then you made 
reference at page 117…[intervenes]. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   It’s an attachment of what was required to 
10 
be paid. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The attachment dated 8 May – oh that was from the 
college, 8 May giving the amount then we have then the email from Mr 
Mbabane on the 17 t h of August 2015 addressed to Miss Moroadi 
Choloto, that’s the PA to the Premier which says, 
 
“Kindly find the proof of payment for 4 000 Dollars”, 
 
And then thereafter on the 18 t h of August, the following day 
2015 there’s an email from Miss Choloto to Mr Mbabane acknowledging 
receipt of proof of payment and thanking him. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   That’s the sequence Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   That’s exactly the evidence of this 
witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so this gives the impression, you know the 
picture that Miss Refiloe requested the Premier to settle her daughter’s 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 82 of 278 
 
fees and one of the PA’s to the Premier sent that request to Mr 
Mbabane and Mr Mbabane made payment of 4 000 Dollars and sent 
proof of payment to Miss Choloto in the Premier’s office and Miss 
Choloto acknowledged receipt of payment? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   That’s the sequence, does it capture it 
neatly Mr Dukwana? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Aright let’s proceed you in line with 
10 
what I’ve said in your paragraph you then refer to further payments if 
you may turn to page 119 and take us through as to how do you link it 
with your arguments in paragraph 43.  Identify the document for us and 
tell us what are the instructions and what has transpired. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   This one is also – the subject is request for 
payment from Moroadi Choloto…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry what page are we? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   119 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   It’s from Moroadi Choloto from the Premier’s 
20 
office to Ego@diamondhill.co.za and a copy to Morakeio233@gmial.com 
dated the 6 t h of – I think it’s May 2015, 
 
“Good day, following the discussion with Ipile Morake Premier 
 
requested that we pay full amount 470 000 and the remaining 
 
amount of R30 000 to one of the SRC president in Cuba, the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 83 of 278 
 
 
account holder is SWC Inkata, account number is given and 
 
it’s FNB, amount R30 000.  I hope the above is in order 
 
regards  Ipile Morake”. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes please more detail to this email who 
are – who dispatches it and who is the recipient of that email? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Ipile Morake is in the office of the Premier 
dealing with IGR or Government Relations in the office of the Premier 
and this was from Moroadi Choloto going to Ego but this was addressed 
to Ego, this amount. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Remind us as to who is Ego? 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Ego Mbabane is the – a partner to the joint 
venture that got this asbestos project. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s the one that reference has been made to when 
we were talking about the payment of the school fees for Miss 
Mokoena’s daughter? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The same person. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The same person? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The same person. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   So here the request is made for Ego to 
20 
pay for Mr Mbabane and Ego to pay R470 000 and remaining R30 000 
to be paid to the SRC president in Cuba am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   You’re correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I don’t know whether you might be able to say to 
indicate what your understanding is here.  I’m not sure whether the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 84 of 278 
 
understanding – the instruction is that the two amounts must be paid to 
the SRC president in Cuba or whether it’s only the R30 000 that has to 
be paid to the SRC and maybe the first amount of R470 000 is to be 
paid somewhere else and the recipient is supposed to know where it is 
to be paid, you might not be able to assist. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   It’s clear that the only amount, if you check 
the details of the account holder and that the amount is specified that it 
should be R30 000 and that would mean the person was supposed to 
pay R500 000 in total.  The R470 000 is paid – should be paid but the 
remaining R30 000 should actually go to this account. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So your understanding is that the two amounts are 
not to be paid to the SRC president it’s only the R30 000. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The R30 000. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   If you may refer to page 120 and also 
take us through that document but firstly by identifying it and thereafter 
please comment its contents. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   This one also has the office stamp of the 
Premier of the Free State and it’s from Moroadi Choloto, Personal 
Assistant to the Free State Office of the Premier, the subject is, 
20 
request for funding to Ignatius Mbabane and is dated the 28 t h of 
January 2016 and it says, 
 
“Good day, kindly find the below details as discussed 
 
telephonically, account name is given, account number is a 
 
travel agency and it’s an amount of R250 000 written also in 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 85 of 278 
 
 
words, two hundred and fifty thousand.  Please send the proof 
 
of payment to the above email address, thank you in advance, 
 
warm regards”. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   So this is a further request made to Mr 
Mbabane? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes sir. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   To also pay this amount? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes sir. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   If I may refer you to the next document 
on page 121…[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So this time the amount is R250 000? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And on the face of this email, it’s not clear what the 
amount was for, is that right? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   One can deduce it was for travelling 
because they paid to a travel agency. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes the next document is on page 121. 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The subject is the invoice from Moroadi 
Choloto at the Premier’s office…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that a different amount, a different transaction or 
are we still connected with this one of R250 000. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   I think it’s still connected Chair. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 86 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe let me ask the question I wanted to ask.  With 
regard to the R250 000 which was to be paid to Astra Travel, Mr 
Dukwana are you – having been in Government for the long time that 
you were in Government are you able to throw any light as to why the 
office of the Premier would instruct somebody in private business to 
make a payment to a travel agent, of this kind of amount…[intervenes]. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   This is, like I said, under normal 
circumstances leaders would avoid such transactions happening, you 
would not get one person who would go to a service provider, 
especially if it is an official trip or whatever that you ask somebody to 
10 
pay for your cost – to bear your cost of travelling or any other person 
for that matter.  So it’s something very strange. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It’s something you are not able to throw light on 
other – but you say you don’t understand it to be normal for such a 
thing to happen, if it relates to your official? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   If you remember Chairperson, I told you 
yesterday, I told the Commission that in the Free State a system that 
undermined a system of good governance emerged in the Free State 
and as such abnormal things would happen.  Something that is not 
supposed to happen would happen and these things would happen with 
20 
impunity because people were becoming a law unto themselves.  Under 
normal circumstances this should not happen and I’m saying this is the 
person who gets it and we are talking about an unsolicited bid and all 
these other things that are raised and immediately after this there is so 
much request coming you pay this, you must pay this.  Any business 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 87 of 278 
 
person, if you want to help a business and you affect the cash flow of 
such a business you are killing it.  In this case here’s a person who 
gets this business and is working, you now have demands coming from 
the office of the Premier, pay this amount, pay this amount, I mean 
R470 000, R500 000 in total, R200 000 and something again, this is 
ridiculous Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The R470 000 plus R30 000 which make R500 000 
was in August I think 2015 and the R250 000 is in January 2016, so 
that means if Mr Mbabane or his company paid these two amounts that 
means by end of January 2016, it means more or less within six 
10 
months, he would have paid more than – around R750 000 at the 
request of the office of the Premier. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   You have excluded the 4 000 US Dollars. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh ja so it would be more than R700 000? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   It would be more than that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well it couldn’t – the payment to the travel agents 
couldn’t be for the Premier’s official trips because those would be paid 
for by Government, there will be no reason for some business person to 
pay for those.  So the question would be whether that amount could 
have been for the Premier’s personal trips and if it was for the 
20 
Premier’s personal trips that could raise questions as well.  You have 
alluded to one question, if it was for somebody else’s trip then there 
would be question of why the Premier would get involved in trying to 
organise payment for trips for somebody else and why those people 
wouldn’t go directly to Mr Mbabane or whoever if they needed any 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 88 of 278 
 
assistance with travelling. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The question that must be asked all the time 
is why people would feel comfortable in approaching the office of the 
Premier and getting this thing.  The – as you say, I don’t think this was 
for the travelling of the Premier I think he was facilitating for somebody 
else or some people and the question would also be relevant what you 
raised, why then the office of the Premier should get itself involved in 
facilitating such especially with a person who was doing business with 
Government. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes because the amount of R500 000 was in August 
10 
2015, the letter of appointment said the appointment for Mr Mbabane’s 
company was from 1 December 2014 to end of March 2015 but there 
were payments envisaged beyond that even in May 2015, so this is – 
this request for July, the payment was in August 2015 and we know that 
later in 2017 there is that service level agreement that we dealt with 
earlier, okay thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Mr Dukwana on page 121 it appears 
that there is an acknowledgement of payment, please take us through 
that it might be linked with the one on 120 unless you testify differently. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   This comes from Moroadi and it says, 
20 
 
“Afternoon to Ignatius Mbabane, kindly note that the proof of 
 
payment is well received and appreciated.  Warm regards 
 
Moroadi Choloto Personal Assistant to Premier office of the 
 
Premier”. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes so clearly when those requests 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 89 of 278 
 
were made to Mr Mbabane he did comply with same and effect those 
payments as we have already demonstrated with different Annexures to 
your statement. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes this one also, if you check and read, 
this was also a response to the one that was sent earlier by Mr 
Mbabane confirming the payment. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes, now if I may refer you back to page 
14 because you make concluding remarks on these payments that you 
have dealt with and you deal with them on paragraph 44 and 46, Chair 
on page 14, if you can read those paragraphs into the record. 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   From page 14, 44 and 46. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA: “Mr Mbabane was in constant communication 
 
with the personal assistant of Premier Magashule, one Miss 
 
Moroadi Choloto, Miss Choloto would communicate on behalf 
 
of Mr Magashule on his request or instruction with substantial 
 
financial implications.  No business entity could sustain in his 
 
commercial well-being and I attach Annexures thereof as 
 
copies of the emails between Miss Choloto to Mbabane to Mr 
 
Mbabane it will be noted that in some of the emails, one Miss 
20 
 
Ipile 
Morake 
from 
the 
office of 
the 
Premier 
features 
 
prominently in executing instructions on behalf of Magashule 
 
via Miss Choloto.  45. It is apparent from the emails between 
 
Miss Choloto and Mr Mbabane that payments were advanced 
 
for every [indistinct] request that was made to Mr Mbabane on 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 90 of 278 
 
 
behalf of Mr Magashule as [indistinct] in the said emails at all 
 
material times thereto.  The official emails of Miss Choloto and 
 
Miss 
Morake 
were 
used 
to 
communicate 
request 
and 
 
acknowledge payments of monies and executing instructions at 
 
the behest of Mr Magashule. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   And paragraph 46 you draw certain 
inferences. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   “An inference could be drawn that each time 
 
payment was advanced to Blackhead Consulting JV by the 
 
Free State Department of Housing, Miss Choloto or Miss 
10 
 
Morake were informed undoubtedly both would inform Mr 
 
Magashule followed by a honorous request or instruction to Mr 
 
Mbabane resulting in the latter making payments as requested 
 
or instructed by Mr Magashule”.  
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes, now let’s move on to page 15 of 
your statement in paragraph 47 you are referring to a concept which I’m 
sure that it’s foreign to me and the Chair, please if you can read and 
explain what you’re conveying. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   “47. Mr Magashule was simply a blessing to 
 
many due to payments advanced by Mr Mbabane from monies 
20 
 
corruptly and fraudulently sourced from the State coffers 
 
through the asbestos project at the behest of Mr Magashule, 
 
Mr Mbabane paid sums of monies for some students studying 
 
through various Universities here and abroad…[intervenes]. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Mr Chair speaking for myself I am 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 91 of 278 
 
not sure what is a blesser but I think you were still proceeding to deal 
with the concepts. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It is – it is a [indistinct] old ages you would 
use Father Christmas but now you you know it is a blesser in the sense 
that you – you agree to request that personally you not able to do but 
you facilitate this on behalf of other people.  And – and worse it comes 
from the – the service provider that is working with the – with your 
government.  So you know it is taking this – you giving and taking it 
and giving there so that you will be seen to be this person who would 
do everything to demonstrate that you care but at the expense of the 
10 
public resources that are acquired fraudulent. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  So as I said you know for the – just to avoid 
being seen as old and coming to the new generation the blesser would 
fit well as opposed to the Father Christmas. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I see you referred to a blesser would that be a 
blessee? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The one who [intervention]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And if so who would be the blessee in this context? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  In one context the blessee will be Mr – Ms 
20 
Mokoena.  That will be a blessee for the fact that the blesser upon 
receiving your request went to the provider who would do that on behalf 
of the blesser and get to the blessee Ms Mokoene in this case. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would Mr Mpambani not be also be – be a blessee in 
terms of any government work if there was government work that he 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 92 of 278 
 
was being given or that would not – the term would not fit in there? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  We can use it even to him in this case where 
you get money and then you use it whenever there is a request. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Alright. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  But what is very interesting Chairperson is 
why would the request come from the highest office in the province?  
And – and go to this person and everything happens this way.  That is 
why we – you know you say once you respect the laws and every – the 
act you protect the office from all these kinds of things and once you 
are in an office you need to demonstrate that and make sure that you 
10 
protect that office.  But drawing that office to issues like this is actually 
undermining the office and also abusing your authority in this regard 
because if the request was made and Mr Mpambani did not respond 
positively this would have also put him in the difficult situation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  I thought your counsel wanted to say something 
at some stage maybe it has fallen away.   
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:  Chairperson I was intrigued by your smile 
when the concept of blesser is being discussed.  It appears the 
Chairperson is well versed with the concept of blesser and blessee. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the Chairperson reads newspapers and – and 
20 
watches – is touch with what happens in South Africa.  Thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  As indicated Chair you can exclude me I 
am not sure about the concept.  You in paragraph 48 and 49 the issues 
that you canvass there you have already testified on those issues so it 
is not necessary for us to repeat that evidence but I want to draw your 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 93 of 278 
 
attention to paragraph 50 of your witness statement where you link 
different payments with that asbestos scheme.  Please read for us 
paragraph 50 and explain? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   
“Events from the emails between Ms Cholota and Mr 
Mpambani all the requests or instructions originated 
from Mr Magashula.  And inference could be drawn 
that the asbestos audit was but an asbestos audit 
heist sponsored by the Premier of the Free State 
Government.  The Asbestos Audit Heist was executed 
10 
through the Premier’s office by Mr Magashule’s 
personal assistant employed by government at the 
behest of Mr Magashule.  This was not only a blatant 
abuse of power by Mr Magashule but a brazen 
commission of fraud, money laundering and daylight 
robbery of the public purse.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now you also proceed to attach a 
spreadsheet to your statement and you attach it as Annexure 2DM14.  
Mr Chair that spreadsheet is to be found on page 124. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have found it. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now that spreadsheet Mr Dukwana 
reflects further payments and beneficiaries which might have been paid 
the amounts which are reflected in that spreadsheet, am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Could you take the Chair through that 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 94 of 278 
 
spreadsheet? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well may – before he does that can I know where the 
spreadsheet comes from? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes Chair definitely.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Mr Dukwana could you also explain to 
the Chair the source if you can of this spreadsheet? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  From Mr Mpambani’s emails. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It – from Mr Mpambani’s emails? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  One of the emails? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  One of the emails. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was attached there? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It is an email coming from. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was in an email?  Okay. 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:  May I assist Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:  It is part of the supplementary statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:  That email is attached in the supplementary 
20 
statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:  Perhaps it would be fitting if Mr Mokoena 
can start with that email to give a context to the spreadsheet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes because it is important before we go into the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 95 of 278 
 
content of the spreadsheet to see. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Chair you will find the supplementary 
from page 222. 
CHAIRPERSON:  222?  I do not seem to have 222 I seem to have up to 
221. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  I am reliably informed Mr Chair that it 
was placed in your file instead – maybe it is part of those documents 
that went to read separately before making the –the ruling of the 
observation that the Chair made subsequent to different parties have 
made submissions to the Chair.  So it might be that it is somewhere – it 
10 
is lying somewhere. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  But if we may. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I think any documents that are handed up just – 
somebody must make sure that they are put in and it should be 
somebody from the legal team because he might not know exactly 
where to put it. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Where to put it in – Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I have – I can make use of that. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  But for the purpose of facility – 
20 
facilitating this debate we may hand you a further copy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you.   
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  While the Chair is still putting that 
document in its file Mr Dukwana you can also quickly go mark the 
paragraphs that links those different emails and the email in question.   
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 96 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You say the supplementary statement. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes supplementary statement. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Can you repeat the instruction again? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Go to page 222. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh this is the supplementary statement that I was told 
about; 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yesterday. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yesterday.  Yesterday Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you say it was handed up? 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  You read – you also had an opportunity 
to go and read it in chambers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that is the one that I read. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes for you to come and make a ruling. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well when I read it it was in the other bundle which is 
not here.  I do not know if it is supposed to be here.  That was the 
bundle that had correspondence? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  It could have been misplaced there 
20 
inadvertently. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  But it is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or maybe they might not have appreciated that that 
particular bundle which has correspondence was required today. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 97 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think that is what might have happened.  I probably 
also did not think it was required. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Required. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because it was [intervention]. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  But be that as it may Chair we will make 
sure that it is placed and in the proper place. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Correspondence.  Ja.  Maybe what you – what you 
can – what you can clarify because I understood it to be handed up 
simply for convenience in regard to the argument that was to be 
10 
presented and that is why we did not admit as an Exhibit. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And maybe it might be also – be 
appropriate for us to mark it accordingly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  So that we do not lose it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If the intention is to have it as an Exhibit then we will 
have to do that. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Definitely as an exhibit Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  But I do not know whether we need to do that 
insofar as it refers to correspondence. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Because it is some – it is simply 
supplementing what is already existing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Which is Exhibit X5. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja it may be that you need to check what it is that is 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 98 of 278 
 
there that really needs to be part of the evidence as such.  Obviously 
the supplementary statement is important.  But the supplementary 
statement might well belong here. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Rather than in that other file. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  No it does not definitely you know 
belong in the correspondence file. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the other file.  Yes,yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Remember that the correspondence file. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Was merely to place different items that 
were received at the last moment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And that included also you know the 
supplementary statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  But I think it should belong in the main 
file. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And maybe to be identified as you know 
20 
Exhibit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  X6 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Or Exhibit XX7 Chair.   
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 99 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  You refer to X7. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes because… 
CHAIRPERSON:  You talk about that bundle.  When you say X7 what 
are you talking about? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  No I am saying that maybe this 
supplementary should be referred to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As X7. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  As Exhibit X7. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Exhibit X7. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  In which case should it not be on a separate – would 
there be a problem if it is simply added here as part of this Exhibit and 
not as a separate exhibit? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  We are – we are easy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think that is – because this is where it belong. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  That is where it belongs Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  All the other supplementary. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Definitely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are here.  Okay so let us not mark it separately.  So 
… 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  It can be referred to as a supplementary. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It will simply be added at the end of Exhibit X.  Ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  At the end of Exhibit X5 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja.  Thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 100 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have got it.  The spreadsheet – I think somebody 
said it is part – was attached to the – to the supplementary statement, 
is that right?  The spreadsheet that you were talking about? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  The spreadsheet Chair it is part and 
parcel of the main. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of the main. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Of the main statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not the supplementary. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  The main statement ja.  Which is X5. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And that is where we have located in the 
spreadsheet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Okay let us continue then. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  If you go to the document that you 
are referring to Mr Dukwana and in line with the question posed to you 
by the Chair you did provide a supplementary statement, am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And in that statement you also deal with 
20 
some of the documents which were initially not annexed to your 
statement, am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  If you turn to page 225.   
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 101 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Take us through paragraph 11 and 12 
and tell us as to how should we link that to this spreadsheet? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  This – see email correspondence between Mr 
Mpambani and Sodi. Paragraph 11 I refer to paragraph 52.1 I made 
reference to the email exchanges between Mr Mpambani and Sodi 
relating to payments effected for asbestos heist.  It appears I only 
annexed the spreadsheet and not the copy of the said email.  I annex 
hereto marked 2DMS2 being a copy of the email exchange in issue.  
The email from Mpambani to Sodi reads: 
“Sure Eddie I have affected the payment in two 
10 
batches.  Kindly find attached the updated schedule 
with the following minor adjustments.  JT from R1 
million 
to 
R500 000.00. 
 
I 
hope 
the 
issue 
supplemented above are in order.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now for completeness turn to page 231.  
Is that the email that you are referring to? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes, yes Chair. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And you are linking that to the 
spreadsheet? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Exactly that is what I am doing. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  So then your answer to the Chair is that 
the spreadsheet that you are just about to deal with was as a result of 
the correspondence that passed hands between Mr Mpambani and Mr 
Sodi? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Correct Sir. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 102 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  That email at 231 comes from Edwin Sodi Chief 
Executive Officer and it is addressed to Sure Eddie.  I have affected 
the payments in two batches kindly find attached the updated schedule 
with the following minor adjustments.  JT from R1 million to 
R500 000.00 on 24 March 2015 at 3:23 pm and then that is the email 
address.   Yes so that is part of – that went with the spreadsheet, is 
that right? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Mr Dukwana. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Dukwana did that go with the spreadsheet? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  But it is from – not from Edwin it is from Igo 
10 
to Edwin. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh right at the top. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Right at the top. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not to Edwin. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  To Edwin yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Chair just to correct also to make sure 
that we align you with the times.  Sure it is not the name of the person 
I am sure it is a greeting when it says sure Eddie.  So it is not 
addressed to Sure Eddie. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I – I had a suspicion that it was about greeting 
but I was not sure.  One does not see these things written down. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One hears them being said only. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  So… 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 103 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Having clarified the issue of the spread 
[intervention]  
CHAIRPERSON:  But at 231 it is an email from Edwin Sodi addressed 
to Eddie but Mr Mpambani is sending something or – to Eddie, is that 
right? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  He is sending the spreadsheet but he was 
demonstrating how they have dealt with that but correcting all the – the 
10 
amount. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  For duty from R1 million to R500 000.00. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  It is a little confusing. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  It does Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  But what – what appears to be the 
relevant portion in terms of linking it is it not the first line that says that 
I have affected the payments in two benches but most importantly 
kindly attached the updated schedule with reference to the following 
20 
adjustment.  Should one read the adjusted schedule to – adjusted 
schedule to be the one that you will be dealing with? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Exactly it is the one Chairperson that we will 
be dealing with the spreadsheet. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now if we may refer to page 124.  If you 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 104 of 278 
 
can take us through the different columns – but maybe before you do 
that Mr Dukwana because I have just adjusted certain things in my 
notes.  If you can go back to page 16 of your statement.  If you look at 
the spreadsheet comparing the spreadsheet with what you are saying 
there.  In the spreadsheet you will agree with me that it only gives the 
initials or the abbreviated names like those that are appearing there, 
am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  However in your statement you then put 
the full names of what you believe those people to be, am I correct? 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Okay.  Bear in mind the 52.3.1 as we 
proceed through that – that will be Mr X for the references throughout 
this spreadsheet, am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now [intervention]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What page did you say the spreadsheet is again? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  It is page 124. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh I got it.  Yes okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now let us go back to the – page 124 
20 
and take us through the different columns and the payments that could 
have been effected? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The spreadsheet is headed or referred to as 
The Free State Asbestos Eradication Project.  And it has a number of 
units.  It has rate per unit.  It has a project value and it has the year.  
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 105 of 278 
 
And then the extreme right you would see that there is a first payment, 
the second payment and the third payment to be effected. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And please tell us what – I mean 
according to your knowledge would each column signify that would be 
quite important so that we do not lose your evidence. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Can I suggest that we go through this and 
then explain. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  So that… 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  If you check Chairperson the – the number of 
units that you will see there is 300 000. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is now on the extreme left column. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of the bigger column.  There is… 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Bigger – the extreme left. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The left one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There is 300 000 units. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  It says number of units and then the number 300 000 
appears. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And then it then says the rate per unit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The next column is the… 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And in this case it is R850.00 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 106 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  The next column it says rate per unit and it says 
R850.00. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And then when you multiply that it gives you 
R255 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay hang on let us not speak at the same time Mr 
Dukwana. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so you were saying that the next column has got 
rate per unit and it has got R850.00, is that right? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That is right Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes then you move to the next column. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The project value.  That is the total amount 
of the project.  The Free State Asbestos Eradication Project. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you have to read it as it is.  The total project 
value reflected on the third column is R255 million. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then you want to make an observation about that 
amount. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA: The R255 million is the same amount that was 
referred to in the – in the letter – the instruction from the HOD.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you – so you say if we go back to the letter of 
instruction from the Head of the HOD which was at page 94 if I recall 
correctly the total value of the Asbestos Project was R255 million. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And I see 300 000 where it says number of 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 107 of 278 
 
units.  That letter also indicated that the housing units which were to be 
the subject of that project was 300 000, is that correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And there was – was there not also something about 
the amount per unit? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It was there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it the same as R850.00 that is written here? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It is R850.00 Chairperson yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  So from this you conclude? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  This is the project that we referred to as the 
Heist that was the – what comes from the office of the – in the 
Department of Human Settlement in the Province and then let us – that 
pointed out that the total value of the project is R255 million and that 
each house would be the cost for that would be R850.00 and then they 
will do the audit for 300 000 houses.  So that tells you that it is not 
separated, it links very well with what we are explaining here now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the suggesting you make is that the payments that 
you are about to read in the spreadsheet are connected to the project 
20 
of the Eradication of Asbestos, that is what you are saying? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Correct Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Mr Mokoena. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I had indicated that having discussions with 
the late Igo Mpambani explaining to me in detail it was a long 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 108 of 278 
 
discussion that we had and it did not happen once it happened several 
times.  He – he used certain names and that were involved in the 
project and he – he referred to them when I was asking – are you not 
going to be disappointed the way you were with the – in the other 
project that you wanted to undertake in the Free State?  And then he 
said we are sorted out.  We have dealt with everything this time that we 
have brought everybody who matters, who would facilitate the process 
so there is no problem or there is nothing that one should be afraid of.  
And but of course as he would mention people that they are working 
with this one, this one he was using these and I would ask who is this 
10 
one and he would tell me the name. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was he using initials? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  He was using initials. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was he using a nickname? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  He was using initials. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Initials. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And then he would say the – and I would ask 
specifically who is this one? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And at the time I was not asking because I 
wanted to prepare or there was any commission I was asking because I 
just wanted to know who are these people that you talking about. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 109 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes and then he would give this to me and 
then that is it.  But he only gave me names of people that he thought 
were more relevant to be mentioned to me.  Others did not 
[intervention]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did not ask? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And others he did not give.  As he was 
speaking he would tell me this person and then he would tell me this 
person. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  So he did not tell me all the other people. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That are here in the spreadsheet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But did you ask him to tell you who certain people 
were and not all of them or did you ask all of them but he gave you 
some and not gave you others or …? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Let me make an example.  When he said the 
- the project in fact is funded - he said the project was funded from 
national.  The province is not paying you know.  The transfer would be 
20 
made from national to the province and he indicated that we have so 
and so Mr X who is facilitating this for us and then he then said in the 
province and then he was jokingly saying you know you cannot do 
anything without the big man and then - then he would refer to the big 
man as in initials and would ask why do you say this. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 110 of 278 
 
He say hey you do not talk about this name anyway.  So it 
was his way of hiding who - whenever he speaks he would speak in - in 
that and then I became interested in finding out why he is using that.  
That is why he explained and then he would even give the reasons why 
they - they brought all these people together but he did not say to me 
that they were paying them or doing that. 
We were discussing and he was just simply saying he has 
managed to bring them to understand and accept and help facilitate the 
project. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So at this stage in your discussion he was not 
10 
saying that he was going to be paying them.  He was simply saying they 
support the project.  They are on board. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes.  He just said we - we made sure this 
time that we tie everybody that matters to this for ease of - of our 
project going through. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  So he did not mention that they were going 
to pay them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  He gave me that impression that they 
20 
working quite well.  They managed to engage … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  These people and these people were on their 
side and they understood exactly where they were going … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 111 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And he gave me the impression that because 
it was money not coming from the province but because you needed the 
province to accept and do this and appoint you.  You had - he had to 
make sure that he - he gets these people to - to accept and work with 
him and once he had that he was excited … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Telling me that really this time we are 
moving and then Mochana (?) if you can - he would refer to me as 
Mochana. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  If you can facilitate the - the other provinces 
specifically he mentioned the Eastern Cape … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And I think because my parents originate 
from the Eastern Cape … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And we - we will talk Xhosa you know … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  To which other every time you know … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Were not speaking any other language other 
than that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, hm.  Okay, thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Can you now proceed with reference to 
page 121 as I have requested you to do before and tell us what does 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 112 of 278 
 
each column represent and what is reflected in those columns? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  If you check Chairperson it says there “The 
Cost of Business” and it is in one column … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And when it says the cost of business which 
is stipulated there and the total cost of business being R82 608 567.  
That was the total value of what he referred to as the total cost of 
business. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  So the - the various payments or items are part 
of the - of what he regards as cost of business? 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then the total is the one you have just 
mentioned? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Then … 
CHAIRPERSON:  So it is likely it was the cost to his business - to their 
business? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  To … 
CHAIRPERSON:  In regard to this project. 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It is - this - this is with regard to the 
asbestos project. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 113 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And then … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  We - we do not need to speculate 
Mr Dukwana.  Look right on top of that document.  What - what is 
written there?  What is the heading? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Free State Asbestos Eradication Project. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  So … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well that is helpful Mr Mokoena.  I also did not pick 
that up. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  So clearly he is specifically referring to 
the issues that you have canvassed with the Chair pertaining to this 
10 
project.  Am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  So when he talks about the cost of 
business it is with reference to what we see as the heading on top.  
Would I be correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You will be correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Then proceed then. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Effectively it was - it is - it is what the business has 
had to pay in regard to or his company has had to pay in regard to this 
business that they got from the Department of Human Settlements in 
20 
regard to the asbestos eradication. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is what ultimately it means. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It means … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 114 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes.  Greasing if you like. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  You are saying what? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Greasing. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Greasing? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  What is that? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  (African language). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh greasing your hand. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  (African language). 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Greasing your hand. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  (African language). You pay bribery if you 
like.  You pay - you bribe somebody … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Or you pay them for them to facilitate this for 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  so this cost of business … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Good English … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Hiding … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Bribery. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Bribery. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is - it is a bribe. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 115 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It is a bribe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well in isiZulu we have got the word (isiZulu 
language) to refer to that as well. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Sotho word (Sotho language). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  Continue. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  You may proceed then. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Mr X - in the cost of business Mr X was 
scheduled to get 10 million and then TM five million.  I will come to the 
10 
other names.  AM 10 million.  OM one million.  MEC 2.5 million.  
MasterTrade 44 208 567,909 and others two million and then you have 
other names Martin 1.5, Steve 1.2, Randwa (?) 1.2 million, JT three 
million, Deidricks one million and then it gives you that total that is 
there.  That is the cost … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just repeat the total.  You said it earlier but just 
repeat for convenience. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The total cost of business is 82 608 567,90.  
Oh wait. You are talking about (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  82 608 567,90. 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes, 90 cents. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  May I …? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And then you have also the project value 
cost of business … 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 116 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That will be 172 391 … 
CHAIRPERSON:  172 million.  Is it not? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  172 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That - that looks like 172 million. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes it is Chair. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It is Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you said 172 000. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I said R172 … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  391 432,10. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  If you check the - the project value cost of 
business divided between the two Blackhead and Diamond in equal 
portion will be R86 195 716,05 and you will see that it is written 
2013/2014 financial year that will be 127 500 000 and then 2014/2015 
financial year 127 500 000. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  So this is how … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  The different amounts were expanded? 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Exactly.  This is how these amount were - 
were expanded and then the - the - Mr X was - the name was given 
because it was in a way of telling me who is facilitating this at the head 
or at the head office and - and this amount will go to 10 million for 
Mr X. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 117 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the initial that is given here which you are not 
mentioning.  The initials that are given here are the initials that he told 
you. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  He was using them.  Every time he referred 
to the person.  He would use  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Use that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Twice in our meeting he used that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And - and then there is also TM in this case.  
The many people … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am - I am sorry Mr Dukwana.  Mr Mokoena I am - I 
am not sure I understand what these other amounts relate to.  Are - are 
they part - the ones that he is starting to read now.  Are they part of 
example in regard to Mr X are they - are they part of the 10 million?  Is 
five million part of the 10 million or is it an additional five million? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Mr Dukwana if you look at that column … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  You will see that there are different 
20 
columns. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Ja.  You see the left one Chair it explains the 
total amount to be paid … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Given to a particular individual? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes.  That will be the total amount … 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 118 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  To be paid … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And then it will be in terms of the year.  If 
you check in terms of the financial year as he indicated there at the 
bottom.  This half of it, it is 127 500 000. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes and then the second half 2014/2015 
financial year he says 127 500 000.  He - he broke it in - in half but it 
is the total amount of 255 million … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And then if you check the - the - if you go to 
your right he then breaks it down in years.  That for this financial year 
they will pay this amount of money and then it will then be broken down 
in that fashion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes; and - and the amounts that - that appear 
between the two columns that there is two - R2 million in relation to - in 
relation to Mr X and there is R3 million.  What do they represent those 
that appear between the two columns which seem to be hanging?  If 
you know what I mean. 
20 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Chair - Chair before … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Before Mr Dukwana answers that question. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  May I plead that … 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 119 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Perhaps it will be prudent not to go to the 
nitty-gritties of the - of the spreadsheet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  The reason is the witness is not schooled in 
accounting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  So he may not explain certain things with the - 
the requisite knowledge that it may be expected out of a person who 
will analyse the spreadsheet. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, no I … 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  And the Chairperson would note that if you 
look at page 94 the first amount there payable is 51 million … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  And then it is reflected there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Other amounts particularly the ones that are 
not inside the columns … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, hm. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  I doubt Mr Dukwana is in a position of 
20 
explaining with precision what those amounts are about. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, no I understand that completely.  I think he 
- he should just be able to say this is what I am able to explain.  
Otherwise other things I am not able explain.  After all it is not his 
document.  So it was just to try and understand that we are - we 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 120 of 278 
 
understand the - the document in the same way he does. 
So Mr Dukwana where you - what you cannot explain just say 
I - I do not know what this represents.  As I say it is not your document 
in any effect. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes.  I will do.  The - if you check this - this 
first portion that is big was for the total amount of money. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That they have earmarked and how they 
10 
would Chair share it … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  But if you go to the extreme right … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It was with the payments that were made as 
they were coming. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  As you would - as you would see that there 
was a payment that was made in December.  There were two payments 
that were made.  The one was 20 million followed by the 31 million in 
20 
December and this would be your 51 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That was there.  So one assumes that every 
time there was payment … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 121 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The cost to business would then be paid. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  Okay, okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And they would be paid these amounts that 
are - are shown there but as you pay … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It was going to go to the total that each 
person … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Would at the end … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Would have received … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  But in this case it - it is not like 10 million 
and then you getting the 10 million just like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In one payment. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The first payment is - is 20 million that we 
get. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Then we give you the amount that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And then we will give you one million give 
you this and it was meant for that.  So the second payment is made … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And the people who - who would have 
received would be - would be shown that this person got this amount of 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 122 of 278 
 
money. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No that is fine. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Any other thing that you wish to explain 
to the Chair in relation to the spreadsheet on page 12 - 124? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  On - I just want to say Chairperson the 
names here as I explained why I am - I am confident that they refer to 
these people that are here including Mr X is what I explained to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That it was a discussion that we had … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And I still met with one person who was a 
partner at some stage Tata Mogwera (?) … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  In - in the province and then unfortunately 
Mr Mpambani passed on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  So we - we had these kinds of engagements. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  So this would be much clearer in terms of 
the names … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  But if you check there and that email that - 
that was the supplementary evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That was said everything is sorted out with 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 123 of 278 
 
the adjustment from one million for JT to 500. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Meaning that everything that was paid for 
that duration … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  But - and if you check that was for with that 
information it was the third payment that was made.  In this case it was 
500 000 instead of what was - was done - was paid. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Huh-uh. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  If you turn to page 16 of your witness 
10 
statement and in line with what you reference to paragraph 52.3.  From 
52.3.1 onwards you give the specific names which you say that those 
abbreviated names actually represents.  Am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And you say that this you are able to 
state with certainty flowing from your own discussions with the source 
of the information. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes.  He - when - because I - I knew certain 
people by their surnames. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  So when he said TM to me I wanted to know 
but who is this TM. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Why are you referring to this person as TM 
… 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 124 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And he then said it is Thabo Mokhesi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And I wanted to know who is Thabo Mokhesi 
because I - I know Mr Mokhesi.  The HOD of the Department of Human 
Settlement in the Free State and he said that is what they know him to 
be as TM and he says why - and I wanted to know what is T.  He says I 
found him.  They call him Thabo etcetera.  He says it is Thabo Mokhesi. 
The HOD in the - in the Free State - the Human Settlement in 
the Free State referred to as Thabo - Thabo Mokhesi.  He is referred to 
10 
as TM in this case.  That is what he said and then AM … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well before you go I think so that one can understand 
it correctly.  Now that you are mentioning who is who then I think you 
must just repeat in terms of the spreadsheet what it shows was paid to 
who. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Maybe what would assist is if you can 
open page 124. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, page - in other words as you explained who 
certain initials refer to.  You go to 124 and just mention that … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  How much was he paid. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  That amount is what that person got. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Chair can it be … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Can it be - he can mention that minus Mr X? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes of course.  Of course. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 125 of 278 
 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no he - I took it that we all know that … 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr X remains Mr X. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Yes correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ja.  No, no. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  But he can state how much Mr X have - was 
paid. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  He - he - I think he has stated - he can say how 
much Mr X got 
10 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Chair the other thing may Mr Dukwana not 
mention the details pertaining to Mr X in the statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That would - that would give a clue? 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  It will give a clue.  So what … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  With in line with the inclination of the 
Chairperson … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Yesterday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  He should not even make reference to where 
Mr X could possibly … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 126 of 278 
 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Be located. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, no I think - I think that was the 
understanding yesterday. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Yes.  Since Chair he has already mentioned 
how much Mr X allegedly received … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, hm. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  According to the spreadsheet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Which is the email exchanges between two 
persons. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Who are - who were directors of these two 
companies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Blackhead and Diamond Hill.  Then we move 
to TM. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Let us - let us leave out … 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  There he can explain. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr X, ja.  That is fine. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Can I quickly point out Chairperson that the - 
the amounts that you see there are the amounts earmarked - the cost 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 127 of 278 
 
for total business but as you pay - as he got paid he will pay a certain 
amount of money.  So the - the 10 million was not paid like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In - in … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  In term of the spreadsheet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It - it - there were several - there would have been 
several payments … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which totalled 10 million. 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  So every time he received payment … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  He would effect this payment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  At the end of it all … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  One believes that after everything was done 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  These people would have received this 
20 
amount. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The total amounts given. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No that is fine. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  So you may proceed then from TM. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 128 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  TM was - was (intervenes). 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  You are still explaining how - how you 
knew (intervenes). 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I explained that as - as the head of the 
department in the Free State of Human Settlement was earmarked to 
receive five million and after the first payment that was received the 
person got one million and the second one he got one million and the 
third one he got 500 000.  So in total according to the spreadsheet - 
the spreadsheet he got 2.5 million.  In three batches. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Are you still with TM or are you dealing 
10 
with somebody else now? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I am dealing with TM. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  In total he got five million you say? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  In total he is supposed to get five million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that was - are those amounts - amounts that he 
was - they were supposed to get and then you break them down in the 
other columns? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Just continue. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  If you check you - you will see that for 
20 
instance the - the - Mr X was supposed to get 10 million … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And then if you check in the column there 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 129 of 278 
 
how much was paid … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And it will add this side.  It is three million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No, no now I … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  If you check that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now I … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I - I hope you understand now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No now I think I understand. I think you - you - maybe 
based on the email that went with this spreadsheet I may have 
confused.  I - I thought that it - the spreadsheet represented amounts 
10 
that had already been paid and that where it says 10 million it would 
just show the total and what is shown in other columns would be how 
that 10 million was made up of - but in respect of amounts that had 
already been paid but what you are saying is the 10 million or five 
million would be what the person was supposed to get at the end of the 
whole project. 
I guess and then the other columns reflected what had been 
paid as at the time when this spreadsheet was prepared? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And in regard to TM … 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  In regard to TM … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The total amount received in this case if you 
check the first payment was supposed to be that and it is clear that as 
you look at that that he did not get the total amount as it was alluded to 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 130 of 278 
 
but so far from this spreadsheet and from the column that is there this 
is the amount that he received here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  2.5 million? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  2.5 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Out of the 10 million. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Out of five - 500 … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Out of the five million he was supposed to get? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Out of the five million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So he got about - he had received about - he 
had receive half of what he was supposed to receive at the end? 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Mr Dukwana … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  I - I am not sure.  I see that 2.5 but next 
to 2.5 there is an amount on the right hand side that says one million.  
What does that represent? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  This if you check there … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  (Intervenes). 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  There was also a payment of 51 million. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You see that? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  There was a payment meaning they got the 
two and this total is five million - it is 51 million.  If you check that 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 131 of 278 
 
spreadsheet you have this first payment and the second payment and 
then it goes there as 51 million. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes, but … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  In relation to TM … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  (Intervenes). 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  What I am trying to show you is that is the 
one million paid … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And then there is 1.5 million paid. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  2.5. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  There is 1.5 and then if you - you break it 
down it is one million, one million, one million, 500 000. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Oh I see. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  I - I am … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  I am not sure if I understand. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Am I losing you? 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  I thought … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  No, no. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  I thought you said to the Chair that 
column that says 2.5 on the - on the right hand side.  You see on top it 
says year one.  Can you see? 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 132 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It says year one. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And then but what confuses me I see - I 
see 2.5 but there is a - an amount of one million which I am not - I am 
not sure what does it represent. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I indicated if you - if you check that - if you 
check the spreadsheet Mr Mpambani was very meticulous in working 
these things.  He would get all the details and I hope you will not be 
confused by this.  The first payment, the second payment and the third 
payment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Dukwana.  Maybe because Mr Mokoena 
10 
and I seem to have a similar problem.  Maybe if I explain it - the … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I check with you whether … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I understand it correctly.  It might help.  Is - is the 
position the following that - I hope I will not going - I am going to cause 
more confusion.  Is the position that the big column on the left which 
has got R300 000,00 - 300 000 units and 250 - 255 million that when 
you look at that big column which has got its own columns the amounts 
of 10 million, five million, 10 million and so on and so on that is what 
20 
each person mentioned there was supposed to get when the whole 
project was finished.  Am I correct so far? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Then you go to the next column.  It says 255 
million.  That is the value of the whole project.  Then the column on the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 133 of 278 
 
right hand side of that column which has got five million at the top.  2.5 
million below that and so on and then it has got two million next to five 
million.  That was an allocation for each person.  The amounts 
appearing under those columns reflect allocations of what each person 
was supposed to get in the first year? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that - am I correct so far? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are correct so far. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, but those amounts the five million and the two 
million and the first year they are amounts that are part of the 10 
10 
million in the case of Mr X for example? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That is correct sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Then you go outside of that column and then 
you have got at the top 51 million.  Alright? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then below R51million you have got a kind of two 
columns without lines, the one relating to Mr X there is two million and 
then you’ve got three million next to it, and then you’ve got other 
20 
amounts which are – which relate to the other people.  Would I be 
correct to say that those amounts which are under that 51million are 
amounts that they were supposed to get not out of the 255million but 
out of the 51million, in other words was the 51million part of the 
255million or was it additional? 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 134 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   If you check the project value, it’s 
255million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   And if you check the financial year he 
believed that they would have got 127 500 000 and then that would be 
the second year they will get this, so in terms of the payment they 
would be in batches but the first year they would pay the 500, the 
5million or half of it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   If you are to get 10million they will pay you 
10 
half of it the first year. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   So if you take the first year in that column 
what it means in relation to the first financial year this person would 
get R5million, the other one R2.5million, and if you check the cost of 
business for TM is R5million but the first year if that amount is paid the 
person would have received this amount of money, R2.5million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mmm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   You understand, in the first year, and then 
the payment, the actual payments that were made are appearing there, 
20 
the first payment, the second payment and then the third payment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it may be that we will not understand everything 
but it ought to be possible maybe to find somebody who might be able 
to explain it much more clearer in due course.  Mr Mokoena, it ought to 
be ...(intervention)  
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 135 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes Chair, with only question to Mr 
Dukwana that I want to know from this spreadsheet what are the actual 
amounts that are paid, let’s leave everything else.  Let’s just simplify it, 
we can see that, let’s talk to the person and what is the actual amount 
received, then we can deal with others later. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Can I put it this way Chairperson that the 
person and what was earmarked for the person as to how much he 
received it is something that you will work it out there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you are not able to say how much was actually paid 
according to the spreadsheet to that person that’s fine, but if you are 
10 
able to say that (indistinct) how much was actually paid according to 
the spreadsheet you say both, it just depends what you are able to say. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Chairperson to avoid the confusion that I 
see coming in I think it would be better as you suggested that we just 
give the figures, the amount, the payments would then come in, the 
person that would be attached to that, that would be better that way. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, that’s fine. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   So that we move from there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So let’s do that, just the total amount that was, that 
the person was supposed to get. 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Was supposed to get when the total amount 
was paid. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay let’s do that. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Chair do we do this exercise that has 
consumed us now before lunch or after lunch? 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 136 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well if he is going to just say these initials represent 
so and so, this is what he was supposed to get we can do that because 
it should be quick and then we can adjourn. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Mr Dukwana let’s try. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Chairperson just to make the number of 
units here will be 300 000, 300million, there would be 300 000 units 
and the rate per unit is 850 and the project value, the cost of business 
in this case with the units with the initials Mr X earmarked to get 
10million, TM as I explained, Thado Magesi as the head of the 
department R5million, AM in this case is Ace Magashule, R10million as 
10 
the Premier of the Free State then, OM is Olum Lamlele that’s 
R1million, he was the head of the department, MEC of the department 
at the time and then the MEC in this case although he explained to me 
what this MEC means he called a number of other people as MEC and I 
will rather not mention this one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, you are not sure. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Because he mentioned another of other 
people, we will say MEC this and then when I ask him he will give me 
another name and I say MEC (indistinct) he talks of another MEC and 
then he will give another name so I will not be (indistinct) in this case 
20 
mention this one 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   And then these are the people that he 
mentioned, and if you check the argument here is all these people were 
key in securing this project, Thadu Magesi was the one who made it 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 137 of 278 
 
possible appointing and all those things and Me Olum Lamlele is the 
MEC then of the Department will be given that and then you have also 
Ace Magashule as the Premier of the Province who get that amount as 
stipulated there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you.  So the other names that are 
mentioned are people that you don’t know? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   No he never spoke about these. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He never spoke about them, okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Do you know who is Martins Steve and 
Rantwa you don’t know them? 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   No I don’t know them. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Do you know who is JT, Diedericks, you 
know them? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   No I don’t know them. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   But all I know about the JT when we spoke 
at the time he was going to Kimberley and he was to meet JT and when 
he said JT to me he said Jimmy Tawu and he was going to meet Jimmy 
Tawu and he said he is JT, so that’s why I have the name as JT there. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   And the Diedericks do you know? 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   No. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   I don’t know Diedericks. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Chair would we adjourn at this moment? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes we will take the lunch adjournment and we will 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 138 of 278 
 
resume at five past two.   
 
We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready Mr Mokoena? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   We are ready Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you proceed Mr Dukwana just to maybe wrap 
up what you may have to say about the spreadsheet is it correct to 
understand the spreadsheet to have been part of a conversation 
10 
between two partners in the same joint venture or co-directors or 
keeping the same project, Mr Bambani to Mr Sode? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes it will be correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the one was writing to the other? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Making aware the other aware of how the 
money was spent. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of how the money was either meant to be divided and 
how part of it may have been already paid, ja okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Mr Dukwana we have exhausted that 
topic, can we move on to page 18, page 18 Chair in those paragraphs 
20 
apparent from that page you seem to be making very strong statements, 
do you wish to summarise for the Chair what you are conveying in 
those paragraphs and take us please through paragraph 53 to 58. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Chairperson with the information that we 
have presented today and many others, one I submit that the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 139 of 278 
 
involvement of Mr Magashule in this asbestos audit heist makes him 
unfit to hold public office of the Office of the Secretary General of the 
ANC.  Mr Magashule’s suitable place of abode in public in a jail cell.  If 
our law enforcement agencies were well oiled Mr Magashula and all 
those who aided and abetted this asbestos audit should be doing time 
in jail. 
 
To date no eradication of asbestos roofs has been carried out 
in any township in the Free State to asbestos roof (indistinct) yet, 
255million has been advanced to Blackhead Consulting Joint Venture 
and the 77million of the State fund is a subject of a litigation in our 
10 
courts, and our law enforcement agencies are doing nothing.  I invite 
the Commission to investigate and subpoena the Provincial Head of the 
Department of Housing, Mr Thabo or Mr Nthimotse Mokhesi.  The Chief 
Finance Officer at the time, the Head of Supply Chain in the 
Department and the then MEC of Human Settlement. 
 
Mr Magashule was the Premier at the time, Ms Cholota and Ms 
Moroaki should be no exceptions.  The MEC of Finance in the Free 
State at the time and Head of Treasury at the time have some 
explanation to do also.  Ma’am Mokoena should come to the 
Commission to explain the circumstances that led her to request 
20 
funding from Mr Magashula for her daughter’s education abroad. 
 
The office of the Auditor General in the Free State would be a 
great resource to the Commission.  The Commission and the people of 
South Africa, in particular the Free State, deserve to know the truth 
about this asbestos audit heist.  The Commission would also do well to 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 140 of 278 
 
subpoena government officials who were at the helm at the time of this 
process, and in this case I mention a number of people in the 
Department, but I must say that I am not suggesting that the persons at 
the National Department of Human Settlements cited above were 
involved in the asbestos audit heist.  Me thinks the asbestos audit heist 
would not have occurred without their knowledge. 
 
What begs the question is why this project was undertaken 
only n the Free State.  Asbestos roofed houses are found in all 
provinces, even the Free State alone R255million was spent for a 
purported asbestos audit.  How much of the amount was from the public 
10 
payers – I beg yours? 
CHAIRPERSON:  The National Public Payers. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   From the National Public Payers via the 
National Department of Human Settlement.  I have a reasonable belief 
that the Free State Government under Mr Magashule was the only 
fertile ground in the country for this asbestos audit heist to be staged 
and executed.   
 
The Commission should also commission an audit to be 
conducted on any payments made from Blackhead Consulting Joint 
Venture to any persons or private entities.  Further the Commission 
20 
ought to investigate if ever there were municipalities and other Organs 
of State in the Free State that were contracted to either Blackhead 
Consulting or (indistinct) Joint Venture. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes, the paragraphs on page 20, 
paragraphs 3 and 64 you have already alluded to that allegation to the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 141 of 278 
 
Chair, you don’t need to deal with those allegations any more.   
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Now can you move on to deal with a 
new topic in your statement, which is introduced from page 20 and 
paragraph – with reference to paragraph 65, you are also referring to 
...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe before that Mr Mokoena so in regard to the 
Asbestos Eradication Project are you saying as a matter of fact that 
actually no asbestos was removed from houses or are you saying they 
may have removed it from some houses but certainly not as many as 
10 
they were meant to do in terms of 300 housing units? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Chairperson it is clear from the records that 
we have presented that the intention was just to do the audit, and that 
was it, that was done.  The part of the eradication of this would have 
been the other as I say the other project but in as far as this and in 
terms of the instructions that were received from the Department it was 
for the audit of the 300 000 houses at R850 per unit totalling 
R255million for that alone and this is what was done and if you check 
even in the report here that the period I thought that the evidence 
leader would also just for the record the report itself that they 
20 
submitted and if you check the period that the contract was from the 1 s t 
of December and it ended and the report, the final report was given in 
February, now if you look at that only 255million was paid for a project 
that took December, January and then February and everything was 
there, so there was no eradication of this or removal of these asbestos 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 142 of 278 
 
housing meaning besides the fact that they made an appeal that this 
would help in terms of the wellbeing of the people of the Free State but 
the money is spent, the money is lost, and our own people in the Free 
State who are still in this asbestos roofed houses are still experiencing 
the same conditions even before the haste that this project was dealt 
with in the first place. 
 
That is why when I indicated there was no urgency they should 
have gone through the processes and invited other people to 
participate in this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But let me just understand I may have misunderstood 
10 
at the beginning, I thought that the 255million in terms of the letter of 
appointment at page 94 I thought that the R255million would have 
included the removal of the actual asbestos roofs and I guess you can’t 
remove without putting in something else, and putting whatever was 
acceptable, but maybe to think that all of that could have been done on 
the basis of R255million is not realistic for 300 000 houses, but are you 
saying that as you understand the project the instruction to this joint 
venture was simply to do the audit, identify which houses had asbestos 
roofs, you mentioned the assessment as well, are you saying that your 
understanding is that the R255million did not go beyond them doing 
20 
that? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Chairperson that’s why I thought it would be 
wise if we go to the ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  To the report. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   To the report and just allow the Chairperson 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 143 of 278 
 
to get the glimpse of that report.  In fact ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes we could go there but what you can tell me is 
your own understanding. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Nothing of that sort.  My understanding is 
the report in fact in terms of the letter you know to the Department it 
was for the audit as well as for the eradication and the removal of the 
rubble to a safer place. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   And what also the – what the instruction was 
also clearly indicated that it was for the audit of the asbestos house. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay just to make sure that we have the same 
understanding, your understanding if I understand you correctly now 
your understanding might be the same as mine then, is the position that 
as you understand the letter of instruction to perform, the letter at page 
94 from the head of department, is your understanding that it was 
instructing them to do the audits, make the assessment, remove the 
asbestos, take it to a particular site and replace, make a replacement 
on the roofs, was that your understanding? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Initially that is what was supposed to be but 
if you check the letter it talks of assessing, auditing and – what did 
20 
they use, the word, if we can go to there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think it’s page 94 if my recollection is correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Are you looking for the report or the 
letter? 
CHAIRPERSON:  The letter. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 144 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The letter. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   It’s page 94. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The letter Chairperson of the instruction is 
audit, assess, and GPS all pre-94 housing units in the province and it 
says at a rate of 850, so that itself the instruction in this case 
excludes, there is no instruction to remove, it is only to audit, to assess 
and GPS all these.  At that rate that is given there 850 and that is what 
the report then does. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Also says that. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I did ask earlier on what GPS means and I think 
you gave me an explanation but I can’t remember what – is that 
something that they were supposed to do as well, in addition to 
auditing and assessing or ... 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   They needed a company that would use       
whatever instruments ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  GPS? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Just to deal with the identification of w here 
the property is and then have photos of the property itself, unit by unit, 
only those that will have asbestos, so they will be able to assess if they 
20 
were to remove the roofing will that not affect the foundation and many 
other things. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the reference to GPS is just for the pictures of the 
houses? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Just for all that, that’s it. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 145 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.  Thank you.  So the whole R255million was 
effective for identifying the houses that had asbestos roofs and making 
an assessment, in terms of the letter of appointment. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   In terms of the letter of appointment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  Yes? 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:   Chairperson you would recall that Mr 
Dukwana did take Mr Mokoena to page 96. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:    No, 97, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:   And asked Mr Dukwana to read paragraph 
two which is working relationship. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:    That is the document that relates, it’s an 
SLA agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:    And if the Chairperson have regard to that 
it says it says the Department appoints the service provider to 
assess/audit houses ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry, I’m at 97. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   At the bottom Chair. 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:    At the bottom Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh close to? 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:    Correct, yes and I think that’s what Mr 
Dukwana read into the record when he was being led by Mr Mokoena, 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 146 of 278 
 
so it answers the Chair’s question.  And that is why Chair has 
characterised the whole contract as nonsensical, the letter of 
appointment says something, the SLA agreement says something and 
they relate to the same project. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:    Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay Mr Dukwana you will confirm it looks like in 
terms of the 2017 agreement what they were supposed to do included 
disposal of asbestos to a certain site, to an approved designated 
disposal site but from what you have said that was not included in the 
10 
letter of appointment.  Is that correct?   I haven’t gone back to the 
letter of appointment but I understood you to be saying that? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes as I say this is something, that’s why I 
was saying it contradicts if it was done done by the lawyers they would 
have seen this, this one even on page 97 it says something, it includes 
there handling and disposal of asbestos sheets and the only way you 
can do that is by removing them, and then to the designated disposal 
site, but if you read the instruction that was given in this case it was 
only to assess and then to audit and GPS at that rate that was given, 
so there was no rate given for the removal and for other things in that 
20 
letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I have just gone back to page 94, it appears that 
the only paragraph in page 94 where one can find what the HOD was 
saying this joint – this company should do appears in paragraph one. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 147 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it says audit, assess and GPS all pre-1994 
government housing units in the Province at a rate of R850 VAT 
exclusive per unit up to a maximum of 300 000 units [R255million VAT 
exclusive] hereinafter referred to blah-blah-blah, will be payable for all 
audited units and it should be noted that all asbestos units are 
expected to be audited in the Province. 
 
So if you say the reference to GPS doesn’t involve removing it 
would appear that it doesn’t say anything about, the letter doesn’t say 
anything about removing. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes it doesn’t say. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes. 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:    And the emphasis there Chair it is always 
throughout that paragraph it is audit, audit, audit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry? 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:    I’m saying that the emphasis in that 
paragraph it is audit, nothing else. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes, okay thank you. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   And I just want to emphasize that it says 
here the number one in page 94 when it reads everything there the 
20 
units and the amount of money that will be paid as a total project cost, 
it says will be payable for all audited units. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   You understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 148 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   This means even if that unit that audit is not 
an asbestos it does not have an asbestos roof, you will be paid just by 
merely mentioning that this house and all those things, so that is where 
I was saying Chairperson it does not make sense for you needed to, 
that’s why I was saying you could have done the assessment yourself 
and once you’ve got the report you would know exactly how many of 
these houses that have asbestos roof and then you would then say go 
and remove them and do one, two, three, so that would be a better way 
of doing things, but for them to say for you to do the assessment and 
also to do the auditing and GPS you do all the  houses that is why 
10 
where we say it is actually a scheme in this case, you siphoning the 
money, you use this, the 300 000, if you go to the report you will see 
that the houses that were said to be having asbestos roofs do not come 
close to 300 000, but this one says will be payable for all audited units 
and then it goes on to say and it should be noted that all asbestos units 
are expected to be audited in the province. 
 
Now that is where I get some difficulties, you say all audited 
units and then you say asbestos units are expected to be audited in the 
Province.  My understanding is ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  So you read that to include auditing units that might 
20 
not have asbestos roofs, that’s how you read it? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   I read it to say the first one, the first 
instruction is you do audit all the houses, the 300 000, but you must 
make sure that all units that have asbestos in the Free State are 
audited. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 149 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Maybe let me help you and the Chair 
and refer you to page 43. 
CHAIRPERSON:  23? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   43 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  43. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   And simply read under that heading that 
says the field findings. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The field findings Chairperson out of a total 
of all the Free State townships assessed via site visits the following 
were discovered.  The actual number of residential units that contained 
10 
asbestos could only be quantified after the physical audit has been 
done, however the audited encountered number of residential units 
containing asbestos is 36 303 stands and the stands walked physically 
and assessed is seen at more or less or plus minus 300 000. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   So that is the point that you are making 
that the only ones that were assessed were 36 000 yet you will be 
entitled to be paid the entire amount of 300 000 units. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   What it means if you were to do the 
calculations you will then say for the asbestos and everything you 
would then say 36, the GPS would say 36 303 multiplied by 850 and 
20 
that is what you will pay but ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  And it would be much less. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   It would be much less but you pay for the 
R300 000 that were physically assessed, walked in and assessed so 
you still pay the 850. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 150 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But the question then is or before I ask that, is this 
page 43 part of the report that – of the company. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The report starts on page 39 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but this is part of the report? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes that’s part of the report. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now what would have been the justification for the 
HOD to instruct that they should audit even houses that did not have 
asbestos roofs, because you can see whether the roof is asbestos 
without even going into the house.  Are you able to throw light on that? 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   That’s what I indicated and that is the 
reason why I referred to this as a heist. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As a heist. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   That the – there was a number specified 
from the beginning, that is 300 000, and there is a figure per unit which 
is 850 and there is a total budget that is there t hat is for this project 
255million, so working it out there you just work the total amount and 
work everything and say go down so you work all this and you make 
sure that you get the money, all of it, and you can justify that I went to 
the house and the house does not have an asbestos and I went to these 
20 
only 36 out of 300 000 in the whole of the Free State. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I have a suspicion that your counsel has quickly 
calculated what it would have been, 850 for 36 000 houses if anybody 
has I would like to know the figure.  Oh he hasn’t. 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:    No Chairperson the only  thing that I 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 151 of 278 
 
thought the Chairperson needed an answer to is what is a GPS. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:    If you go to page 55 it answers the 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Oh geographical information system. 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:    Yes.  No, no Chair you go down there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry, did I look at the wrong one. 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:    Other electronic special database it will 
say the GPS position of the house can be met at the added advantage 
that each of the above can later be revised by GPS and navigation, so 
10 
the way they were talking about that information that they will get. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay.  But so 36 000 housing units at R850 per 
unit will be far less than the ...(intervention)  
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The 225million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It’s about R5million. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   No I am saying it will be far ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Far less ...(intervention)  
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Than R250million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But as far as you know Mr Dukwana because 
obviously you have spoken to people and you have looked at 
20 
documents is there anything that you have come across that says what 
the justification was why housing units that did not have asbestos had 
to be visited? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Every time you engage on this the only 
conclusion that one comes to is that it was only motivated by  greed 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 152 of 278 
 
and make sure that you get as much money from the whole project and 
you could see also by the requests that were coming that these people 
would not mind if in any project Chairperson you need to have a bit of 
quantities and make sure, especially this, you would know that this is 
how much t his project would cost if you had to do that, but for a 
person starting anywhere you start with say there’s R50million that we 
put aside for cost for business and then if you go again at the end 
you’ve got R77million that in the papers that Ms Cholota also placed in 
this case also indicate that the R77million the last payment was for – it 
was a profit for them because they did not have any overheads 
10 
etcetera, so meaning the 77million was to be shared.  If you go there 
you will see the report indicates that upon discovering that 77million 
was paid they had a meeting and in that meeting they then took the 
16million, the 17million and shared it equally and the money that was 
left because it was said they were over the report in the report in their 
papers that they submitted to court he argues that the late Mr 
Mpambani indicated that the Public Protector had actually found out 
that they were overpaid by R77million, but then he realised that it was, 
that it was sixty – he said it was 60million and then we had to share the 
70million out of the 77million.  Then he goes to Court to demand that 
20 
half of the 60million is due to him and that must be paid, so that is why 
in the papers he demands 30million of the 77million because they 
would have shared the money, so what I’m trying to point out is you 
have 50million cost to business, you have 77million it works out to 
127million.  Of that 255million worth of project that goes as a profit that 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 153 of 278 
 
these people had and it shows you how bad the whole thing was, there 
is no project, it’s almost half of the total project that will give you a 
profit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the answer is you have not come across anything 
that provides justification for – there might be none justification maybe 
for the project in relation to the roofs that have asbestos, and maybe 
there is justification but for those that didn’t have asbestos roof you 
say you have come across nothing that provides any justification? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Nothing, nothing chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I take it Mr Mokoena that our teams are already 
10 
underway to get all these papers from litigation that he refers to and so 
on? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Indeed Chair indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And Mr Sodi is still – is still alive? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  He is alive. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you said you have not met him? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  No I have not met him but he is still alive.  
Yes Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja we… 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Efforts are made Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Efforts are being made to … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Even though we cannot [indistinct]. Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Get him.  Ja okay.  Alright thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Chair from the lawyers mathematics that 
are on trust.  They say that [intervention]. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 154 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  From the lawyers of which I do not trust 
their mathematics they say that 100 and – for R850.00 and times those 
36 units. 
CHAIRPERSON:  36 000 is it? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  36 000 units it is almost R30 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  R30 million? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  So you can subtract that from the R255 
10 
million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you say I must take that figure with a pinch of 
salt? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Be careful Chair when it comes to 
lawyers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I would agree with you.  Yes okay alright.  But that 
might give us an idea. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  It just gives an idea Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja an idea. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  We might have to rely on other people to 
20 
do the calculations but for now we can live with that figure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay hm. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Mr Dukwana I was just about to move to 
deal now with what you are calling the housing heist.  Now explain to 
us before you even deal with the – the facts relevant to it why did you 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 155 of 278 
 
refer to it as the housing heist? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  This also will demonstrate Chairperson how 
people would steal resources meant for poor people and do that with 
impunity and nothing happens.  And in this case you will see that you 
have key people who were involved and these people nothing happened 
to them and as usual as it happens the people who were dealt with are 
officials who were taking instructions from the – their heads.  And you 
would find that the HOD then, the DDG then and the CFO and the MEC 
in the Department nothing happened to them.  But all other officials 
who working in this project were – I am sorry – were disciplined and 
10 
you know as we speak [intervention]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were what? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  They – there was a disciplinary process 
some dedicated officials and unfortunately as we speak most of them 
are outside the employ of government.  And this was only meant 
Chairperson that when the Auditor General comes you just want to 
demonstrate that you have done something about this and it usually 
goes.  It happened in the Free State with 23 roads.  If you remember 
there was a project that cost almost – it was about R6 billion in the 
Free State and it was 23 roads and the same way some officials 
20 
suffered but all the people who were up there nothing happened to 
them.  So these are just as you say – as we say put them here.  People 
are just stealing – stealing and every time we put the people in front 
and we say we want to serve, we want to – we are doing all these 
things for the people but when it comes out it is these people that 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 156 of 278 
 
stand up and always you know give an impression that you are servants 
of the people when in actual fact you are criminals and stealing money 
from them and always created this impression that you care.  Any 
person who – who cares Chairperson will not have stolen R255 million 
just for this.  Even the Head of the Department could have seen that 
this is wrong and I cannot be part of this.  But this person – this thing 
happened because people were getting something.  You come to this 
you will realise also it is just a heist, it is stealing and nothing else. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But before we go into more into the housing 
heist as you call it.  At some stage you talked about going to the report 
10 
that was provided by the company in regard to the asbestos project.  
There was reference to one page that may or may not have covered 
what is necessary but I thought I want – I would ask the question 
whether all it says really for all intents and purposes is we audited plus 
minus 300 000 and then out of those 36 000 had asbestos rooves.  We 
did our job then we are entitled to payment.  Was it something along 
those lines more or less or is it difficult to say? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Mr Chair what Mr Dukwana read on page 
43 it is in fact the findings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  It is the findings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of the report? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  You know of the – yes of the report.  It is 
the field findings unless you want [intervention]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well is that the report – that is the report of who? 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 157 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Of the entity that was appointed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh the JV? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh ja that is – that is what I am – that is what I am. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Mr Dukwana let us go to page 
[intervention]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it should not have the finding because it should 
just make a report. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes let us go to page 39 so that these 
issues are clarified. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And if you can identify that document? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It is the Free State Department of Human 
Settlement.  It is a – the report Free State Department of Human 
Settlement final audit report. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And who is the author – who is the 
author of the report? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The report is prepared by Mr IP Mpambani, 
Blackhead Consulting JV and it prepared for Head of the Department 
Free State Department of Human Settlement. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now bearing in mind the time period that 
we have dealt with in – on page 94 paragraph 2 you do not have to go 
there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry before you go there this is confusing for 
me.  Why is a report that comes from a service provider carrying the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 158 of 278 
 
logo of the Department giving the impression as if it is a report 
prepared by the Department for somebody else, do – is that something 
you are able to say anything on – you are not able to say anything on? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I do not understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because normally if you are service provider you are 
supposed to report how you have done the work.  Your report should 
have your own letterheads. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it might be addressed to the client.  Earlier on 
this gave me the impression as if it was a government report. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  I thought so Chair that is why I wanted 
to take him back to this report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now having in mind the duration that we 
have already spoken about on a number of occasions what is the date 
of this report? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  13 February 2015. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  So that is what you are conveying to the 
20 
Chair that within a very short space of time they were able to produce 
this report and be paid the monies that you have referred to? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Remember Chairperson the letter appointing 
them was dated the 2 n d. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Say – it was signed on the 2 n d December 2014 yes. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 159 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  But it was for the 1 s t January – of December. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And the final report was submitted or 
prepared on the 13 t h February 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  So it tells you it is from the 1 s t December to 
the 1 s t January would be one month and then the 1 s t to that is almost 
two months. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  So basically they did a five page proposal 
10 
and a two month work. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it is two and half months if you… 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes two. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you include the shutdown period. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes and then – and then they got R255 
million. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And what you were reading on page 43 
you have already read it into the record it is what the service provider 
themselves are saying in the report it is not the Department that is 
recording that am I correct? 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It is the service provider. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes Chair.  So surely it clarifies Chair 
what the service provider themselves say that they have done and you 
can then correlate that with what they have been paid and in line with 
what Mr Dukwana has testified about throughout the better part of the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 160 of 278 
 
day. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I see that on that page – page 43 there is a 
reference to phase 2 of the works and I know that Mr Dukwana did 
before lunch make reference to phase 2.   
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And it says options to cater for repairs. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes it says options. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It says options to cater for repairs will be developed 
in detail on phase 2 of the works however recommendations 
highlighting the advantages and drawbacks of each option is indicated 
10 
as follows.  And then it goes on. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  This comes to what the Chairperson was 
asking that if it explains it also that it was just for auditing and all that.  
And then there was going to be that other process of removing them 
and doing that and they had options.  And what this means the stealing 
was going to continue. I suppose had the death of Mr Mpambani did not 
happen and you could see if you check the amount of money that were 
now earmarked to be used for the reroofing and everything and the 
20 
options that are there we talking here a lot of money.  You talking about 
R3.6 billion and this was pointed there. For that the first option would 
have been R3.8 billion and the second option R3.7 billion and that was 
going to be the [intervention]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where are you reading those figures from? 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 161 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Page 84 Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Of that report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  So I am just saying this was something that 
was going to continue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  So it was the – that and once you have dealt 
with the identification of such houses the focus now of the number 
there was going to be something and remember Chairperson that they 
10 
said they had three in their report if you go to 43 you said – in the 
report I think it is 43. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja 43. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  They said the 36 units – 36 000 units and 
then it was not going out at the rate demolishing existing building and 
dispose rubble the amount there and everything. And the total project 
as they say with the options that are there is R3.7 and then R3.8 
billion.  That if – if the project were to continue this is the amount of 
money that was going to be spent to remove these asbestos rooves and 
replace them with either the IBR sheet roof or something else that – or 
20 
the tile roof.  So what it explains is that they did not do that work 
because it needed to be approved first and then given a go ahead. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To the extent that there may have been a need for 
this type of project in respect of housing units that had asbestos rooves 
you have come across nothing that justifies why it would not be – it 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 162 of 278 
 
should not have been through a competitive tender process, is that 
right? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Ja they have come – there is nothing 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There is nothing? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  There is nothing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.    
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Does that clarify Chair the initial 
enquiries. 
CHAIRPERSON:  YEs. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Can we now move onto – you have now 
explained to the Chair as to why you referred to it as the Housing 
Heist.  Can you preface you know this session of your testimony by 
giving us a brief synopsis of relevant materials facts you know giving 
rise to what really transpired in this Housing Heist? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  In 2010 Chairperson the Minister of Housing 
at the time was Mr Tokyo Sexwale.  And he – there was a decision 
taken that any province that was not moving in terms of building houses 
20 
because people were tired in fact even in Parliament the Parliament 
was tired of departments that were not spending their allocated amount 
of money and then every time roll overs and roll overs.  So then the 
department and the – and Ndada Tokyo Sexwale decided that any – if 
they Chair – if they find that a department – a Province is not 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 163 of 278 
 
delivering accordingly they will then take whatever that is allocated 
what they feel should be taken and give the – what they have taken 
from this province give to the province that is moving so that houses 
are built instead of waiting for this and nothing happens.  So during 
that time there was a notice to the effect that monies from the Free 
State because at the time this I think it was almost in December the 
Free State their spending was very low in terms of houses.  And it 
could be explained Chairperson it was not the time when after the 
elections 2009 and you getting into the new era.  And in this case you 
will find a new administration, a new Premier and there were contracts 
10 
that were there and you would think that government operating as 
government it was not any other government it was still the ANC 
government.  And the person who was an MEC at the time of housing 
was also a MEC member – ANC member. So the common sense is you 
take the work that is there, you continue with the work.  But it was not 
to be.  What happened is those who had contracts at the time there was 
a need to renegotiate these contracts and some of these people it took 
a long time for this process to happen.  And it actually created this 
backlog for the department because they could not – they could not go 
ahead and build.  Remember the financial year would end in April and 
20 
there would be these allocations coming in.  But if by December you 
still have not done the work that you needed to do in terms of 
identifying the service providers and starting the work then it created a 
problem.  So this is the – why this backlog existed.  If the income in the 
administration that came in 20 – in 2009 had continued with existing 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 164 of 278 
 
projects or existing companies that were awarded contracts at the time 
so that by the time your financial year comes you have got money and 
you can work.  But this created that problem.  And in December I think 
a few days before [intervention]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry just to understand the part soon after the 
new administration came in 2009.  So you say contractors who had 
already been awarded contracts before the elections who were carrying 
on with the work they were effectively told no now this is a new 
administration we will have to renegotiate.  Is that what you saying? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  This is what I am saying Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. And what was being renegotiated now?  Was the 
new prices or what?  I mean there was a contract – there were 
contracts in place that had been signed by the same government? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Chairperson what I want to point out is as 
government and how you work you develop all the systems and by the 
time you go to the next you already know how much is going to be 
allocated for you before the financial year begins.  And with that 
knowledge – armed with that knowledge you prepare the ground.  And 
in this case you advertise, you do that.  You do not advertise in April 
after you have received money.  So you will do that in advance so that 
20 
by the time the financial year begins already you have people.  There 
are many business people who were given these contracts and some 
were told to give back these contract etcetera.  Because people wanted 
also some of these business people wanted to be in the good books of 
the new administration.  Some of them accepted and did that in hoping 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 165 of 278 
 
that they would be favoured at the time when these allocations were 
given but it was not to be.  It was clear – this is something that you 
would witness that people normally as it happens in many – I do not 
know in other provinces but in our province that is what is the problem 
that we sitting with.  This administration comes you actually want your 
own you know you have your own style, you do things differently.  You 
disregard some of the things that happened in the past and then you 
start something new.  And this is what actually has created problems in 
terms of having seamless transition in terms of government.  Taking 
into consideration in the Free State it has been the ANC in government 
10 
and it has been ANC members in these portfolios.  So you would take – 
it will be common sense that if that happens and the new MEC comes 
there is nothing that you need to take and then the financial year that 
comes you would then introduce whatever you introduce.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  So you do not disturb the smooth running of 
the department – of the – of government.  But in this case it was like 
that and continue afresh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now faced with the threat of the money 
20 
having been – or threat that the money might be taken you know back 
to the National government what then happened? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The – the MEC Mr Mosebenzi Zwane at the 
time came to a meeting of the Executive [intervention]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was he MEC for Housing in 2009? 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 166 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  He was MEC for Housing and you know it 
was still [intervention]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the new administration. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:    Yes Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At that time ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes.  And I was MEC for Economic 
Development and Tourism at the time and Environmental Affairs.  So I 
sat in the meeting where this happened.  In that meeting it was a few 
days before the 16 t h December in 2010 and with this threat in 
government that money would be taken away from the Free State 
10 
because we were – we had spent almost less than 10% at the time as I 
wanted you know April it is May, June, July soon you are in December 
and you only left with January, February, March and then you know so 
roll over was [intervention]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The end of the financial year. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At the end of March ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes and now you going to have a problem.  
And then for you to deal with that the MEC got into the meeting and 
indicated related the whole story. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  In December 2010 now? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  In December 2010. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And said that we should not be worried 
because they – they have a plan and he was going to – he is not going 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 167 of 278 
 
to take any holiday he was going to work throughout.  And that one 
picked that up immediately and the question that one asked was 
considering that the 15 t h – the 16 t h December around the corner could 
be two days or so of that meeting what is it that you are going to do 
when contractors would have been closed by that time?  Then he said, 
no we are going to work throughout the holidays and to make sure that 
no money goes.  So this is the creation of this fiasco that we sitting 
with.  And we – we went with that understanding and you know you 
could not understand how that was going to be possible.  But when we 
came back [intervention]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was he saying this at a meeting of the executive 
council of the province? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Correct; you are correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In – on the 15 t h December 2010? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  No it was in December I cannot remember 
the date. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You cannot remember the date? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  But it was in December. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And the fact what I remember is the question 
20 
was; considering that we are a few days before the 16 t h December what 
is it that you are going to do when contractors are closing on the 16 t h 
December?  And all that he said was that he – he will not personally – 
he will be overseer in this process.  He would not go on holiday and 
they will work on this.  When we came back; when we reopened the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 168 of 278 
 
report that he gave was – we have managed to move I think at the time 
he was saying we have managed to move to almost 66% or so of the 
spending of the budget and some of our colleagues were impressed but 
there were others who were not impressed in terms of what could have 
happened?  The question was then, is this – this 66% or so are you 
talking about money actually spent in building houses?  And the answer 
was yes we have built houses, we have sorted the matter out.  But it 
came later as you will see that it was money paid to implementing – to 
service providers’ etcetera without them doing any job and it cost the 
province a lot of money and many of the people who were supposed to 
10 
get those houses could not get those houses.  And you will see later 
even at the – when the Head – the current Head of the Department and 
deposing his statement to – his affidavit in – in the court application to 
declare to nullify these contracts and referring to it as a corrupt 
scheme engineered in the Department that is how he used the terms 
that he used then.  I may not be quoting him verbatim but it is in that.  
And also agreeing and confirming that almost more than R500 million 
was lost in this and then – the houses and the number of units of 
houses that were not built.  So in essence you could see that some 
people were given some money and some in the process some were 
20 
involved in the car accident and died and nothing was done in terms of 
getting the money back and there were some other people who will just 
say we did what [indistinct] to do and then there will be service 
providers who would just chowed the money that there is nothing. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 169 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  So the Department – this is the long and 
short of what this is but we can go point by point Chairperson. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes before referring you to specific 
annexures or documents that you may have alluded to may we preface 
that with you reading paragraph 67 into the record on page 21? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   
“Through that commitment by Mr Zwane service 
providers some of which had no expertise in building 
of houses let alone registered with the NHRBC were 
paid in advance millions without compliance with any 
10 
public procurement prescripts.  There is a court case 
about this matter that has since been withdrawn.  For 
ease of reference I annex hereto marked 2DM15 a 
copy of the court order indicating that the matter has 
been withdrawn by the applicant.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  May we proceed to also read 
paragraph 68? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   
“Fortunately my legal team has been able to obtain 
the application to review and set aside the corrupt 
20 
scheme conceived by Mr Zwane and undoubtedly at 
the behest of Mr Magashule.  In the said application 
the HOD of the Human Settlement in the Free State 
that is the current HOD Mr Mokhesi deposed to a 
very lengthy affidavit and I am advised I should read 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 170 of 278 
 
the same into the record as Annexure 2DM16.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  May I then refer you to page 125.  Are 
you there? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes I am. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Is this the Notice of Removal that you 
alluded to in the previous paragraphs that you have read into the 
record? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It is true that it is. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And what is the date of that removal? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The - the date is dated on 5 March 2019. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Are you aware if this application was 
ever pursued after this removal? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I have - I have not seen anything that is - 
towards that. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now may I refer you to page 1-2-8?  
Is this the affidavit that you have referred to as being deposed to by 
Mr Mokhesi wherein they sought to set aside this corrupt scheme as per 
your words? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Correct sir. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  I am not going to permit you to 
20 
read as you have requested the entire affidavit but what we will attempt 
to do in order to place some of the facts relevant to your testimony 
before - on record is to direct you to some of the portions of the 
affidavit.  If I may refer you to page 1-3-0. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just repeat that page please. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 171 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Page 1-3-0 - 130 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  1-3-0. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  You would see that there is a 
subheading dedicated to deal with “The Nature of this Application”.  If 
you can read those paragraphs into - into the record up until paragraph 
11 at least they will give us a sense as to what you are referring to. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  “The nature of this application:  
this application arises from a set of agreements 
10 
concluded in late 2010 and early 2011 between the 
department and a number of building contractors 
and suppliers of building material to whom I refer 
generally as the contractors and the suppliers and 
to payments made by the department to the 
suppliers.  The agreements are listed in the 
schedule attached as NM1 to this application and 
Annexure 2 to the Notice of Motion.  The 
agreements relate to the construction of low cost 
housing 
in 
the 
Free 
State 
Province. 
 
The 
20 
department received a large conditional funding 
allocation from the National Treasury to build low 
cost housing.  The agreements formed part of a 
fraudulent scheme which was conceived by the 
department to disperse very substantial sums of 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 172 of 278 
 
money mainly to the suppliers in order to avoid the 
funds becoming a so called unspent conditional 
allocation and therefore reverting to the National 
Revenue Fund.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  So that is what this accord to what you 
have told the Chair? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes Chair. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes, alright.  Can you proceed? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  “The department through the MEC 
six orders declaring the agreements and the 
10 
decisions to make payments to the suppliers to be 
unlawful and accordingly void ab initio in addition 
or in the alternative.  It seeks the review and 
setting aside in accordance with the requirements 
of legality or in terms of the provisions of the 
Promotion of Administrative Justice Act No. 3 of 
2000 (“PAJA”) or broth of the department’s decision 
to conclude the agreement and make the payment.  
In consequence it seeks the review and setting 
aside or the agreement themselves.  There are two 
20 
major grounds on which the department seeks this 
relief.  The first is that the agreements were 
concluded and the payments were made in breach 
of procurement law.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Huh-uh. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 173 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  “The second is that the agreement 
and payments form part of a fraudulent scheme and 
are tainted by fraud.  The department has instituted 
several action proceedings in this court against 
contractors and suppliers who received payments 
from the department or who benefitted from such 
payments.  In the actions the department seeks 
inter alia to recover what it paid over or an 
appropriate portion of what he paid over.  The 
actions are listed in the schedule attached as NM2 
10 
to this application and Annexure 4 to the Notice of 
Motion.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now if I may refer you to page 133 
in order for us to get a sense as to how many respondents were 
pursued in this application that was withdrawn.  If you may read 
paragraph 16 into the record. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  “There are 106 respondents.  They 
are the building contractors and supplies of building 
materials to which I have already referred.  I 
confirm that this application and the averments 
20 
made are confined to the respondents inserted in 
and as identified in NM1 and NM2 respectively.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes and you referred earlier on to the 
heading you coined it to be “The Housing Heist”.  Am I correct? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are correct. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 174 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now may I refer you to page 1-3-4 to see 
whether you find comfort in what is stated from paragraph 22 to 23.5.  
If you can read same into the record please. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  “The department scheme:  I have 
said that this application relates to a set of 
agreements which the department concluded in late 
2010 and early 2011 with contractors and suppliers.  
I have also said that the agreements form part of a 
fraudulent scheme conceived by the department to 
pay out funds from its conditional funding allocation 
10 
in order to avoid the funds become an unspent 
conditional allocation and reverting to the National 
Revenue Fund.  It is convenient to describe the 
department’s scheme up front.  Its major features 
were:  one, the department concluded some 125 
written 
building 
contracts 
with 
contractors.  
Accumulatively 
in 
terms 
of 
these 
contracts 
contractors 
were 
appointed 
to 
construct 
approximately 14 769 low cost houses in six district 
municipalities and towns across the Free State.  
20 
The total value of the building contract was varied 
and was based on an average of R72 417 per unit 
or per house.  The building contracts provided that 
the 
contractors 
were 
obliged 
to 
supply 
the 
necessary materials for their construction work.  
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 175 of 278 
 
The value of the building contract thus included the 
cost of materials.  The department also concluded 
some 120 written tripartite supply agreements with 
contractors …” 
CHAIRPERSON:  1-1-2 hey?  112? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  112. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  1-1-2. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, I might have misunderstood.  I thought you said 
120. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  No 112 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  112 okay, alright.  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  “The department also concluded 
some 112 written tripartite supply agreements with 
contractors and building material suppliers.  The 
material term of these supply agreements was that 
the department will pay suppliers for building 
materials 
which 
the 
suppliers 
supplied 
to 
contractors.  Suppliers’ claims for payment were 
required to be supported by one, an invoice in 
20 
respect of material supplied by the supplier to the 
contract and two, a certificate from the contractor 
confirming receipt of the materials invoice.  The 
department also agreed to the cession by the 
contractors to the suppliers of claims which the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 176 of 278 
 
contractors 
purported 
to 
have 
against 
the 
department.  The cessions were documented and 
written material supply cession agreements signed 
by the contractors, suppliers and the department.  
The cession agreements contained instructions from 
the contractors to the department to pay the ceded 
claims to the suppliers.  The department made 
payments to the suppliers.  The total value of the 
payments made to the 21 suppliers over the period 
2009/2011 exceeds R500 million.  The payments 
10 
were made from the conditional allocation which the 
department received from the National Revenue 
Fund via the National Department.  There was no 
lawful cost for the payment.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  If I may stop you there.  So the 
amount reflected on paragraph 23.4 accords with what you have also 
referred to when you testified earlier to - to the Chairperson? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Correct Chair. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And this is the amount which could have 
been expanded or being paid within that short space of time when you 
20 
say that it was already in December - two days before the 16 t h and up 
until the time when you came back? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Correct Chair. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now may I refer you to page 1-3-6 and 
then we can skip all these other paragraphs and concentrate on 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 177 of 278 
 
paragraph 24.  Take us through paragraph 24. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before that Mr Mokoena assuming that this R500 
million that is referred to in regard to this project you call “Heist” was 
paid for no value for money effectively.  Maybe not even assuming that.  
Assuming that there was just corruption here.  If you add the amount 
that was mentioned in regard to the asbestos project this - add this 500 
million to that one you - you do not reach a billion as yet or do you?  
That other - on - on that other one the amount - the project was about 
two … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  255 … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  255 million. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  There was some - there was a figure that we 
mentioned and I was saying that already you are looking at 700-and 
something … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Million, is it not? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Remember you - you added … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  The four - the 4 000 or was - was I getting confused.  
There was a time when I was talking about 700-and something million 
… 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  (Indistinct). 
CHAIRPERSON:  But of course the total amount for the value of the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 178 of 278 
 
project was 2-5-5.  Maybe I got confused and mentioned 700-and 
something.  So there is no 700-and something million. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Mr Dukwana do you want to answer? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  (Intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  I - I think I will allow the counsel for Mr Dukwana.  I 
think … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  No Chair let me assist. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, Mr - yes, yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  700 000 that the Chair was making reference 
to … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Has to do with onerous requests that were 
directed at the Premier’s Office … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And the Chairperson was saying it is 470 
that has to be paid.  30 000 to an SRC President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That is 500 000.  There is 200 - 255 … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That is paid to a travel agent. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Blah, blah, blah.  So those … 
CHAIRPERSON:  No.  It was not millions. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes.  Those, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Those are separate. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 179 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Those are separate from this … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  From this one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now I understand.  So - but if we add this 500 million 
to that 255 million where one is looking at - over 700 million in terms of 
the two projects. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  I have stayed deliberately from the 
computation of the funds with the caution that I gave earlier on 
10 
Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Mr Dukwana … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may proceed. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  I was referring you to page 1-3 - was it 
1-3-4? 
UNKNOWN PERSON:  Six. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  1-3-6 with particular reference to 
paragraph 24.  Take us through that. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Paragraph 24: 
20 
“The 
reason the department 
implemented 
the 
scheme was this:  in late October that is one and 
November 2010 
the 
department 
was 
severely 
criticised by the National Department because it 
had 
very 
significantly 
underspent 
from 
its 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 180 of 278 
 
conditional grant allocation.  Halfway through the 
financial year it had spent only 10 percent of what it 
was meant to have spent.  The National Department 
and National Treasury threatened that their unspent 
allocation would revert to the National Revenue 
Fund to be reallocated to provinces with better 
spending records.  In the face of that threat the 
department proceeded to implement the scheme 
dispersing funds to the tune of more than 500 
million from its conditional allocation over the 2009 
10 
to 2011 with no lawful cause for the payment made.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Let us then skip the rest and go to 
page 1-3-8.  What appears to be relevant to sketch - the relevant you 
know facts it is paragraphs 27 and 28. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  “I submit that the department 
scheme was a fraud on the National Government 
specifically on the fiscus.  It was also fraud on the 
public on all who expect state funds to be spent 
properly including on improving the standard of 
living of the poor on those in the Free State and in 
20 
other provinces with an expectation of receiving 
state funded housing and all taxpayers.  I have 
described above the fraudulent aspects of the 
department’s scheme.  It is important to point out 
that the contracts were all - were also unlawful 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 181 of 278 
 
because the department did not follow any lawful 
procurement process before concluding them.  This 
is and in itself a ground on which the contracts 
should be declared void.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes and so in order for us to appreciate 
whether there was any value for this money that was paid I know that 
you have touched on that but it maybe also prudent for us to go to page 
1-4-7 and take us through from paragraphs 64 to 66.  Page 1-4-7 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Page 1-4-7? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  From 64? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  From 64 to 66. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA: 
 
“At 
the 
time 
however 
the 
memorandum contemplates advance payments to 
material suppliers.  With advance payments to be 
regulated via specific agreement.  For an example 
one of the features apparently enforcing the 
department’s 
turnaround 
strategy 
is 
that 
the 
department 
will 
where 
necessary 
enter 
into 
agreement with material suppliers and provide them 
20 
with an advance payment.  That is paragraph 1.5 
bullet point.  Paragraph 3.6 of the memorandum 
states that the department may provide an advance 
payment to the material supplier and in such event 
a separate agreement shall be entered into by the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 182 of 278 
 
department 
and 
the 
service 
provider. 
 
The 
department’s decisions were in clear breach of the 
advice given to it by the National Department via 
(indistinct) and the technical meetings.  The 
department had been told that its expenditure 
recovery plan was not acceptable and that it should 
not implement it.  It was also been told that paying 
suppliers 
without 
a 
supply 
service 
supplied 
materials was unlawful.  As I set out in more detail 
below the department proceeded to make payments 
10 
to suppliers without the suppliers having supplied 
material.  That is it made payments in advance.  No 
written agreements were concluded governing those 
payments.  The department did not follow any 
proper 
procurement 
process 
to 
identify 
the 
suppliers to which it made payments.  The total 
value of the payments made is nearly one billion.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  So this is very serious Mr Dukwana … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Very, very. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And up until now you do not know the 
20 
reason why this application was not proceeded with? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I do not know the reasons but I can only 
speculate Chair.  As I said earlier once you make corruption to be 
normal in society things like this happen and in this case I am sitting 
Chairperson having worked in Government and especially in the Free 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 183 of 278 
 
State.  There is no official and I repeat there is no official that will be 
this brave to disregard the National Department’s directive even when it 
- even the Treasury - when it was you do not do that. 
You know the consequences that will follow but this could 
only - the bravery that this people got for them to be doing that is 
because of the backing that they have and that backing would be 
coming from the Premier as well as the MEC and I am saying this 
Chairperson because the contracts were signed in December and in 
January. 
It is the period that the MEC indicated that he was going to 
10 
be there overseeing the process.  So what it means is he knew exactly 
what was happening and he could not have done that without consulting 
- and I am talking from experience.  He would not do that without 
consulting the Premier. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  So in this case the unfortunate thing that 
happened was when people realised that these things were so serious 
the poor officials were especially the junior - some levels there suffered 
because of this.  They push under the bush and when you expect 
leaders to take responsibility like the MEC who said we are going to 
20 
make a plan. 
You would expect the MEC will be brave enough to say this is 
what I - I advice these people to do and take the blame instead of all 
the time having officials taking the blame.  So this as I stated 
demonstrates clearly Chairperson that there is always disregard of this 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 184 of 278 
 
but what was happening here why it was taken what the - the - what is 
being said sir by Tata Moekwe (?). 
The question that I am asked is that the - the only reason 
that I can deduce from this is that you - you need to demonstrate 
Chairperson to the Auditor-General that we suspended people.  We are 
going to court to get this nullified and then we will get our - our money 
back and you are talking about something that happened way back in 
2010 and this is 2019 and nothing has happened yet. 
So it demonstrates that the - this was very urgent because if 
you stay longer many of these people we are talking about who are 
10 
service providers would - would not be having any assets that you can - 
as a department. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let us just make sure we get everything in - we 
understand it in proper context.  Sometime during the first half of 
December 2010 a meeting of the Executive Council of the Provincial 
Government takes place which you attended … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that meeting is held against the backdrop that 
the National Department of Human Settlements had or maybe let me 
rephrase that.  That meeting took place against the backdrop that there 
20 
was an understanding to say the least.  Let us leave out threats and so 
on. 
There was an understanding on the part of the MEC for 
Human Settlements in the province that if money that had been 
allocated to his Department for Housing had not been used - that 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 185 of 278 
 
money - had not been used by the end of the financial year - that 
money would be taken away from the province.  Is that right?  
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And - and he did not want that to happen? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Not at all Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And he then said at the meeting of the Executive 
Council which you attended that he would not go on holiday during that 
December holiday and they would make a plan? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the plan being to make sure that the - the money 
10 
that had been allocated for housing in the province would be used - all 
of it would be used if possible. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that there would be no money taken away from the 
province? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The intention was to avoid money being 
taken away. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  The intention was to avoid that. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And some of you at the meeting were concerned how 
20 
he would do that given the short time left before the end of the 
financial year and the December break that was supposed to happen? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  There was no logic Chairperson in the sense 
that the - the - April to December … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 186 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You have only - only spent 10 percent and … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  That is the … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You are left with February, March and then 
you - your - your financial year ends … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And the question was what is it that you will 
do in that space of time - a short space of time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So as at - as at the time of that meeting your 
understanding is that the Department of House - of Human Settlement 
in the province had only spent 10 percent of its budget for housing? 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and the MEC at the time who was Mr Zwane said 
he would not go away for the holiday.  They would make a plan to avoid 
money being taken away. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  He indicated that he himself and the officials 
would not go on holiday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would not go away. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  They will work around the clock. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and you - did you also say when you came back 
which I assume would be after - in the New Year he made a report to 
20 
the Executive Council as to how - what they had been able to do? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  We came back late January or early 
February. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  When the legislature opened and the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 187 of 278 
 
Executive started functioning and the report given was that we have 
moved.  We at least - we are sitting at 66 percent of the spend that we 
should have made you know.  So the question was from December to 
January what it is that you did.  Do you build the houses and the 
answer was yes we - it went to - we did - we were not told that the - it 
was this scheme. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So there was an - a meeting of the Executive 
Council of the Province late in January? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  In 2011. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At which Mr Zwane made a report? 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Gave a report to the Executive. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the report was in part to the effect that as at that 
time he was able to say his department had spent about 66 percent of 
the money that had been allocated for housing during that financial 
year? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Correct and he was praised for working hard. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He was praised for working hard but you say you 
were not told as to what exactly he and his department had done within 
this short period to achieve such a high percentage of expenditure? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  No.  He did not give the details. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You were not told? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  No, we were not told. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Let us now proceed to also refer to 
some of the relevant facts which corroborates what you have already 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 188 of 278 
 
testified on before the Chair.  Turn to page 149 Mr Dukwana and if you 
can read into the record paragraphs 72 to 74. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you - you do that I just want to - you - you are 
reading from an affidavit - from the affidavit of Mr Nthimotse Mokhesi 
which was apparently deposed to on 21 December 2016 that appears at 
page 2-0-7 … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And he - he is - he was at the time at least I do not 
know now.  He was at the time the head of the same department.  Is 
that right? 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Mr Mokhesi? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Are you are talking about Mokhesi? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  This - this affidavit from which you are reading. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Was he head of this department in 2016? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The head of the department - if I am not 
mistaken - was Tata Gift Mokoena.  I think at the time there were two 
20 
departments.  You had the Department of Housing under one MEC - was 
housing and (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well he does say in the paragraph - in the - in 
paragraph 1 Mr Dukwana … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Page 1-2-9 Mr Chair. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 189 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja 1-2-9.  He does say he is the Head of the Free 
State Department of Human Settlements and he is saying that as at 
21 December 2016.  So he must have been head of the department at 
the time - in December 2016. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  At the time he prepared this, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At the time he prepared this yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So that (intervenes). 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I thought the question was … 
CHAIRPERSON:  My question was whether this person that - whose 
10 
affidavit you are reading form was the head the same department but in 
2016, December which I think is correct. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  No.  It would be - in 2010 he was not the - 
the head of the department. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.  I am saying he was - he was the head of 
department in December 2016 … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But this department of which he was the head in 2016 
is the same department we are talking about in 2010? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes sir. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Page 149 from paragraphs 72 to 74 - if 
you can read that. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 190 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Can you ask if - if you allow me just to - to 
clarify this on - that is page - paragraph 70? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes, yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   That will clarify the concern.  You remember 
I said it was reported as 66%, but if you check here the department 
responded by issuing its own, it was in response to 69, on the 18 t h 
January 2011 the National Department issued a media statement 
regarding a shifting of funding from under-performing provinces, the 
Free State and KwaZulu Natal to other provinces. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes. 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   And then the Department responded by 
issuing its own media statement on the 20 t h January purporting to set 
the record straight.  It stated among other things that the department 
would spend its entire conditional allocation by the end of the financial 
year.   It stated the following as of to date, 20 January 2011 the 
Department has spent a total of 78% of the conditional grant funding.  
By the end of January expenditure should be around 85%. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, I see that in paragraph 67 at page 148, according 
to the affidavit it says on 12 t h January 2011 the National Department 
20 
advised the Department, that must be the Provincial Department of 
Human Settlements that R263million of its conditional allocation was to 
be stopped and would be reallocated to other provinces, that’s what 
they didn’t want to happen, that is what Ms Zwane didn’t want to 
happen. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 191 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So this is what they said and then media statements 
followed. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   149. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   By the time these statements were issued 
the Department had already transferred several hundred millions of 
rands from its conditional allocation to suppliers.  It continued to make 
unlawful transfers in January, February and March 2011.  The transfers 
were made without the supplies having supplied material, without 
10 
written agreements in respect of or regulating the transfers, and 
without any proper procurement process having been followed.  The 
Department made the transfer for the purpose of avoiding having its 
conditional allocation stopped and transferred to better performing 
provinces.  It made the transfers so that it looked as if the conditional 
allocation had been spent.  I submit that this was a fraud on the 
National Treasury and on the National Government more broadly as 
well as on the taxpayers and the public generally. 
 
I will repeat that the unlawful transfers amount to more or less 
R631million in total. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you can stop there, just the context again, this is 
the Head of Department, this is the head of the same department but 
later, in 2016. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Later. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In 2016. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 192 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   In 2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who is making an application to court. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So all of these things that he says here must have 
been things that he has checked in the department to establish exactly 
when were payments made and to whom and so on. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Correct Chair because he indicated that as 
factual issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   And that was under oath. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Maybe to jump ahead of myself as well, 
if you turn to page 208, simply to piggy-back from the Chairperson’s 
question and maybe to also place context as to where would that 
information also be derived from, are you able to identify this document 
on page 208. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   This in the High Court of South Africa Free 
State Division Bloemfontein and in the matter between The Member of 
the Executive Council of the Department of Corporate Governance, 
Human Settlement and Traditional Affairs, Free State as an applicant 
20 
and Cine Group Trading 802 CC and one of five further respondents 
listed in Annexure 1 to the Notice of Motion ...(intervention)  
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   And who is the deponent? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   It’s Habbard Lobita. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Now let’s see on page 209 as to who is 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 193 of 278 
 
he, if you can read paragraph one. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Paragraph one: 
“Mr Habbard Lobita states the following: 
I am employed by  the Special Investigating Unit, SIU, as a 
project manager stationed at the Special Investigating Unit 
office, 
2 n d 
Floor, 
Telkom 
Building, 
Zastrow 
Street, 
Bloemfontein.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes, do I take it that as at the time the 
SIU was also involved in order to deal with the facts that you have 
testified about in this ...(intervention)  
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   According to this yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes, right.  Now let’s go back to put 
more facts, relevant to what you have already alluded to, if you may 
turn to page 176, and take us through paragraph 132 and paragraph 
133 Mr Dukwana.   
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The consequences.   
“The Department paid approximately 631million without having 
received anything in exchange.  There was no evidence when 
the Department made these payments that it had received 
value for the payments and the payments made in that the 
20 
houses had been built or part-built to a satisfactory standard.  
The department has made extensive efforts to to ascertain to 
what extent houses were in fact constructed and materials 
were in fact delivered as contemplated in the construction 
agreement, in other words the Department has tried to 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 194 of 278 
 
ascertain to what extent material suppliers dealt with the 
money paid to them by the Department honestly and 
responsibly by using it to supply  materials to contractors for 
the purpose of constructing the houses contemplated in the 
construction agreements and for the purpose for which the 
money was originally allocated and transferred by National 
Government to the department.  This has been an exceedingly 
difficult point to get clarity on.  In this regard I have referred 
above to clauses of the construction contract which obliged the 
contractors to keep information relating to the building project 
10 
up to date, to allow the department access to such information 
and to provide the department with monthly written progress 
report on the status of the project, the expenditure to date and 
any other information reasonably required by the Department.  
This was not done by any of the contractors.  The contractors 
paperwork was either totally inadequate or simply did not 
exist, nor have the material suppliers ever provided proper 
reports to the Department.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   If I may stop you there, so clearly form 
the deponent of this affidavit there was no value at all for an amount of 
20 
R63.1million to be paid at all. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Correct. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes, if you may turn lastly to page 203 
and take us through the contents of paragraph 222, you will locate it at 
the bottom of the page. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 195 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:    
“I draw attention to the following consideration in addition to 
those which I have already mentioned. 
1. The entire scheme was fraudulent and tainted by fraud. 
2. The contractors and suppliers must have known that it was 
unlawful for the scheme to be constructed in this manner 
and for payments to be made in this manner.   They must 
have known that this was fundamentally inconsistent with 
the manner in which the State ordinarily and lawfully does 
business. 
10 
As I have pointed out some of the invoices submitted by 
contractors and suppliers were themselves fraudulent.  The 
merit of the review I respectfully submit very strong, the sums 
paid over by the Department under the unlawful scheme and 
now sought to be recovered by the Department are very 
substantial.   
It is in the public interest that substantial amounts of public 
money which have been unlawfully spent should be recovered.  
This is particular so where the money has been diverted from 
the intended purpose of delivering houses to members of poor 
20 
communities who do not have access to adequate housing in 
fulfilment of their constitutional right.  It is in the public 
interest that those who have benefitted from fraud and 
otherwise unlawful activity should not be able to retain the 
benefits of the fraud and illegality.” 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 196 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes, and 223. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:    
“Allowing the consequences of the scheme to stand is I submit 
inconsistent with the duty of the State to fight corruption and 
mal-administration particularly in relation to public money.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes, may I now refer you back to your 
statement with particular reference to page 22. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you go back there you know this is a very 
detailed affidavit that was deposed to in December 2016, so it’s two 
and a half years later, because you live in the Free State you might 
10 
know if you have heard that anybody has been arrested and prosecuted 
in regard to any of these matters covered in this very detailed affidavit? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   No sir, no Chair, nobody. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were there any – or you said that there may have 
been or there were junior officials who were disciplined. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Government it’s a hierarchical animal, in the 
sense that even when you prepare a memo just to demonstrate, if a 
memo comes from a Deputy Director it will go to a Director, it goes to 
the Chief Director if they have one, it goes to the Deputy Director 
General if the Department has one, it goes to the Head of the 
20 
Department and it goes to the MEC, and in the time that I was there I 
saw many delays that were made deliberately.  A report would lie 
prepared by the Deputy Director who may not necessarily be there say  
would submit to the Director who is on course, it will wait there even if 
it waits for a week, and then when he comes and in some instances 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 197 of 278 
 
Chair some of the people won’t read this because they realise that they 
are not the final decision makers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   So all that they do they just say noted and 
sign. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They  just pass it on. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Others without having read this and in some 
instances you will find that even some of the  HOD’s would not have 
read the matter, when it comes to you if you are a person who reads 
you would find some mistakes and you say take this matter back and 
10 
you would be surprised that even the HOD in some instances did not 
realise the mistake, so in an event that you just sign you would find 
MEC’s will sign without having read the whole thing, in some instances 
they just go to what the first page is and what the recommendations are 
and then you sign and you leave it there, so I am just saying this 
scheme would not have happened if there was no memo that came from 
whoever say a junior level director up in this case the CFO will be 
included because there is money involved.   The Chief Director would 
be included, the DDG will be included and the HOD will be included, 
finally the MEC would have signed this, and then that would then be 
20 
implemented.  Without that it does not happen, so I don’t see how this 
could have happened, but in this situation the MEC and nothing 
happened to him, the  HOD, nothing the DDG, nothing, the Chief 
Director was the and the directors and others and the CFO nothing. 
 
So you’ve got these other people at a senior level nothing is 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 198 of 278 
 
done to them and only these few people who are not decision makers, 
even if you are a chief director in your office, in that environment you 
would not make a decision without that decision going up to the DDG 
and to the HOD who would give it to the MEC, it comes back, so it is 
how these things have been done. 
 
Maybe when I left things changed but whilst I was still there 
this was the process that will be followed, so I am just stating the fact 
that I strongly believe that if there are people who needed to be dealt 
with it would have been the DDG, the HOD, the CFO and the MEC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  And then I would have thought that when 
10 
the MEC, Mr Zwane, reported at an Executive Council meeting late in 
January that within effectively a period of about maybe seven weeks, 
maybe eight weeks which included a certain number of weeks that were 
shut down weeks for maybe many businesses, when you reported that 
he had been able to raise the expenditure of the Department from 10% 
early in December to 66% or thereabout late in January I would have 
thought that the Premier would have been interested in knowing how 
did you do that, exactly what did you do, please tell me more, how did 
you achieve that.  You take eight months to spend only 10% of the 
allocation, you take six, seven weeks you are able to add 40 something 
20 
percent of expenditure that you have used.  You don’t remember in that 
meeting the Premier asking that type of question. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   No.  Not that I don’t remember, but he did 
not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He did not? 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 199 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   No he did not.  The questions that were 
asked were coming from other members who were surprised how did 
you do it, but he said it was a, they worked hard throughout the 
...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  He didn’t give an answer as to exactly what he did? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   There was no report, there was no written 
report that would come to the Executive as expected. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   So it was just a verbal report just to note 
that we have managed to prevent money taken out of the province and 
10 
we made sure that money stays in the Province and we reported to the 
National to the fact that this is the case. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, well we will hear from the Premier at some stage 
I’m sure because I think if you are the Premier and your MEC tells you 
this that should some alarm bells should ring, you should say no I 
really want to know how did you achieve that, what actually did you do 
to satisfy yourself that somebody in your council hasn’t done anything 
wrong you know, but that’s fine. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes Chair.  Well those were also 
addressed but I am not going to take Mr Dukwana there, just for noting 
20 
from page 132 you know to 143. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Those would, could just be some of the 
questions that you know this application grapple with but we don’t have 
to read that Chair. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 200 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, can we find out Mr Dukwana whether you know 
whether the respondents in this matter, in this application brought by 
the Head of Department in the High Court for the cancellation of these 
contracts and recovery of the money whether they filed any papers in 
court to oppose or they just didn’t oppose, is that something you know 
or is that something you don’t know? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   I don’t know Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   We can verify at a later stage.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Page 135. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   No just for noting Chair, that some of 
the questions that you have posed are dealt with on those pages 142 to 
143. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes, we also make a note for them in 
our submissions.   If you go to page 22 Mr Dukwana you make 
concluding statements and those are critical and crucial, if you can 
read paragraph 72 to 73. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   I am stating here that the Government of the 
Free State must explain why it withdrew the application ...(intervention)  
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Page 22, paragraph 70. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Oh, 70? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:    
“Mr Zwane must explain to the Commission the extent of his 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 201 of 278 
 
work during December 2010 holidays and how the service 
providers were identified and why they were paid in advance 
without any procurement procedures followed.  It must be 
noted that in the application the SIU deposed to a confirmatory  
affidavit and yet the SIU has not in terms of its powers moved 
swiftly to recover the public monies appropriated unlawfully by 
those involved.  For ease of reference I annex the SIU 
confirmatory affidavit as 2MD17.” 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   And that is the one that you have 
already touched on? 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes.   
“To my knowledge or recollection through this housing heist no 
houses were either renovated or built to this day.  Mr Zwane 
needs to explain as the former executive authority of the 
department his role in this housing heist, where are the houses 
renovated or built.   What happened to millions of taxpayers’ 
money?   The government of the Free State must explain why 
it withdrew the application in issue.” 
The reason that I am talking about Mr Zwane Chairperson is that 
immediately after the – once you dissolve the Executive after the 
20 
election the – when the Premier is elected and has taken an oath all 
the executive powers of the Province fall within his ambit and then he 
delegates, he delegates this either to the HOD’s, to MEC’s etcetera, 
certain powers and in this case as an executive authority you have got 
an authority in terms of the law to deal with matters that pertain to your 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 202 of 278 
 
Department and that is why in terms of the processes that whilst people 
will say I don’t sign it will be once there is a recommendation it goes up 
until the MEC, the MEC may not be involved in the adjudication of 
tenders etcetera but once the appointment is to be made there would 
be this it would come that the – this is what the relevant committees 
etcetera that have you know and you would have the knowledge, it 
might come to your attention for you for attention so that you know 
what has happened, it may come also for you to make – to approve 
whatever they should have dealt with you know from where they are 
supposed to do so it is not correct that an MEC would claim that he did 
10 
not know or that it did not happen, you know exactly what happens in 
your department, otherwise it will be a person who ignores his 
responsibility, that is why I emphasized that Mr Zwana has an 
explanation to do and it would be in the best interests of this 
Commission considering that you are talking about there’s so many 
people, almost 14 000 units that would have covered so many families 
and so much money that we cannot get it this year when it happened in 
2010. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But also in regard to this project, if you can call it a 
project, he had the special interest in it if your evidence is true, 
20 
because he went to the extent of not going on holiday. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In order to put together a plan from what you say he 
said at the meeting. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Correct. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 203 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And he reported back. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   He reported back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It would be difficult to think that he stayed and 
worked and didn’t take a holiday but he didn’t know how, what the plan 
was and how the plan was implemented. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   It would be – if you were to say that it would 
be disingenuous of him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   I am just about to move to a new topic 
Mr Dukwana, the one that you referred to it as the ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Mokoena I see we are at something like two 
minutes to four, let’s talk about what’s going to happen.  I am able to 
sit beyond four but let’s just check and make sure that we are able to.  
From your side you are? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes Chair we find ourselves where there 
might be other issues of the Commission tomorrow so we are willing to 
20 
proceed and deal with this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, are you also okay? 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:    We are in agreement Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are in agreement, okay.  Mr Dukwana you are 
fine if we continue beyond four? 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 204 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Perhaps a tea break Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry, maybe a tea break would be appropriate, but 
before we take the tea break I just want to have an idea that we are 
coming back after the tea break to continue or not.  Mr Dukwana you 
are okay? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   I am okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, what is your estimate of how much time we 
need? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Chair the remaining topics are fairly 
straightforward and they are not as demanding as the ones we have 
10 
dealt with, no my sense is that we might need another hour, also if we 
can make sure that – we are dealing here with a witness that is a 
politician so if he sees a microphone it might be difficult also to deal 
with him Mr Chair so from time to time I am reminded as to how to lead 
such a witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, well I have had quite a number of occasions when 
I have also thought maybe I should intervene but it’s okay, so your 
estimate is we should be able to go up to five and finish. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   If we go up to five or six, there was one 
witness also which is simply a corroboratory witness, a very, very short 
20 
witness, and that is the one that is going to be led by my learned 
colleague and ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, that one would be about five minutes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   I think so yes, so for Mr Dukwane if we 
can do one hour or so. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 205 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, let’s take a short break, let’s take a short 
break, ten minutes or fifteen minutes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Ten minutes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ten minutes should do, okay, we will resume at ten 
past four.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes let us proceed. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Mr Dukwana we were now just 
10 
about to deal with your next topic which you can locate it from page 22 
from paragraph 74 referring to the housing heist through implementing 
agent.  Can you please proceed dealing with the relevant facts under 
that topic? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The – this… 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Can you switch on your microphone 
please. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Chairperson the – this one you have got not 
only the housing – in the Free State the implementing agents are all 
over and in some cases they speak to what I had raised earlier on of a 
20 
system that is there creating redundancy on the other hand of 
government departments.  You would have this case for instance in the 
FDC the – they use for – the FDC has a particular responsibility in the 
Free State and key to that would be to – it would deal with businesses 
in the province and development of also SMME’s etcetera.  In the – in 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 206 of 278 
 
doing with – in dealing with that because it became difficult to get more 
funding for this particular thing it then created a portfolio that deals 
with owning properties and managing properties to get resources that 
would add up to your coffers as FDC.  But unfortunately it did – it came 
out that the board decided that it will remove all those issues that were 
no core business in the FDC and part of it was properties.  So they 
started selling properties you know disposing of properties.  And 
unfortunately that was killing the – you know what was giving the 
money in terms of keeping to them and working out their mandates.  
But what is very interesting is once you do that you take your 
10 
responsibility that is not even your mandate for when the project in 
Vrede of 1000 houses could not be successfully completed the 
Department of Housing appointed FDC as an implementing agent. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you mean there was – there had been a decision 
to build 1000 houses in Vrede? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  There was a decision taken by the 
Department a long time ago to build houses in Vrede; a 1000 of those 
units. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  But the contractor that was appointed could 
20 
not do much and almost about 800 or so houses were left and you know 
were not built and as such [intervention]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were not completed? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Were not – not even built. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They were not even – the building did not even start? 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 207 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  No not – it had not started. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In regard to 800? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Almost 800 even more than 800. 
CHAIRPERSON: Almost 800 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And only about 200 were built? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Less than 200 yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And those were built to completion? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Some of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or maybe not – oh some of them. 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:    Some of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Then the – at the time the new board was 
appointed I think this year; the FDC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The new board; the FDC board? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes.  The old board had also Mr Mokhesi as 
a member of the FDC board.  Remember Mr Mokhesi is a Head of 
Department of Housing and then had the Chairperson of the board is 
Me Hantsi Mayeza. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  But while – while you are there is it 
20 
permissible – it is possible – how is it possible that Mr Mokhesi would 
be part of parcel of FDC? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I do not know but as I said anything in the 
Free State is normal. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Under which department did the FDC fall in terms of 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 208 of 278 
 
the provincial government? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Economic Development. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Economic Development. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And this – Mr Mokhesi was… 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  HOD. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the Human Settlements? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  In Human Settlements. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  In [indistinct] at some stage. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  As according to the information that also we 
collected was at some stage and a member of the board. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And you were saying who was the Chair 
at the time?  Who was the Chair? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It was Me Mayeza – Hantsi. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes okay.  Now in relation to paragraph 
78 you make mention of companies called Unitel Holdings as well as 
Mafuram. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Mokoena I think I interrupted Mr 
20 
Dukwana before he could complete a certain point he was making. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  About this project with a contractors having failed.  I 
thought he was [intervention]. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 209 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  He was in the middle of a sentence to say in the light 
of that failure what happened. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Of the? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of the contractors. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Of the Vrede. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To build the houses. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The Department felt that you needed to fast 
track the building.  Appointed FDC as an implement agent and – and in 
this case I pointed out that it is very interesting that the HOD then – 
10 
these responsibilities to deal with housing you have got COCTA 
somebody is their HOD and you have got requisite skill or skills in the 
Department in terms of people who would know who would have 
technical knowhow in terms of making sure that they follow up all these 
projects and report progress engineers etcetera.  Now taking this and 
taking it to FDC maybe when I left they amassed the skills that would 
allow them to be an implementing agent in the housing field wherein 
they – then what is very interesting is that the same – the details – this 
is something that I am driving to say.  It needs thorough investigation 
as to how and why was it allowed to happen?  The Chairperson of the 
20 
board has a company I think it is Moono or something; Moono, Moono.  
Is then appointed to complete the 800 units in – in Vrede. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In Vrede. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And nobody sees that as a problem.  I am 
the Chairperson of the board, I am appointed as an implementing agent 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 210 of 278 
 
and then my company gets business to go and [indistinct] and do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  From the board. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And the argument that would be going out 
and response the person would say I was not involved in the – in giving 
out the houses but this is what I am trying to say that once things start 
happening people do not even see when things are wrong.  And the 
question also is why would this be given to FDC when FDC did not 
possess the experience and the requisite skills that would be needed to 
monitor and deal with this project?  And there is no explanation 
Chairperson other than it was facilitated to ensure that it gets to the 
10 
Chairperson.  Other than that I cannot explain.  Because you cannot 
have this and then it happens this way and FDC cannot explain itself 
and I do not think FDC other than saying the person would arrogantly 
indicate that I was not part therefore there was no conflict of interest in 
this particular [indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well maybe before we proceed just tell me if you are 
able to.  This concept of an implementing agent if you are able to; 
where it comes from within government because when I was hearing 
evidence with regard to the Vrede Dairy Farm it came up.  We have not 
finished the evidence – I have not finished hearing the evidence of Mr 
20 
Thabethe who was the HOD of the Department of Agriculture at the 
time.  But I gained the impression rightly or wrongly that it may well be 
that at least that department I do not know whether the whole provincial 
government, that department may have been using implementing agents 
for purposes of bypassing or circumventing procurement procedures.  
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 211 of 278 
 
So – but I have not had a chance to ask Mr Thabethe where did this 
whole concept come from?  Did it come from the whole of government?  
Is it a known concept to say under certain circumstances a government 
department can resort to implementing agents or is it something that 
certain departments decided to do on their own?  Is it – are you able to 
say anything to me about this whole concept? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Mr Chairperson the – if I can indicate.  The 
Department of Public Works, the Department of Agriculture, the 
Department of Health, the – I think these are the department housing.  
These are the departments in the main in the Free State that are using 
10 
implement agents.  By way of example in fact you have a department in 
some instances the Department of Agriculture paid so much money in 
some instances almost about R905 million to some projects, to some 
companies implementing agents and the only reason that you can find 
this explanation Chairperson is to circumvent the supply chain 
provisions.  And what also is worrying in some instances there was a 
report for instance in the Department of Agriculture by the Auditor 
General who could not get into the – the finances of these 
implementing agents because they are private companies and the 
Auditor General cannot audit those private companies.  So the 
20 
Department will take their resources every – but whatever that is meant 
for projects, capital projects and they will take them to the 
implementing agent and the implementing agent would not necessarily 
follow processes, procurement processes or supply chain processes.  
Then they will appoint – so it is actually as you say it is a scheme in 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 212 of 278 
 
the province that syphon and takes money without accounting but you 
can justify that I gave the Department of Agriculture.  The Department 
of Agriculture gave about three implementing agents and I think it 
would be the cost for three years almost more than R3 billion.  And in 
terms of accounting the same person who was here could not do that 
because they were saying we gave the responsibility to the 
implementing agent and the Auditor General found it very difficult to 
audit and raised this matter.  But it is still continuing.  This is a 
problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but.I do not – I do not understand because the 
10 
Auditor General would be entitled to say you as the Department owe an 
explanation as to how this amount that you gave to somebody else was 
spent.  You cannot just give money and then wash your hands off it.  
This is tax payers’ money.  Where is the need to give the money to 
somebody else to do what your own department is supposed to do?  
Because I would imagine that if you are a Department of Agriculture for 
example or of housing you need to identify skills that the Department 
must have and skills that it must have in sufficient numbers in order to 
implement its progress.  And therefore generally speaking you should 
be able to have people who will implement your programs as a 
20 
department who would have the right skills.  It may be that in certain 
circumstances and maybe they should be really very rare where you 
might have to go outside but generally one would expect that you have 
people with skills to carry out your programs.  And therefore it becomes 
difficult to understand why is there a need for you to give a service 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 213 of 278 
 
provider to implement your own programs?  But also certainly now to – 
to say now you wash your hands off how that money has been used 
seems to be something else.  But your impression – is your impression 
that it might be used this concept of an implementing agent might be 
used to bypass or circumvent or avoid complying with procurement 
procedures as well? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Chairperson when I started I indicated that a 
system is built in the province and because there are no consequences 
once the Auditor General can make the findings that is why if you check 
you will find that the Province is actually not performing very well and 
10 
this also is extended to local government. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but is it your impression that is what I want to 
know? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  My impression is it is meant only to 
circumvent the supply chain processes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Supply chain – yes okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  There is no other explanation.  But as I was 
saying also in the local government they – they would have deviations 
which were meant – which are meant only for emergencies but people 
will have deviations just to avoid going through the process for 
20 
something that is not even urgent. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As far as you know from your experience in 
government you do not know of any prescripts that particularly allow 
this thing of implementing agents? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  No the time that we were there it was not a 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 214 of 278 
 
common occurrence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  So I would not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  But I think it would be there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Not at the scale that is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  At which it is happening now. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Happening in the Free State. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  You are referencing two companies in 
your statements.  The one called Unitel Holdings and Mafure who are 
also the beneficiaries according to you to the Housing Heist.  Are you 
able to tell us as to who are the individuals that might have been 
associated with these companies? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Mafure if I – let me read this?  It will be 
better that way to make sure that we keep to the time that we have. 
“There was also a company called Mafure with links to Ms Thoko Alice 
Malembe the daughter of Mr Magashule.  There was also a company 
called Unitel Holdings Limited with its principle place of business in 
20 
Wynberg in Johannesburg.  Mr Lian Ling Lee – Mr Lee and Ms Malembe 
are directors of this company.  For ease of reference annexed the DM – 
2DM18 a copy of the NHBRC form providing the directorship both 
Mafure and Unitel Holdings benefitted from the Housing Heist in the 
Free State. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 215 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Especially with regard to the Vogelfontein 
one. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Can you share with the Chair as to how 
would these entities or individuals have benefitted from this Housing 
Heist? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The – the issue is these matters will not be – 
they will not go for competitive bidding and – and the – it will then 
happen as you will see also in the – in Vogelfontein and in other areas 
that the – as you check number 80 where the modus operandi of the 
10 
Housing Heist was simple in the Free State.  The Free State Develop – 
Department of Housing would award a housing contract to build a 
certain number of units.  Not one unit is built and the Free State 
government – will – do not follow up to ensure that monies from the 
public purse are accounted for in compliance with the PFMA. In some 
instances houses would be built and not completed and would be 
handed over to a new contractor to complete. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And yet  
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not indicate in regard to this topic the years 
when this happened.  Which years are we talking about here? 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The – I think we – I am not sure exactly with 
the years at the moment Chairperson but the – I think it was early – 
early 2011/2012 somewhere there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but at that time Mr Mohkesi was he Head of the 
Human Settlement Department already? 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 216 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  When it started the Vogelfontein I think it 
started way back but he would have presided over it as it continues.  
You see like the houses in Vrede started 2013/2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would you have – would you remember around about 
which year he might have become HOD of that Department Mr Mohkesi 
or you would not? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I do not know.  I do not know really. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Well I am just thinking about what you 
say in paragraph 77 namely that Mr Mohkesi the very same HOD of the 
AFSDHS was a board member of the FDC but we know that at some 
10 
stage it was somebody else? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  No I am talking about the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So in 2010. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The time when this matter was referred when 
the FDC was appointed he was an HOD. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you do not remember when that was? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I think because the – it would be 2015/2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  But somewhere there 2016/2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay much later than 2010? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  You were still explaining to the Chair 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 217 of 278 
 
with reference to your paragraph 81 as to how would these entities 
benefit from the scheme. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The number 81 I say: 
“Alternatively the Department would appoint an 
implementing 
agent 
advance 
millions 
to 
the 
implementing agent and the latter would appoint 
service providers to build houses.  In many instances 
the directors of the companies rendering services in 
this regard who will persons politically associated 
with the Mr Magashule.” 
10 
The danger that you see in many of these it is like myself Chairperson.  
I would register a company, no skills whatsoever in terms of housing 
and then I would – I will be awarded with the tender to build let us say 
1000 houses or 500 houses.  Normally what these people would do they 
will then appoint a sub-contractor and in some instances you would just 
determine the amount if for instance I say all I need is R10 000 per unit 
without lifting a shovel [indistinct] and then the rest it is for you to 
complete and do – and make sure that you build these houses.  So I get 
the tender.  I am the person who applied.  I get the tender but the 
tender – I get the money.  The money that I will get is just R10 000 per 
20 
unit if you have it and then multiply by 1000 if those are the houses 
that I get that will be the money that will come to me and I would not 
have incurred any cost in terms of that then you would then appoint 
contractors.  People who know the job and they will be contractors and 
then they will complete and do the job.  In some instances because the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 218 of 278 
 
money that they have it is not enough to do this and also profit.  Here 
you tempting them to actually do some things that are not correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Some shoddy work. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I beg yours? 
CHAIRPERSON:  To do some shoddy work? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes they would – because you want also to 
live.  So that is what you would have in this.  And – so I am just saying 
this needs – this matter needs to be followed up thoroughly to get the 
role of the implementing agents and also people who are getting these 
tenders and check who then becomes the sub-contractor?  And what is 
10 
it that the person – yes the contractor did in the – in working in the 
project.  You would find it does not happen.  I mean you may have a 
company building a road and then sub-contracting some companies to 
do something but in this case in the housing some people – I just get 
the money and I stay and then you continue with whatever you have.  
And also because the company – the contract is written in my name and 
then I am the one who is buying the material I would then get 
something from that.  So would claim VAT for that.  So this is the thing 
that is happening in the province and I do not know whether it is 
prevalent in other provinces.  You have got qualified people, companies 
20 
that are ready to do the building but in some cases they will not even 
bother because they know they will not get the work.  And then you give 
people – I mean there are so many people you would see that they call 
themselves a business people but a person would not even have a truck 
etcetera.  They would be driving in these beautiful cars but they are in 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 219 of 278 
 
the construction business without any trucks to do the work.  So I am 
just saying in short this is what these things are all about. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And then the company that is called 
Major Bricks would it also be one of the beneficiaries to this scheme? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Can you tell us about it? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The – this is also the company that 
benefitted in houses in Bethlehem and also in houses in areas in 
10 
Virginia [indistinct] and Bothaville and you can go and check some of 
the shoddy work in those areas and poor people are made to sign 
happy letters Chairperson.  You eager – you staying in a shack and 
then the house you know they are roofing etcetera and then it is not 
completed and many other things are still outstanding but the 
contractor will come and say for me to have this sign a happy letter.  
And you can go and be security in this house.  We will finish some of 
the work while you there so that people do not cause problems with 
your house.  So poor some would then sign this not knowing that they 
are signing happy letters.  Happy letters would be that the house is 
20 
finished and everything is there and you are happy.  And in some 
instances for instance in [indistinct] and Bothaville people who were 
tasked in terms going out and checking these they are finding it very 
difficult to get this Mr Lee to repair some of the things and in some 
cases he has made some remarks that I would not repeat here 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 220 of 278 
 
Chairperson to those people who were tasked with this to make sure 
that they go and check these buildings. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  Now you – and who was the owner 
of Major Bricks? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Mr Jackie Gow[?]. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  At the time when it was still next to 
Hennaman. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  You conclude that topic with reference to 
page 25 paragraph 84 to 86. If you may take us through those 
10 
paragraphs? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Chairperson it needs to be emphasised that 
the implementing agency scheme in the Free State was operating in 
various departments and municipalities.  Central to it I was to transfer 
monies outside government department to an entity that would 
perpetually execute a project.  Once the funds have been placed with 
an implementing agent the latter appoints without a due process 
service providers and that is the beginning of the distribution of sharing 
ill-gotten tax payers’ money.  The feast commences and the indigence 
bear the brunt of those whose time it is to eat.  But the caveat was that 
20 
looting of the public purse at a scaling explicable has to be carried out 
to advance corrupt interest of our leaders such as Mr Magashule, Mr 
Zwane and others.  And Mr Lee has close links with Mr Magashule it is 
a known fact.  I cannot rule out the possibility that Mr Lee and Ms 
Malembe’s business ventures were facilitated and blessed by Mr 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 221 of 278 
 
Magashule especially going to Vogelfontein that if we were to invite the 
Mayor the then Mayor in the area in Bethlehem to come and deal with 
this and collaborate what I am saying Chairperson.  I invite the 
commission to investigate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is the name of the Mayor? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Tjhetane Mofokeng.  It is Mr Mofokeng. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Mofokeng? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And - and the name? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Tjhetane. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you.  Yes continue. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA: 
“I 
invite 
the 
Commission 
to 
investigate their business relationship and the 
circumstances that led to Government resorting to 
implementing agency scheme for services delivery 
purposes.” 
And this has to do with the departments that I have 
mentioned.  In some instances Chairperson you had people who were 
directors in some departments in some regions who would not do 
anything.  They - because the work that they were supposed to be 
20 
doing is now being carried by the implementing agents and some of 
these directors were coming to the office to sign leave forms and 
others. 
So that - that is the - the frustrating impact of all this.  The 
implementing agents (intervenes). 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 222 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So effectively with this - with the use of implementing 
agencies you could have a situation where personnel within the 
department who are supposed to do that job are not doing that job but 
that job is being done by an implementing agent and the department is 
basically paying two sources for the same job. 
Paying the officials that it employed to do this kind of job and 
paying the implementing - implementing agent? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Mr Chair before moving to a new topic 
10 
my learned colleague Mr Manyi has quite important information which is 
almost in line with the evidence that was given by Mr Dukwana 
pertaining to the application … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Which you were asking yourself 
questions as to what could have happened with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Maybe I should allow him … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Allow him to, yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  To just place it on record.  It is quite 
20 
important and … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  In all fairness as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Thank you Chair. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 223 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Chair it has since transpired that indeed the 
question that the Commission was puzzled with as to whether - what 
happened to the application that was brought to the High Court in Free 
State by the MEC Nthimotse Mokhesi.  That matter has been finalised.  
The order is indeed as follows Chair:  that the agreements and the 
decisions pertaining thereto are reviewed and set aside and bar for the 
second and 44 t h and 65 t h respondents in that application that actually 
wanted to proceed and challenge the issues on the merits in the court 
but for the other 103 - 102 applicants indeed the order was given and 
10 
the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  They did not oppose? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  They did not oppose. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  The date of the order is 26 August 2019.  It is 
(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  It is Monday this week? 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Indeed so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay.  Do you know whether it is just an order or 
there is a full judgment? 
20 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Chair I am not certain. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are not sure. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  This just came now … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, okay. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  To me as - as I have indicated earlier on.  
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 224 of 278 
 
This would have been part of the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Response if indeed Mr Mokhesi … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Had received a notice that he alluded to 
earlier on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No thank you very much.  That is useful information.  
Thank you. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Thank you Chair. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  It would be also interesting to lay our 
10 
hands to the judgment Chair to see … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes and - and all the papers. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  All the papers Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Now the next topic Mr Dukwana is 
Blacky Seoe not Sue as some of the people refer to him.  Now can you 
tell us about his relevance to the issues that are to be determined by 
this Commission and what you wish to highlight in relation to him. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  The - so when I was the MEC for Economic 
Development.  Mr Blacky Seoe was the Chairperson of the FDC. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just raise your voice a little bit again. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I am saying … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Bring … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  At the time when I was MEC at least up until 
2012 Mr Seoe was - Blacky Seoe was the Chairperson of the Board and 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 225 of 278 
 
it transpired that the - at the later stage what actually happened the 
FDC decided as I said earlier to dispose of the - some of the properties 
that they had.  It - it had ownership of filling stations.  It had buildings. 
It had also a number of student accommodation etcetera and 
those as I said were source of revenue for FDC.  I do not have the - the 
benefit of the reasons and the - the logic behind the FDC deciding this 
matter.  Probably the MECs that came after me would know why this 
matter that happened the way it happened and in - in the same vein 
Chairperson that some of these people then benefitted and some of 
these people that benefitted in the whole scheme of things are also in 
10 
some boards. 
They are either Chairperson or members of the boards in the 
Free State and the close knit group of people around Mr Magashule.  In 
this case he would have Mr Blacky Seoe who would have benefitted a 
lot in terms of the properties etcetera and we would know at some 
stage up until 2008 that Mr Blacky Seoe and Mr Magashule were part of 
the - were directors of a company called Sambal and - and at the time 
Chairperson when Mr Magashule was MEC for Sports Mr Blacky Seoe 
benefitted a lot in terms of promotion and using the Rob’s Promotion as 
the company and became the highest paying if you like or among the 
20 
highest paying promotors in boxing at the time but interestingly to note 
immediately Mr Magashule moved to the other department and 
Mr Khotso Sesiwe (?) came in, in the department. 
The - Rob’s Promotion just disappeared and then that would 
tell you the whole story and in this case Mr Glen Netshivhodza also 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 226 of 278 
 
being part of the times the Tourism Board etcetera a very close friend 
or very, very close person to Mr Magashule.  I know this for a fact 
Chairperson because I know Mr Glen Netshivhodza quite well and - and 
also Mr Magashule and their relationship coming back - far back from 
Parys etcetera and you will see the benefit in some of this and the - in 
fact there was student accommodation that were getting - were putting 
some income into this and at some stage these were given or 
supposedly purchased by Mr Netshivhodza and - and as such the FDC 
would not have enjoyed the benefits of the - using these you know 
monthly. 
10 
The income that it will come back into the coffers of the FDC.  
So I am just stating the fact that sometimes these things look innocent 
but the - these some of the things that need to be investigated 
thoroughly to understand why exactly this has happened and the - 
especially when you look into the Rob’s Investment portfolio.  It will be 
interesting Chairperson to note you know that from April 2018 to 
March 2019 Rob’s Investment Property had buildings like civilian 
building, housing social development. 
What the company benefitted through rentals from that period 
20 - April 2018 to March 2019.  It is almost 10 485 298 and the sitting - 
20 
social development it is 4 865 000 and you also have sitting economic 
development is there - the first floor - 379 000.  Silodal Education is 
there 6 540 000 and Alan Building Corporative Governance 13 359 000 
and then you have got Sambal Investment where Mr Blacky Seoe is 
also the owner. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 227 of 278 
 
You have Warden Building housing sports arts - six million, 
business partners’ sports arts - six million - 6.5.  Syfrets Building/Old 
Sanlam Building and all these from that period to this you are talking 
about almost 64 million. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Who - who would be the tenants of those 
buildings? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I - I said I was mentioning social - social 
development and arts… 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  It would be Government - Government 
departments? 
10 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes.  Government departments. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But - what - what page were you reading from. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  We - we do not have - we do not have 
the benefit of that information Mr … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I am trying to  
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To look for these figures. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I must - I must indicate - just to indicate 
Chairperson I think it - there was some miscommunication because 
even with my attorneys when we - when I met with the investigators of 
20 
the - of - of the Commission I - I gave them this information.  I - you 
know … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And unfortunately every time I was looking 
for it I thought - because they said they had given the information to my 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 228 of 278 
 
attorneys … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And - and this also led to this kind of a 
situation. 
CHAIRPERON:  Not being included? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Not being included. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And we preparing this … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  But I am just stating that … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I think if the Chairperson allows … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  We can ask my - my legal team to also 
prepare … 
CHAIRPERSON:  A supplementary … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  A supplementary … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  You know - affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That would have all these details written 
down and everything. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja that would - that would be … 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And if that is - is allowed Chairperson … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 229 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It would mean that we can leave this matter 
and I can provide a detailed … 
CHAIRPERSON:  A supplementary, ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  A very, very to the details as well as the 
implementing agents and how much … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  These implementing agents found … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA: 
 
Received 
from 
Government. 
So 
if 
Chairperson allows that.  That is what I will suggest we do. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  It may be very useful and important information.  The 
only thing is that if they do not know what it is there might be a 
problem but they - if they know what it is they might be able to say 
even if you talk to it now.  It is fine.  I would rely on them but if they do 
not know what information is they will - it will be better that a 
supplementary affidavit be done later. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  It will be better Chair because remember 
that when we - when we commenced with our opening … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  We referred to quite a number of 
20 
documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Notices. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Notices … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And also affidavits and I believe that … 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 230 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Mr Seoe is one of the people that 
reacted to also Mr Dukwana’s statement … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And those things have to be put to 
Mr Dukwana for him also to deal with them accordingly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  In all fairness so that we do not leave 
out any … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Affidavit of any witness and that he must 
(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is better to deal with it … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In a supplementary statement. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I would agree Chairperson with that and also 
because I was very reluctant in - in terms of also providing some 
information because it involves also some institutions … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  In terms of what has happened … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA: 
 
But 
safe to 
say 
in some 
instances 
Chairperson that what would be demonstrated will be company A the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 231 of 278 
 
same company.  Company A would have this and then the holding 
company.  You buy a building say for 29 million.  You sell it to your own 
company for eight - 89 million.  You approach the - the bank and then 
you bond the property for 200 million. 
So I am just saying these are some of the things that I think 
not referring to any particular person here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I am saying one thing that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  A practice? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I would have provided in terms of the 
10 
information that we have … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And that is why I am saying for all these 
people in fairness to many of these people … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  If I can be allowed to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Put in a supplementary affidavit … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  That will also be fair to some of the people 
20 
that are … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Are mentioned here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is fine.  That is the arrangement. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes.  From para - yes. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 232 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I - I think it looks like we - we all agree that that is 
the better route to follow. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Yes Chair.  It - it is and I did intimate to 
Mr Mokoena that we have obtained … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Further information. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Further information … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Part of it I think Mr Dukwana deals with in his 
supplementary statement … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  And I think it would be - we have already 
contacted the investigation team … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  To - to get information from us … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  And I think by way of a supplementary 
statement it was (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  It should be fine. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  But it is quite voluminous … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
20 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Of the implementing agents. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  It is as recent as last June. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  It is as recent as June … 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 233 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  As June. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Chairperson … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  And Mr Dukwana will deal with some of the 
aspects as we go on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SMANGA SITHINI:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  No that is fine.  Thank you. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Sorry Chair on that note the - and I am sorry 
to interject Chair.  The version has been - a different version has been 
10 
provided in the statement of Mr Seoe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  Referencing certain paragraphs … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  That he was referred to, to respond to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  That Mr Dukwana indeed has alluded to.  So 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  It would only be fair … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  If indeed that version was placed before 
Mr Dukwana … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  And it will address some of the confusion that 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 234 of 278 
 
is now emanating … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MZWANELE MANYI:  From the evidence that he is now giving.  
Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I am sure Mr … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Chair we are aware about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  The only problem that we operate within 
the rules … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And those documents that were received 
were as a very - were received this week some of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Others last week Friday … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And with all fairness to Mr Dukwana or 
anyone else one could not even have dealt with them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There has not been enough time. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Definitely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  If we were provided with this information 
within the time prescribed one would understand … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  What is being conveyed to you now … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 235 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  But in all fairness all that we said we 
said we will compile all the documents relevant.  We will make them 
available to Mr Dukwana and he will react according to them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And - and he can - he can if necessary file an 
affidavit that responds to … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Definitely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To that and then if - if there is a need he can come 
back to deal with all of those issues. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And not only that.  It will also be fair and 
interesting … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  To have those that are submitting letters 
and affidavits … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  To avail themselves to the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Let them come and sit like Mr Dukwana.  
Let them be confronted with the issues arising from there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  That will also give common sense and 
20 
meaning to this paramount concept of fairness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN PERSON:  Chair … 
CHAIRPERSON:  No that is - that is fine. 
UNKNOWN PERSON:  Chair … 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 236 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN PERSON:  The - the notices were received as we indicated 
yesterday that were received only on the 17 t h of August and they were 
responded to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN PERSON:  And there indeed also tabulate as to what 
options are available to the receiving party of that notice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN PERSON:  If indeed one decides to respond to that in a 
form of a statement … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN PERSON:  It is also very acceptable because it is an option 
that is availed … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN PERSON:  To their response.  So  
CHAIRPERSON:  I - I … 
UNKNOWN PERSON:  (Intervenes) what Mr Mokoena saying … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN PERSON:  As far as availing themselves and being 
subjected to cross-examination or whatever. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
UNKNOWN PERSON:  They have exercised (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  I think - I think the bottom line is that what 
Mr Mokoena is saying is those statements have been received.  There 
may be something about when they were received but he is saying 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 237 of 278 
 
there has not been enough time for - for them to be given to 
Mr Dukwana to consider them but also part of what the legal team and 
the investigators are supposed to do after receiving such responses is 
to see whether there is anything to investigate in relation to the 
contents of those statements and - and when that has been done then 
they come back to the legal team to say okay this is what we find about 
what is said here. 
Maybe this is true or this is not true.  This we are not sure 
about.  So when it is put to the witness it - it ensures that there is 
fairness.  I think what - what he is simply saying is yes and opportunity 
10 
will be created but it might not be the right time now because there has 
not been enough time for Mr Dukwana to consider them. 
UNKNOWN PERSON:  Accepted Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
UNKNOWN PERSON:  But the time the horse has already bolted and … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well no, no, nobody can - nobody can - can say that 
your client’s version would have been put to Mr Dukwana as of today if 
it is not put but I think that most of the time what we have heard since 
last year is that the versions have come later than the time when the 
witness has given evidence because even those who apply for leave to 
20 
cross-examine usually they - they come late and so on. 
I think as long as the public understands that there is another 
version that - that maybe coming or that is - that will be put to him. 
UNKNOWN PERSON:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 238 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Chair also to clarify one or two things.  
Mr Blacky Seoe was served with a Rule 3.3 (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your voice has gone down again. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  He was - he was served with a 3.3 
Notice on 1 August. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  26 days before today’s hearing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  He was consulted with … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  By the investigators on three occasions 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And I think we should place those on 
record … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  And the statement that we are receiving 
now is - we will leave it there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Let us leave it on the basis that I have indicated. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us leave it on that basis. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  But there are facts to deal with these 
things. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  We are at 5 o’ clock.  Let us … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Move on Chair. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 239 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us try and - and finish because I think we … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are close to finishing. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  We are. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  From page 27 paragraph 92 you are then 
dealing with a person who is a former - who is the former employee of 
the Free State Legislature.  Can you give us the name and give us the 
context upon which we have to understand your evidence? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  You said from page? 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Page 27 paragraph 92 Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  To paragraph 95. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I - I thought Chairperson … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  This will also include in terms of what we 
have agreed on … 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Because it falls into the element of the 
properties.  So that we give all the details. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, oh. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  So I will suggest that this - this should be … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You deal with it later? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  We will deal at some point. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 240 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. That is fine. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Alright.  We can now move to the 
concept that might be known to many.  Starting from page 28 at your 
paragraph G and it is Operation Hlasela and you can tell the Chair 
about it and its relevance to your testimony. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Chairperson sometime in 2009 after the 
elections the Premier of - the newly elected Premier Mr Magashule 
ordered all members of the Executive Committee that were newly 
appointed as members of the Executive Committee to attend a service 
that was held in Bloemfontein by a church called (indistinct).  An 
10 
Apostolic Church and during that there was a big banner - that was 
2009. 
There was a big banner that was written Operation Hlasela 
one million members by December 2009 and after the - the service 
when … 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you were an MEC at the time? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes.  We were … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You attended. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  We were newly appointed MECs … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  In 2009 and then the - I am just scratching 
the origin of this thing - and Mr Magashule noticed that and when it was 
time - when he was given an opportunity to address the congregates he 
then asked permission from the head of the church to use the operation 
Hlasela. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 241 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  The name or - that phrase? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes and it was granted and then because he 
was saying this Government who use to - to - Hlasela is to attack. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  So it would be used to attack poverty, crime 
everything … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Huh-uh. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  And then when we came back there was this 
10 
Operation Hlasela.  It was all over.  When we started we would - 
departments would be asked that - if it goes to Welkom for instance 
departments asked to indicate what is it that they would contribute in 
terms of development in the area and so departments will - will then do 
that. 
That as - as when he started earlier and what was very 
interesting in that was the fact that the Premier of the Free State - the 
then Premier of the Free State would be having this mic and some 
people would come and then a person would say I am so and so.  I 
have a degree in sports management and all this and the person would 
20 
then be there and there you would be told you are - you are appointed. 
Come - go to this department and then they would deal with 
the matter or some people would then write the details - who - 
everything.  So it created the whole excitement that you got a person 
who moves - who is moving, who is implementing but it was made 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 242 of 278 
 
difficult for officials because at the time all of you as MECs, officials, 
senior officials you must be there and when this thing happens. 
So it created quite a problem and at the time then the ANC 
then wanted to deal with the matter so that you give it content and the 
Secretary at the time was Comrade Besani - Sibongile Besani. We - we 
tried to - to bring - to bring some content into that and - and make sure 
that it is about coordination of Government work and make sure that 
you destroy these laws and make sure that Government works as 
Government not department going there but little did we know that it 
was not this noble idea. 
10 
It is actually to centralise everything in this office.  For 
instance I will make an example in the department that I - you know - I 
headed.  It will be as we - one understood that as an MEC you are 
actually playing your role of advising the Premier.  It is your 
responsibility to protect the Premier and make sure whatever comes to 
the perennial head of Government at the time is processed properly and 
this is what we thought we would do and do that but it was difficult 
because Mr Magashule the Premier then would meet with the officials 
without us knowing. 
We would be there with - some would not even be the HODs 
20 
in the department.  It would be people who are - you know - appointed 
to deal with Hlasela Projects.  In the case - in my case for instance 
when the project was going to Hlasela was visiting - they have about 
five towns and the - the late Dr Mathebula then came to me to say he 
was from a meeting and the meeting wanted - in the meeting they were 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 243 of 278 
 
told by the Premier that they must contribute and the department was 
supposed to contribute 50 000 per town for - for car washes and when 
they came to me demanding that I advised them that I will speak to the 
Premier. 
I did that exactly to say we cannot do this in this particular 
way.  He created some problems but what I am trying to say is this is 
what you would find that Hlasela ended up not being what the concept 
that you see there that I have indicated that - that it - it will - it was 
meant to facilitate good governance, effective leadership, effective 
service delivery, coordination of activities, to make sure that services 
10 
are delivered. 
Instead it ended up ensuring total control of public 
procurement by the - by the Premier.  It became clear that the Premier 
wanted to know exactly what each department was doing and make sure 
that you know - so - and you are able to direct everything and make 
sure that you are in control and - and it - it goes as I am saying this 
Operation Hlasela. 
In some instances it affected Local Government.  We ended up treating 
Local Government as we are a big brother as the province and at any 
given time a meeting will be called and then all CFOs or all Municipal 
20 
Managers and Mayors are called.  So you leave whatever.  You come 
over.  It was not something that will be properly planned.  Respecting 
this other sphere of Government and what the Constitution stipulated 
that you need to - it has a role to play and also you do not need to be 
encroaching into the space of the other sphere of Government but from 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 244 of 278 
 
time to time provincial government needed to help the municipalities in 
terms of dealing with their work and you needed also to have that inter 
relationship between National, Provincial and Local Government but as 
I am saying Hlasela destroyed all that. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Now tell me in terms of the 
appointments that you alluded to that you will be required or instructed 
to make will there be any processes that are followed, were there any 
vacancies for those positions? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   You know I remember when we had a 
meeting in Welkom of the unemployed graduates, the hall was filled, 
10 
the hall was full, and everyone would raise whatever they have 
everything and all that and people will be promised you must go there, 
you must go there, you must go there.  In one occasion Chairperson I 
was confronted by people who were appointed at Operation Hlasela 
meeting, who came to the department and they were saying they are 
sent, they must start today and at the time there were no 
advertisement, there was on vacancy and all I did was to say I did not 
appoint you, did you see me, the department having an advertisement, 
no, but now how do you come, you have never been, you have never 
gone to an interview. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You have never applied for a job. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   You have never applied ,you have not gone 
to an interview, but here you come and you want to, you say you were 
sent and then I sent them to the Premier, I even phoned him to say 
there are two people who are here and then I am sending them, he said 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 245 of 278 
 
please attend to them, I said I can’t, I don’t have any space.    
 
So I am just saying this was a noble idea when it started, but 
...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Were they not sent to at least, at these Hlasela 
meetings was did the Premier maybe not say please go to that 
department and see whether there’s a vacancy and so that you can 
apply and then – and so on, did he say you are appointed, you are 
going to start on that and that day? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   In some instances Chairperson they would 
say you, if you say and then you come and say I have this and you say 
10 
okay go to department so and so, in some instances okay you may 
start, you are appointed, and you could see the excitement in the hall, 
people had worked out that yes the Premier is working, you are 
appointed in this, you are appointed, in some instances I think it also 
became unbearable to him to realise that it is not sustainable to deal 
with the matter in that fashion but as I am saying it became very 
difficult also to protect the Premier in the sense that when you get into 
– he will be the one who introduces his team, he will be the one who is 
the project you know as MEC of the whole event, from morning up until 
we leave it will be him with the mic and engaging people, so it became, 
20 
it created a cult if you like, he was then seen as this person who is a 
mover, who is doing all these things, but the unfortunate thing you were 
putting MEC’s in a corner, MEC’s in the department would not have 
budgeted anything for that particular area, you get into a hall and the 
MEC of Public Works sees that hey there’s something wrong here, and 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 246 of 278 
 
when she is asked because we were made to stand up and say this is 
what I will do and this is what I will do and then a person will stand up 
and say no I am going to fix this hall, I am going to do this, I am going 
to do that, and I mean it became a mockery if you like, and this is the 
problem that we experienced and even if we tried but it was working for 
him in terms of you know creating that euphoria and people getting 
excited, it was good for that, but unfortunately it was a nightmare for 
even administrators in terms of what you need to do, but also causing 
problems, because we would have a person in a particular space, who 
has been in the department quite a long time, no promotion, you come 
10 
in and then you appoint a Deputy Director or something without going 
through the processes so I am just saying this became a problem, this 
operation Hlasela instead of helping but for other people out there as it 
was an excitement, it created excitement. 
 
It created you know in some instances Chairperson in Virginia 
just to make an example, a painful experience you know happened.  
There is a mother who is saying with a family etcetera in a shack and 
across the street it is a two-roomed house and a shack and because it 
was decided that we are going to destroy the two-roomed houses and 
then build the better houses for these people and this mother when 
20 
people were destroying you know the Premier would get into this 
Gandaganda and get into the house and destroy the house. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The Premier would drive the tractor? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   He will be there Chairperson, demonstrating 
and then he goes there and destroys this and people are excited.  This 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 247 of 278 
 
mother then said why don’t you take my side and build a house there 
and move me from this mukuku and please and get me this two-roomed 
at least, but you know you could not, we could not answer these 
because already the house was done. 
 
So I am just indicating ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Were the shacks being destroyed before another 
house is being built or what? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Well you get there Chairperson, you don’t 
have the (indistinct) of a house etcetera, you get there just to 
demonstrate that you are going to work and then you would be told we 
10 
will get accommodation somewhere for you.  In some instances we had 
families that stayed longer because these were not forthcoming, but as 
I am saying it is – it would happen in some areas, in some areas when 
some of the things worked and things were, people would be happy but 
in some cases you will find we will leave, there’s excitement when we 
are there, we leave and nothing actually happens, even people who 
were promised that they will go back and do this and do this it will not 
be done. 
 
So I am just saying this created a lot of problem for us as 
MEC’s and for administrators but it was a noble idea and planned 
20 
properly it would have helped the Province. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Yes you are touching also on a topic 
which the Chair have heard from many witnesses in other streams 
pertaining 
to 
the 
TNA, 
and 
how 
the 
media 
communications, 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 248 of 278 
 
procurement of these people were sourced, we can deal with that within 
the context of the Free State and what you know.  
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   If the Chairperson allows ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   ... there’s detailed information with regard 
to this, I would suggest that would outline everything, I would suggest 
that from this file we prepare something instead of dealing with it 
piecemeal. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay, no that’s fine. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   And the next topic, the Executive 
10 
Council Meetings, you did allude to it but I think you might want to 
elaborate on that topic. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you deliberately skip the other topics or he has 
dealt with them ...(intervention)  
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   No he has dealt with them Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh and the scholarship, okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  It is Operation Hlasela. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think there is somebody who wishes to say 
something? 
ADV SMANGA SETHENE:    I think he skipped page (indistinct – 
20 
microphone off) Commissioner. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  No that is still coming.    
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   G was Operation Hlasela, H that is 
where we are Chair. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 249 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   And that is what I suggested I asked 
Chairperson that if I can be given the permission to provide detailed 
information. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   And that’s why then I went to I. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We have agreed that Media and Communications will 
be dealt with later because you want to supply more information. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   And that’s why Chair we are then on 
page 30. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes sir. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Then that’s I? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes sir. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Chairperson in times of the Constitution and 
also what governs the Province as the Executive Council would be your 
cabinet and people who sit in Executive Council would be people who h 
20 
have taken a oath of confidentiality and all those things. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   And that would be the MEC’s and the 
Director General and a person would be appointed as a Secretary of 
the – of the Executive Council.  My experience throughout, I have 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 250 of 278 
 
served in a number of these with a number of other Premiers, but when 
it came to 2009 in this case Chairperson you would have just to protect 
the Executive there were processes that would be put in place, sub-
committees of cabinet or of Executive Committee etcetera and making 
sure you process anything that needs to serve before the Executive 
Council.   
 
Something very strange started happening, in this case you 
would have an Exco meeting starting at nine o’clock ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  In the morning? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   In the morning, that’s every second 
10 
Wednesday, it starts at nine o’clock and once you are there you will 
find that you have HOD’s, CFO’s in the meeting, huge, you know huge 
church now and you then get people coming in to make presentations.  
Business people would come in and make presentation and in some 
instances you would see that there was contact between these people 
and the Chair and the person who is chairing, in this case the Premier, 
and they will always come from the Office of the Premier, meaning they 
would have started there and the Premier would then take them to the 
Executive Council so what would then happen in those meetings you 
would make a presentation, you listen to presentations Chairperson, I 
20 
am not exaggerating this, from nine o’clock and in some of these cases 
ten o’clock up until four o’clock, you listening to presentations, people 
present and they leave and then the impression created at that time is 
that the officials who are there and then as the Chair I then say to you, 
say you come and introduce that you can construct a road using this 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 251 of 278 
 
particular method etcetera and the question would then come in after 
interrogation, after presentation if we are to give you something, a 
space there and you pilot this, would you agree to such a thing, and 
ultimately the business person will say yes, and now you’ve the MEC, 
you’ve got the  HOD, you’ve got the CFO, they’re sitting there and once 
the person is then, once he agrees and then refer to the HOD, the 
problem that the person had agreed to do you know a pilot so you are 
sent to a department to facilitate that, so the HOD would not say no, 
the MEC’s were there, the executive was there, so they would then take 
the matter and you start doing the work and before you know this 
10 
company would have been appointed without following processes 
etcetera and do some work, but what actually also created problems is 
that after that when you now go down we normally said start, you go to 
the eighth floor and then when you go to the Executive Council you go 
to the fourth floor, and then you would be sitting as an executive and 
you will not take matters that were coming from there, from the 
presentations that you – you start with the Agenda of the Council and 
you finish with the Agenda, but you would see things starting to happen 
and people would do things and you will see my problem with this and I 
also raised this specifically with the Chair to say we  need to avoid and 
20 
work because there were committees established, so whoever wanted 
to come and make a presentation must start there, so let’s you know 
you process everything ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Should start with a sub-committee. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Go to the sub-committee and the sub-
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 252 of 278 
 
committee will be the one that will come and make a submission and 
come and make this submission to the Executive.   The sub-committee 
will determine whether this matter needs to be dealt with in a particular 
way without it serving before the Executive.  Without that, without that 
processing opportunity you are opening the Executive Council to a 
whole range of things and that was the problem that we experienced, 
but every time the – you raise the matter the then Premier would say 
this is – you cannot control me, you know you want to manage me, this 
is my way of doing things, you better wait for your moment, so at the 
end you decide you know ...(intervention)  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that wait for your moment to be Premier or what? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes, yes, and for now it is being controlled. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   So allow me to do as I feel, and this also as 
way of an example Chairperson, and I think the – what I am saying 
calling MEC’s that were there would also confirm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I have heard evidence, I think in relation to 
either it might not be Vrede, I think it may have related to the Aviation 
Sector I have had evidence which is along those lines, that there would 
sometimes be meetings of the Executive Council that would start – or 
20 
maybe I am getting confused, but I heard evidence along the lines that 
an Executive Council meeting would start at nine am and would take 
the whole day if not more and at those Executive Council meetings 
people outside of the government would come and would attend 
sometimes, so I am just not sure whether it may have been Free State 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 253 of 278 
 
or whether it was North-West, but I seem to think it was the Free State. 
 
Yes, okay, alright. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Yes, that was our experience Chairperson 
and the Executive would go up until very late, dealing with the matters, 
but what I wanted to as a way of an example how compromised the 
Executive Council would be, in one instance Chairperson as an 
example without also mentioning names, there was a project that was 
suggested, it was dealing with speed boats, and you have an entity 
called Pakisa Major Sports Events that would deal with such issues but 
the person who was in the marketing ...(intervention)  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am look at Mr Mokoena and your counsel 
...(intervention)  
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   I was getting worried. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   No, no I am not, I am just making an 
example. 
CHAIRPERSON:  (laughing) maybe it should be dealt with later if it is 
going to mention entities names.  I think ...(intervention)  
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   No, all I needed to say Chairperson there 
was a decision that was taken on the matter and without the matter 
being discussed in the Executive Council.  It was skipped for whatever 
20 
reason and later when the Chairperson was about to close the MEC of 
Finance indicated that we have an outstanding matter that was not 
dealt with and the Chairperson just said maybe you were not listening 
or you were outside and when he said it was not discussed he said 
according to me this matter was discussed, so the Executive Council, 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 254 of 278 
 
the decision then stood as the Executive has discussed the matter and 
it had financial implication that matter, but later on during the meeting 
of the Budget Committee the same matter that had served before the 
Executive Council, with a request of a particular amount, two days later 
the amount was – it was R600 000 but the amount when it went to the 
Budget Committee was a million, so I am just saying these are some of 
the ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  The way of doing things. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   The way of doing things without following 
process and undermining your processes and I think these are the 
10 
problems that we are sitting with and the Executive Council and how it 
operated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes.  You are dealing with another 
topic, of the sanitising of forensic reports.  Explain how this had 
happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What part is that? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   On page 31 Chair, paragraph J. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Paragraph J. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Chairperson I wanted to ...(intervention)  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry, I just want to, page 31? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  That is at paragraph J, the topic is 
starting there Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The topic there is Executive Council meetings. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   No J, page 31, three one Chair. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 255 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you see I don’t have page 31, I have got page 13 
to 33. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   I am not sure how that happened Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well maybe deal with it whilst somebody is getting me 
the page.  Continue, yes. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:   Chair maybe it’s for a good cause that you 
do not have it, in fact through you I want to find out (indistinct)  
CHAIRPERSON:  If we can deal with it some other time? 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Yes, because there is a detailed letter from 
Mr Fivaz that seems to shed light as to what might have happened. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay, so I guess then let’s deal with it another 
time. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   That is fine Chair, that is in order, as 
long as the legal team of the witness has seen that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Not only Mr Fivaz but I think Mr 
Ramathi has also (indistinct) to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   And then let’s deal with the one on page 
31, international scholarship program, anything that you wish to 
20 
highlight to the Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where are we now, are we now coming to the 
conclusion? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   On page 31, no Chair there is one topic 
before the conclusion, page 31. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 256 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Page 31 oh that is the one I don’t have, give it to me. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   You will see there is a topic 
...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  I had seen such a page. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh no this is page 32 that looking at, oh it’s 31 but 31 
has been written, one has been written in a way that – maybe I have 
got it, it’s just that I am misreading it. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   It is that time of the day Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I don’t have it, but I think I did see it.  Okay, 
10 
alright continue, let’s try and finish, 
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:   Chair may I just indicate in the same vein 
that the previous topic has been decided to be shifted or be put in 
abeyance pending the letters that gives a different version, in the same 
breath there has been a version, a detailed version that has been 
procured for the evidence leaders and of course Mr Dukwana legal 
representative, exactly dealing with this aspect as well, we don’t know 
whether indeed they have had sight of it or they also want to you know 
leave it for later determination, I don’t know, but there has been a 
version that has been given detailed with all annexures. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think maybe let’s deal with it some ...(intervention)  
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Is it K Mr Chair? 
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:   Indeed , by the DG. 
CHAIRPERSON:  K, international scholarship ...(intervention)  
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  Indeed so ja. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 257 of 278 
 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:    Chairperson can I ask something?  In 
dealing with that in that particular matter in that particular way can we 
also ask that the following things that would instead of rebutting and 
doing all that, that the following information should be provided to the 
Commission that would help in fact for instance the policy outlining this 
scheme, the Bursary, and I think it would help a lot if we get that 
...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, that’s ...(intervention)  
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:    With all the issues that we are raising. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That’s fine, I think what should happen is mention to 
10 
your legal team the kind of information that you believe would be 
necessary and they will share that with the Commission’s legal team 
and the Commission would try and get it from the Free State Provincial 
Government so that then the Commission could have a full picture but 
let’s not bother to itemise what information would be required now, if 
that can be done ...(intervention)  
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  Chair if I may assist the response that has 
been provided is detailed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It might have some of ...(intervention)  
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  It has almost everything that Mr Dukwana 
20 
wants to be canvassed in that report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but whatever else is required you would 
cooperate to ...(intervention)  
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:   Indeed so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 258 of 278 
 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   It makes our duties simple Chair, then 
we don’t have to deal with the topic on the letter K, and that concludes 
Mr Dukwana’s evidence but I would like for him to deal with this 
conclusion from page 33, paragraph 117 Mr Dukwana. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What page? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Page 33 Chair, I hope you are having it, 
page 33. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that the conclusion? 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay, let him deal with the conclusion.   
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:   Mr Dukwana. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Chairperson thank you for this opportunity, I 
believe that as one person who had worked in the Province, stayed 
there, and also in the leadership, both of the Party and the 
Government, I am well versed with the affairs of the Province and how 
the system has concealed corruption and also encouraged it to happen 
and I would anticipate that it would be difficult for the Commission to 
get any cooperation from the Free State Government and as well as 
from the officials who would want to – I am raising this matter that even 
as late as yesterday some of the people were calling me to say we 
20 
would like if there was an opportunity for the Commission to hear some 
of the information that we have in camera, we can provide such 
information, but people would like to give some information to us and 
because they are afraid of the consequences that might follow, 
especially with regard to officials. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 259 of 278 
 
 
As I explained the other day that if you – if a person were to 
come here as an official and say things that are not accepted they 
would find a way of suspending the person and they would make it very 
difficult for the person as I say, people believe that because I am in 
government I have you know an access to resources that is unparallel 
and you as an ordinary member you would suffer because you would be 
using your own resources, so I am just asking that it could also be 
helpful and – but also I think the Free State situation that involves also 
the administration at the Local Government level you would know that 
with the reports that have been released we are performing very bad, 
10 
and in fact technically I must say Chairperson we – you don’t have a 
government in the Free State and I would suggest you know just putting 
to the Commission to raise the issue that if this matter, if the 
Commission has to do some thorough work in terms of helping the 
process and rebuilding that trust in terms of government you need the 
President of the Republic needs to act in terms of Section 100 of the 
Constitution and put the entire province under administration. 
 
It has happened in Limpopo and I do not understand why the 
Free State as we see, only the Department of Finance it was Health 
and as well as Education at some stage were put under administration 
20 
but I am just saying if we are really serious about dealing with this and 
uprooting them there is a need for the President to think of applying 
Section 100 of the Constitution and put the entire province under 
administration.  In this way a multi-disciplinary team of untainted and 
independent professionals with no links to Mr Magashule and his 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 260 of 278 
 
network be put in charge of the government affairs and render 
assistance to the Commission. 
 
I can tell you that you will unearth many things that you know 
many people will be surprised that these things do happen. And the 
principal aim of the team would be to audit every contract in the 
government departments, State entities and municipalities in the Free 
State. Without such assistance or intervention, I’m afraid to say that 
the Commission will be constrained in its performance of its 
Constitutional obligation. I have spoken to a number of government 
officials in the Free State province and they are eager to provide 
10 
information or render assistance to the Commission. Their only fear is 
that there is no independent vehicle through which they could be of 
assistance to the Commission and this is my humble plea in conclusion, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, you very much Mr Dukwana. I have, I have 
identified a special task team that is dealing with the Free State and 
reporting directly to me. And in regard to the Free State and both Mr 
Mokoena and Ms Rangata are part of the test team. They are also 
investigators. We might have to add more; the investigators are not 
many that have to report directly to me about whether there are, how 
20 
the investigations are going and if there are challenges report directly 
to me. So, I know that for a number of months you and your legal team 
have been very helpful to the Commission. Please share with them 
whatever it is that you have in mind could be done to get more 
information including the issue of officials who wants to assist the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 261 of 278 
 
Commission but who may be scared of certain things. And they’ll report 
back to me and so that we find a way of making sure that we can get as 
much information as possible. Ja, okay.  
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  I will do that Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  That concludes the evidence of Mr 
Dukwana. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  We have one short witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  Ms Mokalobe who will be dealt with by 
my learned colleague, Ms Rangata. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I know that we always had in mind that there 
would be that witness but I wonder whether. I know it’s a very short 
witness. Maybe he or she will be five minutes and maybe ja. 
ADV PHILLIP MOKOENA SC:  She is short. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think we will excuse Mr Dukwana. You are excused 
Mr Dukwana. 
MR MXOLISI DUKWANA:  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe we’ll take that witness and from what I know 
20 
the witness will talk about, it shouldn’t really be more than five 
minutes. Okay, Ms Rangata? 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Good afternoon, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good afternoon. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you very much. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 262 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Call the witness. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Our next witness is Ms Mokalobe, 
Mpolokeng Mokalobe.  
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  You will have to spell the name and 
surname. We haven’t been doing that with Mr Dukwana. The 
transcribers will have to talk to. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To you people to make sure that what they will write 
10 
there is something we can recognize. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Her name is Mpolokeng M P O L O K E N G. 
her surname is Mokalobe M O K A L O B E.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, that’s fine. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Mpolokeng Mokalobe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. Administer the oath or affirmation. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you, Chair.  
REGISTRAR:  Please, please state your full name for the record. 
20 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  My name is Mpolokeng Mokalobe. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the prescribed oath? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  No, I do not have any problem. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on your 
conscious? 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 263 of 278 
 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Yes, I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give will be the 
truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth? If so, please raise your 
right hand and say so, help me God. 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  So, help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you very much, Chair. I know that 
we’ve got challenges; it’s been a long day. I’m going to try and be to 
the point. Ms Mokalobe, thank you very much for coming. I know that 
your evidence is quite limited. I’m going to take you through the, Chair 
10 
we are going to be taking this witness through a document called with 
your leave if we can label it. It’s marked Exhibit 6, X6. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The file containing the affidavit. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes, the affidavit of Ms Mokalobe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of Ms Mpolokeng Mokalobe will be marked Exhibit X6. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you very much. Ms Mokalobe, you’ve 
got the Annexure X6 in front of you. Can we please go to page 1? If you 
look at the document on your extreme upper right side there are 
20 
numbers there. It’s MM01. I’ll just say one when I called the number. 
So, that’s page 1. 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Okay. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Can you identify that document for us? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  It’s an affidavit that was undersigned 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 264 of 278 
 
by Mpolokeng Mokalobe under with the ID 76091306… (intervenes). 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Is that your details? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Ja, those are my ID numbers. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you. If you turn to page 8, are you 
there? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Yes, I am there.  
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes, there is a signature there is just under 
that is all I wish. Is that your signature on page 8? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Yes, that’s my signature. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, there are three signatures there on that page. 
10 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  I beg your pardon, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  There are three signatures on that page. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which one are you talking about? 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  There’s one just after the sentence that is 
all. That is the first signature. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The first signature on the page? 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  On the page yes, Chair. On page 8. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Whose signature is that?  
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  That is my signature. 
20 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  The second signature just almost in the 
middle of the page. Is that your signature? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  It’s my signature. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you. I would want to believe that 
you’ve read the document. Do you agree to the contents and the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 265 of 278 
 
correctness and truthfulness of the document? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  I agree to the contents. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you. Chair, I’m going to take this 
witness through this… (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  You, I’m sorry. You deposed to this affidavit on the 
12 t h of August 2019. Is that right? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  That is right, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. Yes, Ms Rangata? 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you. I’m on page 1 of the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Under paragraph two, can you just read it 
into the record? I depose… 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  I depose to this affidavit with the aim 
to provide the Commission of Inquiry into State Capture with 
information at my disposal in relation to my knowledge about the City of 
tomorrow project. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you. So, your evidence today will be 
restricted and limited only to that aspect relating to the City of 
tomorrow. 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Yes, Chair. 
20 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you very much. What are you doing 
currently? What is your position currently? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry, Ms Rangata. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Isn’t her evidence simply about identifying whether a 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 266 of 278 
 
certain signature is Mr Dukwana’s signatures? 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you must just go there. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You must indicate if she knows Mr Dukwana’s 
signature, how she knew it and. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And indicate which one whether a particular one is Mr 
Dukwana’s signature. So, that’s all we need. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you, Chair. From the evidence that 
10 
you, sorry from your affidavit you’ve indicated that you consulted with 
investigators of the Commission. 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Oh, maybe I’m sorry may be confusing 
you. I think you may have to let her say what her position is, which 
department she is now, in which department she was at a particular 
time and what her position was that; how she knows Mr Dukwana and 
then go straight. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Okay. Ms Mokalobe, what is your current 
20 
position? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  I’m currently the director for sector 
development 
in 
the 
department 
of 
economics 
small 
business 
development towards him and environmental affairs. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  And when did you join the department? 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 267 of 278 
 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  I joined the department in 2008, August 
2008. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Okay. I see on paragraph, I’m on page 2 of 
your affidavit where under paragraph four you’ve mentioned that you 
have been part of the task team for the City of tomorrow. Is that 
correct? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  That is correct. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Okay. In your involvement in that project, 
what was the responsibility or what was your role? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Maybe Chair what I can explain is the 
10 
task team was meant for the City of tomorrow. It was a task team that 
was meant to be more like an engine for all high-impact projects in the 
Department of Economic Development at the time. It just happened that 
the City of tomorrow became one of the projects that were dealt with. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes, you’re dealing with the project at some 
stage you were provided with documents. I’m going to take you through 
before I deal with how you know Mr Dukwana. I’m going to take you 
through to page 5 of your affidavit. Are you there? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Yes, I am there. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Okay. On page 16 you are dealing with your 
20 
consultation with investigators of the Commission. 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Pardon? Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On paragraph 16? 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  On paragraph 16, thank you. On paragraph 
16 you’re dealing with your consultation and you’ve mentioned there 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 268 of 278 
 
under paragraph 17 that you were shown some documentation. If I go to 
17.1 you’ve indicated a document master plan agreement as Annexure 
MM2. Can we go to page 11 of your affidavit or of Annexure X6? Can 
you see the document there? Is this what the investigators have shown 
to you? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Yes, this is one of the document that 
was shown to me. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Okay. And have you read the document? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  I didn’t get the, I didn’t go into details. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes. 
10 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  I’ve just read parts of the agreement. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Sorry, you just did what? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  I just read part of the agreement. I 
didn’t go through in details. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Okay. I’m just quickly going to take you to 
page 17 paragraph five, appointment and work schedule. Can you read 
5.1 for the Chair? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  5.1 reads, 
Free State hereby appoints a Consortium to undertake 
the project in accordance with the terms and conditions of this 
20 
agreement and the Consortium accepts such appointment. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you. I think that is sufficient. I’m 
going to take you to, can you please turn to page 26 of X6? Excuse me 
27, page 27. Just there towards the bottom there is a signature there 
under the, on top of that signature there is a writing there. The 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 269 of 278 
 
provincial government of the Free State acting through its Department 
of economic development tourism and environmental affairs. Can you 
see just underneath there, there is a signature there? Can you see the 
signature? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Yes, Chair I can. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Okay. Can you observe just below there as 
to what is the name of the person who signed there? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  The person who signed here is MA 
Dukwana. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes. Can you identify with the signature? 
10 
Do you know that signature? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry. Unless you were there and unless you are 
already saying you know that this is Mr Dukwana’s signature. There is 
just a name MA Dukwana written below the signature and then there’s a 
signature above. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes. 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So, I just want to make sure. I don’t know whether 
you’re going to say this is Mr Dukwana’s signature. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or you’re going to say it is not but if you say the 
name of the person who signed is Mr Dukwana you are already saying 
the signature is Mr Dukwana’s signature but you might not be intending 
to say that. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes, Chair. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 270 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  I think I might have misled her. Just under 
the signature there’s a name that’s written there. So, after you have 
read the name, I want to take you back to the signature. If you look at 
the signature again. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, she doesn’t even have to look at the name. If 
she knows the signature whose signature it is, she might be able to 
say, I know whose signature this is. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Can you identify this signature that appears 
on the page? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you know that signature? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  I couldn’t recognize the signature from 
the… (intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  You could not recognize it? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  From the time when the investigators 
gave me this document. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  And even now, Chair I still think it 
doesn’t look like I don’t know the signature. 
20 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  You don’t know the signature? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Yes. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you. And if you turn to page 28, 
there’s a signature on top there. Do you know that signature? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  No, I do not know the signature, Chair. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 271 of 278 
 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That’s the first signature on page 28. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where, under the words the provincial government of 
the Free State. You don’t know that signature? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  No, I don’t know the signature. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Alright. Thank you, ma’am. We know that 
you are not an expert when it comes to signatures. I’ve shown you 
those two signatures in particular and you’ve said that you don’t know 
10 
them. Can I understand, have you been, have you worked with Mr 
Dukwana before? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Yes, Chair. I worked with Mr Dukwana 
in the task team that we alluded to, the high-impact project task team 
but I was also at the time when the task team was operational. I was 
also head of planning, strategic planning and the department and in the 
department I usually directly with different managers. Especially the 
head of the department and the MEC in the department. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  So, that’s how I got to work with Mr 
20 
Dukwana. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, let me ask the question. Is this signature on 
page 27 not Mr Dukwana’s signature? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  To my eyes it doesn’t look like Mr 
Dukwana’s signature and I’m saying that having been responsible for 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 272 of 278 
 
planning. He would sign a number of my documents; the departmental 
documents. That would be the annual reports and I was responsible for 
that. And as part of that in terms of printing and making sure that we 
have those documents in the department I would be the one responsible 
to source his signature and he would normally sign on a paper about 
three signatures and I would take them to the printers. So, I got 
accustomed to, to the signature. But when I look at it for both 
signatures that I looked at they look different from what I was used to 
seeing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are there any particular features of this signature that 
10 
you recognize that make you think it’s not Mr Dukwana’s signature or 
are there none? You just don’t recognize it as his signature? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Thank you, Chair. I think, I must repeat 
she said that I’m not a handwriting expert but Mr Dukwana’s signature 
was a bit broader; was a bit broader and I think it had two, two levels if 
I recall well. There would be a little signature on top and a slightly 
another one at the bottom about as a lame person I would not exactly 
say what it is that is but it looks different. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is there another signature? 
20 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes, yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  If you go back to your affidavit on page 5, 
you are making for the reference to an appointment letter which we find 
on page 10. Are you on page 10? Can you identify that letter? 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 273 of 278 
 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  The letter has the letterhead of a 
member of the executive Council. It is directed to Mr… (indistinct) 
Balshama and Mr John Thomas. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes, and the date below there? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  The date that has of the signature 
seem to be the 3 r d of November 2011. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you. Just above the date there, 
there’s a signature. Do you know the signature? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  I do not know the signature. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  So, from what you’ve seen from the two 
10 
previous signatures that we’ve just been through from page 27 and 
page 20 sorry, 27 and 28. Would you say that the same answer applies 
to this one? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Yes, I would say that it applies. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Okay. I just want you to read into the record 
on your affidavit on page 6 of your affidavit. Maybe we should start. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I mean what is, what do you want her to read? 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  I want her to read, Chair on her, the 
response that she provided on Annexure MM2 which appears on 
paragraph 18. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, but why must she read? 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  It just confirms what she has just… 
(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why don’t you ask her the question and let her 
answer? 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 274 of 278 
 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Sorry, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why don’t you her ask the question? Let her answer. 
What you want her to read? 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  She already answered, Chair. I just wanted 
to put it formally into the record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What? 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  What she says in terms of the signature; 
what she has actually captured in particular paragraph 18.4. 
CHAIRPERSON:  She has already said she doesn’t know the 
signatures. What more do you want her to say? 
10 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  No, it’s okay, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm? 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  No, she’s not going to give me a different 
answer. I wanted her to read it into the record. So, I think you’ve 
answered the question sufficiently. If I can just move to the last point 
on paragraph, paragraph 22 on page 7 of your affidavit. You mentioned 
documents that you have been missing from your office. 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Paragraph 22? 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Page 7, page 7 paragraph 22. 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  I got it. 
20 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes, you’ve made reference to documents 
that have gone missing, right on that paragraph? Do you want to 
quickly just explain to us how the documents, how you missed the 
documents or how they went missing? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Chair, I wouldn’t want. Okay, the 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 275 of 278 
 
documents are missing and I’m not very certain how they, they got lost 
or. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  And the reason is, it’s documents that I 
dealt with in 2011/2012 that were now filed, kept in a cabinet 
somewhere and the only time I went back to look for them was when the 
Commission came to the department and some information was 
requested from me. When I went to the cabinet there was no file. It was 
mostly projects in there; presentations from, from the different projects 
that we were dealing with. So, I wouldn’t be able to tell if they were 
10 
stolen, somebody took them and it was at the time; it’s after a time 
when we moved offices. We moved from the offices that we are. So, I’m 
not so certain what happened to the documents but ja, I couldn’t find 
the documents that were needed for us to supply the Commission with. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you. Except for the documents, what 
else went missing? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where are we going with all of that? I thought this 
witness was about a signature only and when I asked you agreed. You 
said that’s what she’s coming to testify about. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes, Chair. We done neh? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, maybe you know. If you know that there is 
something then you can tell me. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Chair, it will just conclude what I’ve just 
asked.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, what is that? Repeat the question so I understand 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 276 of 278 
 
because I must follow what the question. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  I asked about the documents which she has 
just explained that the documents went missing but she can’t say they 
were stolen. So, I’m asking. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, but what are the documents about? 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Okay. Chair, let me leave that question. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Ma’am, last question from me. I’m going to 
take you to page 6 paragraph 18.3. You’ve indicated the, that the name 
that has been spelt for Mr Dukwana is incorrect. Can you explain why? 
10 
Why do you say so? 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Chair, what I indicated was that I’ve 
never come across a time when Mr Dukwana signed and he wrote his 
name with D U K O A. All the signatures that I have seen was with K W 
A in the middle. So, I didn’t know this name as it is written here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, that can’t be signatures because the signatures, 
his signatures are such that you can read any letters are there you 
know. You say in the names because as I see these signatures, I don’t 
think you can read the letters from the signature. 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  Chair, perhaps what I want to say is 
20 
more often than not before you sign or after you sign you write your 
name. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no that’s what I mean. 
MS MPOLOKENG MOKALOBE:  And I have never seen his name written 
with a D O A. It’s always, what I’ve seen was always with a K W A. 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 277 of 278 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you. Chair, that’s all for this witness. 
Thank you, ma’am. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much. You are excused. I think in 
regard to the signatures you may have to look for a handwriting expert. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To assist us on. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  The difficulty was we couldn’t obtain the 
original documents but that was, there were attempts that have been 
made to get the original documents. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, but even if you have a copy it should be possible. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes, yes, it’s being attended to, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because the handwriting expert would just need to be 
shown to signatures. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One being Mr Dukwana’s one. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then another one obviously he need not be told 
much or she need not be told much and must compare the two 
signatures and indicate if it’s the same person. 
20 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  It shall be done. Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. We are going to adjourn and tomorrow we start 
at 10 but thank you very much to everybody for all the cooperation. We 
28 AUGUST 2019 – DAY 151 
 
Page 278 of 278 
 
adjourn. 
MS BAITSENG RANGATA:  Thank you. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 29 AUGUST 2019 
 
