 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 
 
 
 
DAY 58 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 2 of 149 
 
PROCEEDINGS HELD ON 28 FEBRUARY 2019 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Pretorius, good morning everybody, good morning 
Mr Manuel. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS:  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS:  Chair for today the Eskom course of evidence is suspended 
temporarily it will resume tomorrow and evidence will be led by Ms Gcabashe in relation 
to the evidence of Mr Trevor Manuel and then that will be followed by the evidence of 
General Siphiwe Nyanda who will be led by Ms Sello. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Thank you.   
10 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Ms Gcabashe. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Morning Mr Manuel.  Chairman the commission will this 
morning hear the evidence of Mr Trevor Manuel and retired General Siphiwe Nyanda.  
With your leave it might be convenient and appropriate for Mr Trengove who represents 
Mr Manuel to place himself on record and to introduce his team.  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
MR WIM TRENGOVE:  May it please you Chair.  My learned friend Mr Mbekewe and I 
instructed by Ms Van Leefer appear for the witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you Mr Trengove. 
20 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you Chairman.  For your ease of reference Chairman 
and also for the ease of reference of the witness the bundle today consists of two 
volumes which are marked V1 and V2 but they are in one file Chairman.  We ask you to 
admit them as Exhibits V1 and V2.  If you open the file Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before that so this will be… 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 3 of 149 
 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  So it is Exhibit V for Valerie. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Exhibit V. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  And inside we have divided the file Chairman between the 
evidence of Mr Manuel which comes under V1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  And the evidence of General Nyanda which is – has been 
placed under the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay thank you. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Section marked V2. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
10 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  The structure of today’s evidence Chairman will be as follows:  
First we are going to just address you very briefly on the relevance of Mr Manuel’s 
evidence to the commissions terms of reference followed by Chairman just the – a 
housekeeping issue I would like to call it which is the furnishing of the Rule 33 Notices 
to Mr Mbalula just to give you a sense of what has transpired in that regard and to give 
you a level of comfort around that issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  And then after that we will really go into what I call the merits. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  If I might start with the relevance. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Of Mr Manuel’s evidence Chairman.  Both terms of reference 
1.1 and 1.3 are relevant to what Mr Manuel has to tell us today.  The more specific one 
really is term of reference 1.3 which reads as follows just for the record Chairman:  It 
asks us to investigate in the context of state capture, fraud and corruption.  Whether the 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 4 of 149 
 
appointment of any member of the National Executive functionary and or office bearer 
was disclosed to the Gupta family or any other unauthorised person before such 
appointments were formally made and or announced and if so whether the President or 
any member of the National Executive is responsible for such conduct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Chairman in context therefore various issues will be explored 
with Mr Manuel.  He is a South African who has been South Africa’s longest serving 
Minister of Finance but he also has insights Chairman into aspects of the efficacy of 
laws such as the PFMA by way of example and policies of government that informed 
the terms of reference of this commission.  In this regard his views will be sought on the 
10 
concept of state capture as defined among others by the two American experts who 
gave evidence before this commission in August and September last year.  Mr Manuel 
will primarily deal with the specific topic of the statement of Mr Mbalula at the August 
2011 ANC NEC meeting regarding the appointment or how Mr Mbalula got to know that 
he was to be appointed as Minister of Sport and Recreation.  In this regard of course 
the affidavit that has been deposed to my Mr Manuel on the 11 October 2018 is 
relevant.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  The commission did Chairman after reading that particular 
affidavit asked Mr Manuel to share his insights on appointments and dismissals of 
20 
cabinet members simply to dig into his institutional knowledge of those matters 
Chairman.  He has deposed to an affidavit which is the supplementary affidavit that is 
annexed to the papers and in that he deals with those aspects.  We believe Chairman 
that that particular part of his evidence will inform or may inform some of the 
recommendations that you may wish to consider as you – as you finalise this process.   
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 5 of 149 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  For the sake of completeness Chairman it is important to 
point out that Mr Mbalula and Mr Atul Gupta are implicated parties with regards to Mr 
Manuel’s evidence.  Both were furnished with Rule 33 Notices Chairman notifying them 
that they are implicated parties.  Mr Mbalula’s was emailed to him on the 31 October 
2018.  As you will appreciate Chairman the full statement of Mr Manuel was annexed to 
that notice.  In fact in the case of Mr Mbalula the – a copy of rules and a copy of the 
terms of reference was also annexed just for his ease of reference.  The – Mr Atul 
Gupta has not responded to that notice.  Rather his brother Ajay Gupta sought to 
respond by way of a Rule 34 Application as the Chairman is aware.  This application 
10 
was opposed by Mr Manuel and in the ruling you gave on the 13 September you dealt 
with the subject matter of why the Gupta’s are at this point in time not entitled to an 
audience before you until such time as they essentially submit to the jurisdiction of this 
commission.  I really just paraphrasing but you made a ruling Chairman and for that 
reason you – the Rule 3.4 Application was unsuccessful.  With your leave however 
Chairman and also in terms of our rules the allegations made by Mr Ajay Gupta in that 
Rule 3.4 Application will be put to Mr Manuel for the record.  Much as Mr Manuel did 
respond to them when he opposed the Rule 3.4 Application he is aware that we will put 
them because we have explained that in terms of rules when we do have a version we 
place that version before the witness who is currently taking the stand.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You have Ms to whether Mr Mbalula did acknowledge receipt of the 
Rule 33 Notice and whether he has reacted in any way to that notice. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  That is the next area that I touch on right now Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  I – to structure my thoughts I made notes for myself. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 6 of 149 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Because it raises a little bit of a dispute and I believe we must 
give him the benefit of the doubt because of the issue he raises.  Mr Mbalula was 
furnished with that by email, Rule 33 Notice.  He has also been given notice of today’s 
proceedings.  As recently as the 14 February Chairman Mr Mbalula was reminded that 
he had not responded to the Rule 33 Notice and he was requested to present a version 
to the commission on or before Friday the 22 February.  On the 22 February Chairman 
the commission had received correspondence from Mr Mbalula in which he stated that 
he had not been furnished with the October 2018 statement of Mr Manuel right 
[indistinct] had been furnished with the supplementary statement of February this year.  
10 
What the commission then did was we immediately wrote back to him and indicated 
when we had sent the original 33 Notice to him and we asked him to please within the 
shortest period of time furnish us with a version.  We have yet to receive that version 
form Mr Mbalula.  So essentially Chairman what we have on file and I have a small file 
but we have prepared should you wish to look at it at your leisure is a file that indicates 
that email was sent by our attorney of record to Mr Mbalula in service – in serving the 
Rule 33 Notice.  The email was delivered Chairman however no acknowledgment of the 
email or the Rule 33 Notice was received from Mr Mbalula.  The email address that was 
used is the same email address we have used consistently Chairman.  So by way of 
example when he responded to the commission’s letter of the 14 February this year the 
20 
email that had been sent to him about giving the commission a version was exactly the 
same email address that was used when the Rule 33 Notice was sent to him on the 31 
October last year.  However Chairman I think he ought to be given the benefit of the 
doubt regarding when he received the Rule 33 Notice.  What we can be sure of is that 
he knows of today’s proceedings.  He has made public statements in which he has said 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 7 of 149 
 
he is only too happy to assist this commission and he will appear before this 
commission when called upon to do so.  So in that regard Chairman I do not think there 
will be any particular difficulty in obtaining a version from Mr Mbalula and in him 
appearing before this commission as and when it is appropriate for him to do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well if the Rule 33 Notice was sent by email somebody should have 
made sure that if no acknowledgment came – was received from him by a certain time 
further steps were taken to make sure we have got proof the commission has got proof 
that he was served with the Rule 33 Notice.  If he was served – if the Rule 33 Notice 
was sent to him in September last year that is a long time ago and it should not be that 
we only hear in February that he never – he says he never received I think measures 
10 
must be put in place to make sure that within a certain period of time after a Rule 33 
Notice has been sent to an implicated person by email that if no acknowledgement is 
received other steps must be taken to make sure that the Rule 33 Notice is served in a 
manner that will give us proof of service.  You know technology is good and it is very 
helpful but sometimes it creates problems when people deny having received 
something when there is a dispute.  So I think urgent measures must be taken either 
that the Rule 33 Notice be served afresh in circumstances where there will proof 
furnished to the commission that he has been served or if it is emailed again it must be 
on the understanding that he agrees to immediately send confirmation that he has 
received it.  And I think this should apply to everyone else so the legal team should look 
20 
at everyone else who has been served or sent by email the Rule 33 Notice who has not 
responded or acknowledged receipt and try and take measures to make sure that they 
have got – you have got proof that they have received it because we do not want 
disputes about whether people have received these notices or not.  Okay no that is 
alright.  We will proceed.  Those measures must just be taken.   
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 8 of 149 
 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you Chairman we will do so.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Chairman for what it is worth of course in the media Mr 
Manuel’s evidence has been all over the papers since at least October last year.  So I 
would like to think that Mr Mbalula is aware of the essence of what Mr Manuel will be 
saying today.  But I think that he also. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Will be prepared. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  To come to the commission.  He has indicated as much. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  And assist the commission.  It is really just the timing issue 
Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  But I think he will – I would like to think he will be here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I must just say in line with what I have been saying to the legal 
team of late steps must be taken to make sure that all the people who are implicated in 
matters relating to dismissals and appointments and in regard to most of the witnesses 
who have given evidence they must now be brought to the commission to give their 
version.  So one we must get their versions in writing first.  Two they have got to appear 
20 
and if they are not volunteering to appear then we must use the processes that are at 
our disposal to compel them to appear.  We do not have a lot of time to do this work we 
have got to move with speed.  So – but I know that at least in terms of the media there 
are a number who keep on saying they are waiting for the commission to invite them.  
But people should not wait for the commission to invite them.  If they want to make a 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 9 of 149 
 
contribution they should make communication with the commission and say I would like 
to come and deal with this.  This is what I know.  I would like to come in and deal with 
this or make a statement.  But from our side the commission must not delay anymore 
now.  We need to make sure that we wrap up all the evidence particularly relating to 
dismissals and appointments and evidence of witnesses that we have had so far.   
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you Chairman.  I must say we do struggle a little with 
some witnesses. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  But we will follow the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  You are giving and I trust the public out there is also 
understanding you very clearly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  As to how we are going to deal with… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Witnesses who are reluctant. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  To work within our time frames. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, ja. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  And prefer to tell us about their time frames. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no we – we have been trying to accommodate witnesses where 
we can but we have got to draw a line. We do not have a lot of time to do this work.  
This commission is not going to finish its work within time if we are going to all the time 
wait for dates that suit witnesses.  We just – we will have to be quite firm.  I hope 
everyone will give priority to the work of the commission because there is a time within 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 10 of 149 
 
which we must finish this work.  Okay. Alright. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Chairman we have asked Mr Mbalula to respond to our letter 
of the 21 February last week within five days and give us a version.  I think that the 
enforcement tools that you refer to may have to kick in. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  If we do not have a version from him latest tomorrow evening 
first thing Monday morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes they may have to kick in and not only in regard to him there are 
others too – there are others also who are supposed to have responded to either 
requests that have been made to them or to correspondence that has been sent to 
10 
them who have not done so.  So we will have to use those powers.  We cannot be 
delayed for too long because of people who might not really be giving the work of the 
commission priority.  I accept that in some cases people have got legitimate schedule 
challenges and they would sit definitely like to help the commission and they would like 
to give it priority but we will look at those.  But one cannot avoid the impression that 
there are some who are not giving the work of the commission the priority that it 
deserves. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you Chairman.  Chairman I believe it is appropriate 
now for witness to be sworn in.  He prefers to take an affirmation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Just administer the affirmation. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  Please place your full names for the record? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Trevor Andrew Manuel. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the prescribed affirmation? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  I have no objection. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you truly affirm that evidence you will give shall be the truth; the 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 11 of 149 
 
whole truth and nothing but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, I truly 
affirm? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  I so affirm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.  Before you start Ms Gcabashe Mr Manuel I 
just want to say thank you for coming to assist this commission and to give evidence.  
You were in government for many years and you were in the structures of the governing 
party for many years.  I have no doubt that you could assist this commission maybe not 
just about the issue relating to Mr Mbalula but also in regard to other issues that we 
might wish to ask you about.  So I really want to say thank you for coming.  As you may 
have – as you may be aware I have been appealing to past and present ministers and 
10 
directors general who may have information that could help the commission in terms of 
its terms of reference to come forward and assist the commission.  I am very grateful 
that there is a number of ministers who have come forward who had some the former 
DG’s also coming forward but we wish that they should be more because it is difficult to 
think that only those who have made contact with the commission know things.  One 
thinks that there are many and there are many present and past ministers who have a 
lot of information that they know and government officials but they simply have not 
come forward including members of the governing party who should know quite a lot of 
things.  So I really thank you that you have made yourself available. 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Thank you very much Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  I think we all vested as South Africans all vested in the 
success of your mission so we wish you every strength and success as we proceed.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.  Yes Ms Gcabashe. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 12 of 149 
 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Yes thank you Chairman.  Mr Manuel you have before you 
just one volume, one bundle of documents that run from TAM02 to TAM41.  You have 
that? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  I have that. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  If you look at page TAM02 I will actually if you do not mind cut 
out the TAM appellation part I will just call the numbers.  So if you look at paginated 
page 02 to 016 of the paginated bundle could you tell the Chairman if you recognise 
this document? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Indeed this is an affidavit I submitted in October last year. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  If you go to – if you turn to page 04 there is a signature on 
10 
that page, do you confirm that this is your signature? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  I can confirm that that is my signature yes. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  When did you sign this document before a commissioner of 
oaths? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  In October the 11 October last year. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Are there any corrections or amendments that you would at 
this point wish to make to the statement – this is the better time to do it rather than as 
we go along. 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Yes there is a bit of a contradiction that arises from the dates 
that I refer to when the NEC took place.  But that matter is corrected in paragraph 12. 
20 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Indeed so.   
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Thank you. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  The documents that are on pages 6 through to 16 what are 
those documents? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  (Laughing) that is an exchange of unforgettable open letters 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 13 of 149 
 
between Mr Fikile Mbalula and I.  
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  We will get to them in due course.  Do you recognise the 
document that is on page 18 and runs all the way to page 25?  What is that document? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Yes Chair that is a supplementary affidavit that I deposed to in 
February of this year which deals primarily with the system of appointments and 
ministers.  I can confirm that indeed I deposed that affidavit and that is my signature on 
page 25 of the bundle 8 of the affidavit.  Thank you. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you.  Are there any changes, amendments you might 
want to make to that particular document? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  You know there is one change and it relates to the 
10 
circumstances that prevailed I think it is paragraph 23 on page 23 of the bundle and it 
relates to the fact that it says here that Cyril Ramaphosa succeeded Halima Motlanthe 
as deputy president in Polokwane that is in fact not correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  What is the correction you wish to make? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  The correction there is that Kgalema Motlanthe became 
deputy president at the conference in December 2007. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is in Polokwane? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is in Polokwane? 
20 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  In Polokwane Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you. 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Thank you. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  And no further changes? 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 14 of 149 
 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  No further changes. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you.  Rule 65 of our rules requires that I establish 
whether any of the evidence contained in the October 2018 and the February 2019 
affidavits has previously been placed before any other commission or tribunal or court 
or body, has it? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  No I can affirm Chair that this evidence appears before this 
particular commission for the first time.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  And just in explanation of that if that were the case we would 
then have had to find that transcription so that we could look at that evidence with you. 
10 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Appreciate that. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Then last but not least could you please turn to page TAM27 
through to 29.   
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Yes. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  And then if you keep your finger there if you could then look at 
TAM30 to 41.   
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Yes. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Have you seen these documents before today? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  I have seen it in the bundle.  And it relates to a – an affidavit 
from Mr Gupta. 
20 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  It is the application that you had opposed about a month ago? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Yes. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  This is just to say that we will be placing some of those facts 
into evidence while we will asking you about some of those matters that are raised 
there.  To go to matters of a little more significance Mr Manuel you are a person who 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 15 of 149 
 
has had vast experience as the Chairman has pointed out in serving in a democratically 
elected government.  Are you familiar with the report of the Public Protector dated 14 
October 2016 and which is titled: “State of Capture”.  Only familiar not that you have 
read it cover to cover Mr Manuel but are you familiar with it? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  I can confirm both thank you. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  In fact the cover page of that report explains that it is and I 
quote: 
“A report on an investigation into alleged improper and unethical 
conduct by the President and other state functionaries relating to 
alleged improper relationships and involvement of the Gupta 
10 
family in the removal and appointment of Ministers and Directors 
of state owned enterprises resulting in improper and possibly 
corrupt award of state contracts and benefits to the Gupta 
family’s businesses.” 
Mr Manuel as a result of that report this Commission of course has been tasked with 
investigating the matters that Advocate Madonsela investigated.  You would agree that 
the untoward appointment and dismissals of Members of Cabinet falls squarely within 
the Commission’s remit? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  I have no doubt it is centre, front and centre of the 
Commission’s work. 
20 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Various witnesses have given evidence on state capture in 
particular as well as fraud and corruption but the focus that I want to, to, to hone in on 
today is state capture, because the Commission is interested in what you may identify 
as key issues in state capture, but to give you a bit of context Mr Manuel I have come 
across an open source media report where the SACP has referred to state capture 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 16 of 149 
 
amongst others as a term used and I quote: 
“To describe private interests influencing the state’s decision 
making processes.” 
Then in the May 2017 South African State Capacity Research Projects paper entitled 
“Betrayal of a Promise:  How South Africa is being Stolen?” they refer to state capture 
as a concerted effort at repurposing the state and diverting rents away from 
development in ways that are extra-legal and anti-constitutional to the detriment of the 
South African Public.  I really paraphrased what they have to say.  Then finally 
Mr Manuel we have had two experts, American professors, Drs Hellman and Kaufmann 
who appeared before the Commission.  Dr Kaufmann actually appeared in person and 
10 
they define state capture as and I quote again: 
“The efforts of individuals or firms to shape the formation of laws, 
policies, rules and regulations of the state to their own advantage by 
providing illicit private benefits for public officials.” 
Essentially they say to us that state capture is a form of corruption and one that is 
distinct from the, distinct and more invasive than administrative corruption which is the 
more common form of corruption.  Having given you that background Mr Manuel can 
you share your views on this subject matter of state capture and in particular as I 
[indistinct] earlier?  Are you able to identify key issues in state capture that really should 
be preeminent in the mind of the Chairman as he wades through the evidence that will 
20 
be placed before him whenever all of that evidence has been placed before him?  Are, 
are there pointers that you can share with the Commission? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Thank you.  Mr Chairman my understanding of our 
Constitution is that it vests responsibility executive authority in the President acting with 
Cabinet.  There is no higher authority and in the context of trias politica I think even the 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 17 of 149 
 
courts have been reticent to try and determine how the President should conduct 
himself.  Now in respect of the appointment of Ministers for instance the, the 
Constitution does not give anybody else the authority to do so and in, in the context 
also the oath of office of the President which is a very public oath there is a 
commitment to act within the interests, to do everything in the interests, to advance the 
Republic and to oppose that which may weaken and to also ask for the [intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And to be faithful to the Republic, and to be faithful to the Republic I 
think if I am not mistaken. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  And to be faithful to the Republic and in this 
context I mean I, I think that the judgment by the Constitutional Court on 31 March 2016 
10 
found that the President had violated his oath of office.  Now if we take oaths and we 
are cavalier in the implementation I think it is the beginning of issues relating to state 
capture and, and you know it is, it is something that I think all [coughing] South African 
should be deeply concerned about because if those words lose meaning then the 
conduct cannot follow and, and when I go back to a number of judgments for instance 
my, it is very clear that that, that the court would not enter into the terrain that is 
occupied by the legislature either and so there is no higher authority and we must look 
to the dictates of conscious, conscience as the oath requires to ensure that you will 
have the proper execution of what is required of, of people who occupy high public 
office.  Now in this regard I think the, the issues that arise Chair about the appointment 
20 
of Ministers is exceedingly material.  Who knows who has consulted, who breaks the 
news and how, how is information shared I think is signal to a range of other issues 
about the conduct that is that is before this Commission, thank you. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  In fact Mr Manuel if I might just contextualise what you have 
said in particular with respect to, to the President and what the Constitution requires of 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 18 of 149 
 
a President.  I, I would like to just go through Section 86 of the, of the Constitution, I 
beg your pardon.  83 of the Constitution which reads as follows: 
“The President a, is the Head of State and Head of the National 
Executive.  B, must uphold, defend and respect the 
Constitution as the supreme law of the Republic and c, 
promotes the unity of the nation and that which will advance the 
Republic.” 
So there really is a duty on the President to ensure that what he and the National 
Executive that is appointed under his direction and at his will, because he, he believes 
there are people who can progress the mandate that he has been charged with.  The 
10 
President must ensure that in what he does and in what the National Executive does 
the interests of the Republic must be advanced and that really is what you, you have 
talked to us about, but can I go a little beyond that Mr Manuel because this Commission 
has of course heard evidence from various witnesses.  Some of it which will still be 
challenged I believe at some point, but if I might just point you to the PFMA which I 
believe is one of our most significant pieces of legislation and one that you had just 
about everything to do with.  You drove it through the whole legislative process.  Can 
you just very briefly speak to the critical issues that that piece of legislation sought to 
ensure this democracy would take account of?  That this democracy would embed and 
these all the types of checks and balances that the drafters and the legislatures at the 
20 
time, the legislator at the time sought to ensure would, would advance the interests of 
the Republic of South Africa.  Just very briefly speak to us about that piece of 
legislation and of course all the Treasury notes and regulations that go with it. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Thank you very much Ms Gcabashe.  Mr Chairman 
the; when we drafted the, the Public Finance Management Act which is Act 1 of 1999 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 19 of 149 
 
there was a fundamental shift from the old norms that applied in the Exchequer and 
what we sought to do in the PFMA was to recognise the parity of decision making 
across systems.  The three spheres of Government and, and the systems that that 
apply and the focus was on outputs and responsibilities.  What the Exchequer Act did 
was to construct a Treasury that kind of gave individual permissions and so you had a, 
a kind of rules based bureaucracy and the big shift and I think it is, it is in line with what 
we raised earlier about the interpretation of the responsibilities of, of the Head of State, 
the Head of the Executive.  It requires people to act in the best interest and the words 
used in the PFMA at various points would be utmost care and so that shift is 
fundamentally important.  It is, it is drawn the, the essence of, of the PFMA is drawn 
10 
from Chapter 13 of our Constitution which sets out norms for budgets, for budget 
control, for the management of finances, for the issuing of guarantees and the range of 
similar kinds of issues that would be normal in fiscal arrangements in democracy and 
so it is for that reason that the Public Finance Management Act was greeted in the way 
that it was.  I, I should, I should point out that as, as it matured probably a few years 
later there was some resistance from people who argued that it holds up but if you, if 
you go, if you look at the link again between the PFMA and the Constitution the 
Constitution asks that one of the tests be that there is value for money.  I make the 
point now.  I can, I can expand it.  That when there is reckless spending almost 
inevitably people who are dependent on public services, the poor, are denied access to 
20 
services because the controls are not in place and in the context of state capture it is 
actually an endeavour to remove those kinds of controls and, and I think it is, it is that 
that we must take a very serious view of because the, the measure of what happens is 
actually seen in the light of very poor people.  Children who still do not have school 
buildings, children who die in pit latrines.  It is that kind of issue that happens when the 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 20 of 149 
 
controls are loose because there is not due care and attention as required by the 
PFMA.  One of the other issues in the PFMA relates to certain schedules that apply in 
respect of State Owned Enterprises.  Schedule 2 for instance takes account of large 
significant State Owned Enterprises.  Eskom, Transnet, SAA, Denel those kinds of 
enterprises would, would all, they all listed in that schedule and part of the difference 
between that schedule and the next schedule is that the [indistinct] provision to bring 
these bodies into Schedule 2 is that they would be well managed that corporate 
governance norms would be adhered to; that they have strong balance sheets and can 
manage their affairs and be accountable for the management of their affairs in the 
public space and, and I think that the collapse that we have seen with a number of 
10 
State Owned Enterprises in the last decade or so reflects a fact that that the, the 
powers given to these, to these State Owned Enterprises were, were exercised without 
the necessary care and attention to detail and so it is, it is that.  I am saying the PFMA 
is distinguished from its predecessors by the fact that it recognises, understood its 
responsibility to groups of equals. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  I, I am glad that you mentioned SOEs in particular 
Mr Manuel because I have, I have always grappled with the distinction between an 
SOE and what was converted to an SOC and the underlying rational for doing that.  I 
know you are a part of that policy making that sought to convert what might be, and 
correct me if I am wrong, the predominantly developmental role of an SOE to a more 
20 
commercial role for SOCs but I might have this completely wrong.  Can you just take us 
through that? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chair, Chair I, this is not an area that I am that I am 
that I am an expert in, but my, my sense of it is that the [indistinct] referred to State 
Owned Enterprises for a long period and when the Companies Act was amended they 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 21 of 149 
 
were termed State Owned Corporations. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Hm. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  In essence they are the same.  The big, the big 
distinction in, in the PFMA are the schedule.  The first, Schedule 1 applies to all manner 
of bodies including the Chapter 9 Institutions for instance.  Schedule 2 has a long list of 
entities and I referred to some of them before.  Schedule 3 refers to some smaller State 
Owned Enterprises and Schedule 4 has a very diverse list including supported entities 
such as universities and so on, but it is Schedule 2 that we look at because I think the 
bulk of issues Chair that relate to state capture actually can be found in Schedule 2. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Yes, thank you.  Maybe as just a last question in this part of 
10 
the evidence you are giving, are you able to identify a, one or two institutions that are 
particularly vulnerable to state capture and really this is an open ended question.  If you 
are not able to so be it, but if you it would, it would just help to illustrate the point that 
you have been making this morning. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chairperson it is a, it is a, it is a fundamental 
important question and, and from the many state owned corporations let me, let me, let 
me highlight what I see as a position of Eskom and I think it is a, it is a situation that is 
well canvassed.  Eskom in its history was an exceedingly strong institution.  One of the 
top utilities in the world.  Eskom had a stronger credit rating than we had as a 
Sovereign and we would look to Eskom with a, with a, with a sense of jealousy about 
20 
the fact that they could borrow more cheaply than what we could.  Eskom also of 
course had surplus generating capacity and six power stations were mothballed and 
then changes happened and I think that if you looked at the situation in the last decade 
all of that has come apart.  Now I am sure that this Commission has and will continue to 
receive detailed explanations of how things go wrong but when I, when I try and 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 22 of 149 
 
understand the, the role of Eskom in the public domain.  Firstly South Africa’s industries 
were built on available cheap source of power.  That is no longer there.  We have 
moved up the ranks of, of the cost of, of energy.  We were also able to use surplus 
power to extend electricity to the homes of many millions of very poor South Africans 
who previously because of apartheid had been excluded.  Thirdly, having available 
electricity with predictable prices meant that that we could, we could build further an 
industry and invite investment into our country and then of course Eskom managing off 
the strength of its balance sheet did not impose a burden on the fisc not for cash 
injections or neither for cash injections nor for guarantees.  All of that is gone and if you 
look at the position of Eskom now and when I, when I refer to the, the budget tabled in 
10 
Parliament by Minister Mboweni last week it is clear that that Eskom sits as an 
albatross around the neck of the fiscus and so Eskom has to be supported.  I think 
none of us as South Africa can ever entertain the idea of allowing Eskom to go down 
but having it means that we, we increase our, our, our, the burden of debt in the general 
economy.  Also if one looks at the applications of Eskom to NERSA the, the cost of 
energy into the future are not as predictable as they ought to be, but moreover I think 
that that as the state takes on more and more debt the credit rating suffers and when 
the credit rating of a country suffers and if we run the risk of losing our investment 
grade rating it means that as a country we have to borrow at much higher costs.  Now 
the, the budget last week proposes a deficit of 4.5 percent to GDP.  That money must 
20 
be borrowed and if the cost of those borrowings increase the ability of the state to 
provide services to people is, is, is diminished.  It has seen the interconnectedness of 
this.  When, when I look at the events which are, which are very well canvassed in the 
state of capture report by Advocate Madonsela it is clear Chairperson that there was a 
cavalier attitude in the management of this.  I think there are a serious of other issues 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 23 of 149 
 
as well.  In the last few years, in the last decade in fact Eskom had 12 CEOs, six 
Chairman, 60 Directors and 30 Executives and between them they cost R514 million.  
So if decisions are taken with the focus on short term for the benefit of private 
individuals then I think the costs are borne by all of society, but those most vulnerable 
bear a greater proportion of the costs and I think it is that that we must understand 
about, about Eskom and similarly if you looked, if you looked at Transnet and you look 
at the way in which the, the supply chain management was managed on, on the 
acquisition of locomotives and, and wagon systems then you begin to understand that 
the costs, because part of what Transnet has to do through Freight Rail is to, is to 
manage major exports, coal line and the iron ore line and when you place the costs of 
10 
that prohibitively outside what is, what is competitive in the global system I think we 
weaken the economy progressively, but similarly given the fact that we have Gauteng 
as the industrial heart line far from, far from the, the, the seaports.  Managing that in the 
system of freight rail is also something that needs to be taken with a lot of care and, 
and, and the, the essence of that, those words in the PFMA of “due care” needs to be 
felt in the management of these kinds of systems.  So I think that that, that the 
examples of, of, of the impact of state capture are legion in this country right now. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  So, so when the SACP speaks to the taking of decisions that 
deprives South Africans of the resources of this country that really is the essence of 
what state capture can be considered to be? 
20 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  I, I, I concur entirely. Chairperson it is felt 
immediately and I say you can look at education of social services at one level.  You 
can look at the deteriorating state of our infrastructure at another and then you can look 
at the poor spending that we can do as a country on, on, on economic infrastructure.  
The kinds of things like special economic zones and so on.  If, if our abilities are 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 24 of 149 
 
diminished then we are not going to create the employment and we also then impose a 
burden on future generations and of course state debt is always a price for future 
generations to pay.  So it is a very serious matter. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you.  Thank you Mr Manuel for those insights.  It 
might be best at this point to, to move on to the primary reason really that the 
Commission wrote to you and asked you to come through to assist it and that is your 
recollection of what transpired at the NEC meeting, an ANC NEC meeting of August 
2011, but it might be more convenient Chairman to, to preface that discussion of the 
NEC by just looking at the broad area of appointments and dismissals.  So in this 
regard I will ask you to, to turn to your February affidavit Mr Manuel and recount or to 
10 
summarise your experience of the practices or conventions that were followed when 
you were appointed to Cabinet.  At paragraph 2 you, you state that: 
“You have always understood that the power of the President to 
appoint Cabinet Ministers is a constitutionally protected 
prerogative and that Cabinet Ministers serve at the pleasure of 
a Sitting President.” 
Please just expound on this proposition. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Thank you Ms Gcabashe.  Mr Chair the; I mean it 
is, it is one of the powers given to the President that has no fetters and I think that in 
the experience of, of those of us who, who served under different Presidents we would 
20 
have seen the exercise of that power.  The first President I served under was the late 
Nelson Mandela and the first Government we were part of was a Government of 
National Unity.  So that reality I suppose fettered the freedom that the President had, 
but it was clear that that there had been consultation between, he was then just 
President of the ANC, Nelson Mandela, and some of the senior leaders who were about 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 25 of 149 
 
including the late Walter Sisulu and others and so after the announcement of the 
election results but before he was even inaugurated there were a number of positions 
that he indicated he had secured. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Can you pause just there?  He indicated he had secured, 
indicated to whom? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Okay. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  When and why were those particular persons selected? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  The, the saying that it was on about 9 May 1994 
and historians can check the date of the election results and the date of the 
inauguration of the President and we had convened in the National Working Committee 
10 
of the ANC and there were a number of positions including the fact that that the position 
of, of Deputy President would be shared between Thabo Mbeki and, and F W De Klerk.  
That the position of Foreign Minister would go to Alfred Nzo.  That the position of 
Defence Minister would go to Joe Modise etcetera and I was also on that as Minister of 
Trade and Industry.  It seemed that that in the discussions also between the three 
parties would constitute the Government of National Unity.  These positions had been 
settled and after the inauguration of, of, of President Mandela on 11 May there was still 
some negotiation about some positions, but that is what happened then. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  And at the time of course we had the Interim Constitution 
that was in place at the time. 
20 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  We had the Interim Constitution that applied until 
we adopted the Constitution in May 1996.  Would you like me to continue? 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Please do, please do. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Then after, after, some weeks after, after 
President Mandela he called me as was his, his, his style at four in the morning asking 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 26 of 149 
 
me to see him as soon as I could in the morning.  I happened to be in Cape Town and 
had to get an early flight, but that was you know.  That is just by the by and when I got 
there 
then 
Deputy 
President Thabo Mbeki 
was 
there 
along 
with 
fellow 
Minister Tito Mboweni and Deputy Minister Alec Erwin and the President told us that 
Derek Keys, being our first Minister of Finance had asked to be relieved of is 
responsibilities and that he needed to find a new Minister of Finance.  He felt that the 
country wasn’t ready for an ANC Minister of Finance yet, and then put the proposal that 
he wanted to bring in his banker, Chris Liebenberg, as Minister of Finance.  He wanted 
to test this with this grouping of people who in his view were in government and 
understood matters economic, and he then proceeded to invite Chris Liebenberg.  And 
10 
Chris served I think for about a year before he indicated to Madiba that his time was 
limited, and so in August of 1995 I was invited to the office of the President where he 
and I met then Deputy President Thabo Mbeki, the President said to me that Chris 
Liebenberg would be leaving after he tabled is budget and would I be ready to serve as 
Minister of Finance and asked for the views of the Deputy President and we agreed and 
on that basis President Mandela asked me not to disclose this to anybody. 
 
Now I mention that because the oath of office has been consistent that 
Ministers in taking the oath commit not to disclose information in their possession to 
anybody not entitled to do so and there was no disclosure.  It was in – on the 28th of 
March 1996 that President Mandela, well shortly before that, about a week or so before 
20 
that the President called me again and told me that I would get a new Deputy Minister 
in the person of Gill Marcus and ja, and that the position of – that I had occupied as 
Trade & Industry would go to Alec Erwin and he gave me permission to have a 
conversation with Gill Marcus, and on 28th of March of that year in Parliament President 
Mandela made the announcement that Gill Marcus would be the Deputy Minister of 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 27 of 149 
 
Finance, I would move across, Alec Erwin would become Minister of Trade & Industry 
and Phumzile Mlambo Ngcuka would become his Deputy. 
 
Those were some of the changes that he announced and there were others 
relating to the closing down of the RDP office, the dropping of Paulo Jordan from 
cabinet and the move of Jay Naidoo from the RDP office into Communications, that 
happened on that day and we took, we were sworn in so that I became Minister of 
Finance from the 4th of April 1996.  That’s what happened then and there were no 
changes.  1999 the  ...(intervention)  
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Can I before you get to 1999 Mr Manuel, sorry to interrupt 
the narrative, which is important, can I just interrogate one or two issues, the one point 
10 
you make, and I think it’s in paragraph 3 of your affidavit is you speak about the norm, 
I’m just getting the term out of context, either at this point or maybe you would want to 
deal with this later, my question really is was there – is there such a thing as a norm in 
the appointment of members of the National Executive, and really I’m looking at the 
manner in which President Mandela in light of the Government of National Unit had to 
handle the appointment of members of the National Executive, but can you say that 
anything in the manner in which he dealt with appointments would have constituted a 
norm that other Presidents may have wanted to have regard to?  
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  It’s a complex question Chair becomes norms and 
conventions require much longer period, but I think what President Mandela did was to 
20 
put emotion a trend that is true to the spirit of the Constitution that vests the 
responsibility with the President. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  The responsibility for what Mr Manuel, just to be very clear. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Sorry, responsibility for the appointment of 
members of the Executive, bear in mind that the Executive exists in the Constitution 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 28 of 149 
 
and in life in two parts, on the one part there are Cabinet Ministers and then as the 
constitution says the President may draw from members of Parliament and appoint 
them as Deputy Ministers to support the system of governance.  That too is a 
responsibility and of course the Deputy President is appointed by the President in quite 
the same way, but those are presidential prerogatives articulated in our Constitution. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  The second aspect you touched on with respect to the 
appointment procedure followed by President Mandela, was the issue of confidentiality, 
both in relation to the manner in which he spoke to the persons he had selected as 
members of his cabinet but also in relation to how those members who had been 
selected needed to treat this information that had been imparted to them, so my 
10 
understanding of your evidence is that that confidentiality not publicising discussions 
either by the President, with the President that way of doing things, that manner of 
doing things was critical to upholding the gravitas of the office to securing the interest if 
I might just default to that phrase, the interest of the Republic of South Africa.  It’s really 
the confidentiality of those discussions that I’m drilling down into. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chairperson that is fundamental.  I think it’s also 
important to see that in the context of ensuring that releases of information are 
symmetrical to anybody who is interested.  A symmetry of information especially in 
respect of matters of government, will actually be used by certain players I would 
imagine to hedge and take positions on all (indistinct) issues.  So it’s not just 
20 
confidentiality for its own sake, it’s also recognising the importance of the exercise of 
power by the Head of State because you can’t – I think it would be completely cavalier 
to allow for arbitrage opportunity and I think that if you look a situation that applies later, 
in December of 2015 it seems very clear that there were people who knew that a  
particular individual, quote out of the blue was going to be appointed as Minister of 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 29 of 149 
 
Finance and somehow became advisors even before the individual was sworn in. 
 
That demonstrates a break with that norm, with that tradition that is so 
fundamentally important in ensuring that confidentiality is actually uppermost in the 
exercise of that power. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Maybe I should allow you then to deal with the next period 
which starts in 1999, just before we get to the tea break and that’s the appointment 
process, new experience under President Thabo Mbeki. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Thank you, Chairperson the elections in 1999 were 
held I think perhaps end of May early June, the President was inaugurated on the 16th 
of June that year, President Mbeki, a number of us received requests to be at the State 
10 
guesthouse late that evening after a cultural event, have sensed what it was about, and 
there was a large gathering of many people who had been Ministers, were Ministers 
because ja, Ministers remain in position until a new cabinet is appointed as per our 
Constitution, and there were some new individuals in this large room. 
 
It had never, I mean there had been no process like that before and so we all 
kind of sensed what it was about but didn’t know how this would be exercised, and 
individuals were then called into a study.  I was I think perhaps the second person to be 
called that night, and President Mbeki was sitting there with Kgalema Motlantle who 
was then Secretary General of the ANC.  Very briefly I was asked whether I would 
continue, I’d be prepared to continue serving as Minister of Finance.  When I agreed 
20 
they would thank me and I was asked to leave the study for the outside and to go 
home, not to have any contact with the rest of them and I went home.   It so happened 
that I shared a house with the late Kader Asmal who then changed from Minister of 
Water Affairs to Minister of Forestry.  He came in many hours later, and I had no inkling 
of the change until he woke me, very rowdily I would say, to tell me that he was very 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 30 of 149 
 
happy with the new assignment that he had, but that’s how that happened. 
 
We were sworn in on the following day, it should probably reflect on about 
the 17th or 18th of June and that’s how the position remained, essentially there would 
have been some minor reshuffles I would imagine, between then, that’s June 1999 and 
2004 when there is yet again an election.  
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Can I ask you just to pause there for one minute. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:   Happily. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  And explain to me what your interpretation of the presence 
of Mr Kgalema Motlantle, who was the Secretary General of the ANC at the time, what 
our interpretation of his presence in that study with President Mbeki was, how did you 
10 
view that? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Thank you.  Chairperson my understanding of it is 
that the President would never arrive in the position purely on the strength of his own or 
her own jacket.  Ours is a party-based system and if you look at the proportional 
representation system I think the President in party is actually the Genesis of taking 
responsibility.  As we know the President arrives in Parliament to be sworn in as a 
member at the convening of the first Parliament after an election, and if there’s then an 
election by Parliament for the President who is then relieved of his or her 
responsibilities as a member of Parliament.  So the President is very much also of the 
party that wins an election.   
20 
 
So with the Secretary General present my understanding has been that there 
would have been some consultation.  Now when I say some consultation I’d indicated 
that when President Mandela announced to us it was in the National Working 
Committee, but subsequently it was never at so large a forum.  Clearly it could not be in 
the National Executive Committee which is exceedingly large, it’s about 80+ people and 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 31 of 149 
 
I would hazard Chairperson that each of the members of the National Executive 
Committee would see themselves as a prospective Minister and so you couldn’t 
negotiate this thing.  There needed to be some consultation so without knowing for sure 
I would guess that it may have been with the top six, President’s preferences given to 
the top six and then the Secretary General representing those interests when an 
individual is invited to serve as a Minister. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you and I have been reminded that it is almost tea, 
but if I can just wrap this up with one last question Chairman.  What I understand you to 
be saying is that you would essentially subscribe to the view that in selecting members 
of the National Executive a President makes political judgment on how best to deliver 
10 
on the mandate of the majority party, hence that however informal consultation with 
senior members of the party. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  That is certainly my interpretation.  I think just for 
the record Chair there were also people brought into cabinet during that period who 
were not of the ANC.  Nkosi Mangosuthu Buthelezi was brought in as a minister from 
the IFP.   Mosibudi Mangena was brought as a minister but was president of Izapo so 
those things happened as well, but I’m sure there would have been consultation 
because almost inevitably there may be some people who in the ANC would think that 
those individuals occupy their positions so the political pre-eminence of the  Head of 
State being able to explain how they weigh the balances, I think is a fundamentally 
20 
important part of that.  Thank you. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  And what that person considers best serves the interests of 
the Republic obviously would inform this process. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Yes Chairperson I read it in the context of the oath 
of office to do that which advances the interests of the Republic. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 32 of 149 
 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you Mr Manuel, Chairman maybe this is an 
appropriate time to take the tea break. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, we will take the tea adjournment and we will resume at half 
past eleven.  We will adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you may proceed Ms Gcabashe. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you Chairman.  Mr Manuel we were essentially at page 
23 of your affidavit and this portion deals with the process as you experienced it under 
President Kgalema Motlanthe if you could just give a short narrative on that thank you? 
10 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Thank you very much Ms Gcabashe.  Mr Chairman the – just 
before the process with President Motlanthe I had said that there were significant 
changes introduced at the ANC conference in Polokwane in 2007.  One of the 
consequences of that was a very intense discussion at an NEC meeting in September 
2008 at which a resolution was adopted to recall President Mbeki and one of the first 
actions I took very early I the morning – it was a Saturday morning perhaps the 20 
September I went to my office in Pretoria to have a letterhead and I tendered my letter 
of resignation to President Mbeki and I delivered it at about 7:30 in the morning.  I went 
off there was the NEC meeting continued and I gave a copy of that letter to both 
President Zuma who was then president of the ANC and President Kgalema Motlanthe 
20 
because it was clear that the ANC would support his candidacy to become president of 
the Republic.  They tried to persuade me to withdraw my letter but I was very clear that 
my reading of the constitution is that Ministers serve at the pleasure of the President. 
The assumption of course being that the pleasure is properly and carefully utilised.  I – 
as it happens I – well I indicated to then Minister Motlanthe that if he required my 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 33 of 149 
 
services I would be available but it had to be his call.  It could not be the call of a 
predecessor.  As it happened I had to fly off to New York and Washington for 
international responsibilities I had and whilst travelling from New York to Washington as 
it happens my phone rang off the hook because my letter of resignation had been 
leaked to the press in South Africa and the Rand was – appeared to be in free fall.  But 
I returned on the public holiday 24 September that evening Kgalema Motlanthe called 
me and asked if I would continue to serve as Minister of Finance and he would invite 
me after he is elected the following day.  It seemed to be procedural formality that he 
would be elected.  And so that was a different set of circumstances.  There were some 
ministers who resigned and replacements had to be found. Some rather hurriedly and a 
10 
new cabinet was formed and sworn in as the president – the cabinet of the President 
Motlanthe on about the 25th or 26 September of 2008.  And that cabinet remained in 
position until elections the following year and the same routine was followed.  When 
President Zuma then had been inaugurated an invitation to the state guest house then 
a much larger grouping of people invited and perhaps I was lucky to be first or second 
again invited to serve and in the room – in the study were President Zuma with Gwede 
Mantashe who was then the Secretary General of the ANC.  So I am saying that in my 
mind the response – no the initiative to confer with some of the top leaders of the 
political party seemed to be entrenched by that practise.  We were sworn in and sorry, 
sorry I need to interrupt this.  There was something that happened.  You see 
20 
Chairperson when you are invited to become a member of Parliament to have your 
name placed on the list of candidates for a party you are required to sign an 
acceptance.  A nomination acceptance and to the best of my knowledge it still exists in 
all political parties.  So I was not sure that I wanted to go back after the 2009 elections.  
So I delayed and then I was called to Luthuli House by – and had a meeting with 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 34 of 149 
 
President Zuma and who was not then president of the Republic and Gwede Mantashe.  
And I indicated that that event I referred to was a signal that my persona had become 
too intertwined with the Portfolio Minister Of Finance and it was not good for democracy 
or me.  And President – well Jacob Zuma then indicated to me that he was mindful of it 
and said that he would ask me to do something else in cabinet not Minister of Finance 
but it would be inappropriate to discuss it because there would asymmetry.  I accepted 
that, signed the acceptance form, went through the motions, sworn in and then I was 
invited to serve as Minister in the Presidency responsible for the national planning 
commission.  And that was a position I occupied until the end of that term which was in 
2014.  But I think Chairperson it is appropriate to mention that there were – there were 
10 
significant changes in the way in which these things were exercised.  For instance at 
the end of October of 2010 there was very large reshuffling.  There were ten ministerial 
changes in all and seven ministers were dropped from cabinet.  And when one looks at 
it well try to understand it then but when one looks at it in retrospect that word that was 
used by Advocate Gcabashe quoting a report earlier the repurposing seemed to be at 
least one of the factors considered.  When one looks for instance and I am going to use 
an example Chair Barbara Hogan who testified before this commission had been 
Minister for Public Enterprises.  Now on that day the 31 October she was summarily 
dropped from her position and Malusi Gigaba was appointed as Minister for Public 
Enterprises.  It is a – and you can run through the entire list that reflects a series of 
20 
choices that were exercised along those lines and you know for instance Minister 
Molewa was removed as Minister of Social Development.  Minister Bathabile Dlamini 
was brought into cabinet for the first time. So those changes were there and those 
changes I think have had a profound impact on the norms of governance since then.  
There is a person I see in the room and I am not supposed to see him but I know that 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 35 of 149 
 
he was also summarily dismissed on that occasion as part of the repurposing. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  In fact that new cabinet and I should actually rephrase that 
the persons who were appointed both to cabinet and the deputy ministers who were 
appointed ended up constituting the largest cabinet/appointment of deputy ministers we 
have ever had in South Africa in terms of just numbers? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Numerically I mean this thing exploded.  A cabinet that – the 
executive exploded because apart from – well from 2009 there were new positions 
created.  What used to exist is Minerals and Energy were separated what used to exist 
is Trade and Industry.  Two new portfolios were created.  Economic Development and 
small business.  There was a new alignment of agriculture forestry and fisheries 
10 
etcetera, etcetera so there were significant changes in 2009 and I think that the cabinet 
was not rapidly expanded even at that occasion in 2010 I referred to but virtually for 
every position there was – there was a deputy minister and in some instances two 
deputy ministers.  So I am saying repurposing but of course there is always an 
opportunity for patronage when you expand a function in the way that it happened over 
that period.   
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  The… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well may I interrupt you Ms Gcabashe? 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Of course Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just to say will the legal team make arrangements that we obtain that 
20 
full list of how the cabinet was constituted before that reshuffle in 2012 that Mr Manuel 
is talking about and obviously the le – how it looked like after the reshuffling.  I think it 
may be quite important we should just have that list and then obviously the legal team 
and the investigators must apply their minds to what evidence if any may be necessary 
around that.  Okay. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 36 of 149 
 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  We will do that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Mr Manuel the point you really touch on now is that the 
constitution provides for a rational application of its provisions and that includes the 
appointment of Ministers and the appointment of Deputy Ministers, you would agree 
with that? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  I agree with it in time. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  So one of the key factors that the Chairman can certainly look 
at as he ultimately at the end of this – of all these hearings looks at appointments and 
dismissals is use that rationality standard to interrogate whether a particular national 
10 
executive… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well before Mr Manuel might answer that and he is free to answer it I 
just want to advise him that this may be a legal question so that if he chooses to 
answer he can answer but if he thinks it might be difficulties for him to do that.  Ja okay 
alright. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Then I will  just rephrase it as you say rational standards are 
what is expected in terms of the constitution and leave it at that. 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Yes and Chair you are absolutely correct I think there has to 
be the test – the objective test for rationality in the exercise of power. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Can I ask… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Can I ask you just very briefly to then just explain the 
significance of a ministerial portfolio as opposed to that of a deputy minister because 
we are ultimately going to come to a position where we are discussing the change in 
status of Mr Mbalula from being a Deputy Minister of Police to being a full Minister of 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 37 of 149 
 
Sports and Recreation.  There are people who still confuse the concept of Deputy 
Minister and assume that Deputy Ministers are members of cabinet.  Maybe coming 
from you people will understand this differentiation a little better.   
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Chair the – my experience and my reading of the constitution 
is that Section 85 of the Constitution vests the executive authority in the present and its 
exercise with other members of cabinet.  So presumably you have to be a full minister – 
you may be assisted but in the main ministers cannot devolve their responsibility to 
deputy ministers.  So it has always been well before ’94 there was a clear distinction 
because there were some deputy ministers and ministers had loos in their toilets and 
deputy ministers did not ever.  They had to continue to try and get there.  They were 
10 
referred to Afrikaans [indistinct] is Kort Broek Ministers.  That was the distinction before 
1994.  And so I am saying Section 85 vests the executive authority in the present acting 
with cabinet and it was always a bug bear for deputy ministers because when ministers 
are – were away there was always requirement that an acting minister be appointed 
and this must actually be in a presidential minute.  And the acting minister has to be a 
member of cabinet.  So deputy ministers never become acting ministers.  I think the 
distinction made in the constitution is held in practise.  And I think it is quite an 
important distinction.  In fact in the case of the Minister of Finance because of the 
extraordinary work load one of the functions that the Minister of Finance has to deal 
with would be variations to import tariffs.  Now these things come in at the rate of about 
20 
sometimes 30 a week and it was just an unbelievable work load and I approached 
President Mandela sorry President Mbeki then asking him whether we could separate 
this out and the deputy minister could be assigned this so there had to be a formal 
assignment, right? By special presidential minute and the publication of that power in 
the gazette.  So it was not just the Minister of Finance sort of shovelling work to the 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 38 of 149 
 
deputy minister to keep them out of trouble.  There was actually a formal assignment of 
that responsibility.  And I think that is how the constitution provides for the distinction. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Yes indeed you are correct because the constitution does 
provide in Section 98 and 99 for any temporary assignment or functions to go from a 
cabinet member to another cabinet member.  So if it were to go to a deputy minister 
indeed a special proclamation some legal document. 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Yes. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  In terms of Section 101 again of the Constitution would have 
to be put in place.  Can I wrap up this part of your evidence with the following question?  
Is there anything fundamentally wrong in a president taking advise in circumstances 
10 
where he or she does not applicate his or her authority to take a particular decision?  I 
ask this because part of the area we are going to move into now is the 1.3 Term of 
Reference 1.3 area where we are talking about whether anybody in an unauthorised 
manner was able to get information on an appointment process that the then president 
was busy with.  So the question is: Is there anything wrong really with consulting never 
mind who but just the process of consulting a third party if that president does not 
abdicate his or her authority to take that final decision? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Thank you Ms Gcabashe.  Chairperson I do not think that 
there – there can be an objection to consultation.  What I have tried to indicate from my 
experience was when I was appointed the Secretary General of the African National 
20 
Congress was not a Member of Parliament even was in the room indicating that there 
had been consultation.  I had never known any – which is why I would have to guess if 
the top 6 were consulted as a unit.  Because there was never = I mean I did not see the 
Treasury General of the ANC having a press conference and saying well you know this 
president wants to appoint Trevor Manuel I disagree with that.  It was always kept in the 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 39 of 149 
 
strictest confidence and I think that the issue of consultation would require that.  It 
would require I think also un-interpretation of the oath of office of the head of state. 
What advances the interest of the Republic and they look to you Chair and say that 
when I read the judgment of the constitutional court 31 March 2016 and at paragraph 
83 where it deals with the violation of the oath of office.  It is about those kinds of 
things. It is about whether – these matters are – where the powers are consciously 
exercised.  And the limitations understood by those who exercise that kind of power.   
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Yes.  Thank you.  This really takes us to the meeting of 
August 2011 and it brings us to the October 2018 affidavit that you deposed to.   
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Yes. 
10 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Maybe I should start at the beginning.  What triggered Mr 
Mbalula’s outburst at the NEC meeting of the 20 – of August 2011? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Chair I may be slightly wrong about this because – just 
because of lapse of time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  But I will try and put my recollection and I think the next 
witness may be in a position to confirm or vary that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  But my recollection of that NEC was that there was a tense 
discussion about the influence of the Gupta’s.   
20 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Can I ask you to pause there because I know you are going to 
go further.  When you say the influence of the Gupta’s a tense discussion about the 
influence of the Gupta’s was this not the discussion introduced by Mr Mbalula or did 
that tense discussion ensue after Mr Mbalula had made his contribution? 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Chairperson the African National Congress is a political 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 40 of 149 
 
movement and politics is very wide and wide ranging discussions take place in the 
National Executive Committee and so in response to what started out as a political 
overview provided frequently by the President of the ANC that then is wide ranging 
discussion and amongst the issues not covered – not canvassed in the introductory 
paper but that emerges from the floor is but why are the Gupta’s as influential as they 
are?  And then there would be various comments on that.  There is no resolution on it at 
the conclusion of the discussion Chair but it is quite important that these matters were 
raised as freely and as strongly as they were in that National Executive Committee 
Meeting.  And my recollection of it is Chairperson that when it came to the opportunity 
for Mr Mbalula to speak in that meeting he became very emotional in the exchange of 
10 
open letters between ourselves – I refer to his weeping and he said he cried but he did 
not – I did not understand why he cried and it was – I am saying it was a very emotional 
thing.  I am not saying this to in any way try and humiliate him or anything it was an 
exceedingly difficult emotional issue for Mr Mbalula my interpretation.  And it was about 
the fact that he had served before this reshuffle I refer to 31 October 2010 he was 
serving as Deputy Minister of Police.  Maybe it was called Safety and Security maybe 
Police but he was Deputy Minister there and on the 31 October he was announced at 
the Minister for Sport and Recreation. And thus moving from a Deputy Minister into a 
cabinet position.  Now what he articulated in the NEC was that he was – he was very 
excited.  No, he said that he was called to Saxonwold to be told by the Gupta’s now I 
20 
know that there may be a difference of names maybe Atul maybe Ajay maybe he knew 
them maybe he did not know them I would not be able to distinguish between one and 
the other brother because I do not know them. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  If I might just clarify.  Mr Ajay Gupta who is the older brother 
says he had the discussion with Mr Mbalula.  It was not Mr Atol Gupta who you 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 41 of 149 
 
reference in the statement but that is really just… 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  That may be so but… 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Information. 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  If I read his affidavit Chair he also says that it was in Midrand 
at the offices of Sahara whereas my recollection of what Mr Mbalula said in the NEC 
was that he was called to Saxonwold. And I would assume that he knows the 
geography of greater Johannesburg well enough to know the difference between 
Midrand and Saxonwold.   
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Can I add one more area of dispute as you continue with your 
narrative.  The third one is that Mr Ajay Gupta says he simply said to – congratulated 
10 
Mr Mbalula and said he understands Mr Mbalula is going to become a full minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Ms Gcabashe I wonder whether you should not allow Mr Manuel 
to finish his recollection of what happened in what Mr Mbalula said and what happened 
at the NEC meeting that is relevant to what we are dealing with before then maybe you 
– you put that to him. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  As you please Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Just so that the evidence is continuous. 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Thank you Chair.  What Mr Mbalula said was that when he 
20 
was called to Saxonwold he went there and there he was told that he was going to be 
appointed as Minister of Sport and Recreation.  And he was at first very excited about 
making it into cabinet I mean there is a sense of a big promotion. Very excited at being 
told this but in retrospect and this was the emotional part of it.  It should never have 
been the Gupta’s or anybody else told him that.  It was the prerogative of the president 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 42 of 149 
 
and that prerogative had been violated by the way in which the information had been 
shared with him.  Now I think Chairperson that if and when Mr Mbalula does appear in 
this commission as a witness he is likely to confirm what I am saying.  That it was the 
sense of the violation of the constitutional prescripts in the exercise of authority by the 
president that had been violated by somebody who knew before he was entitled to.  
And seemed to suggest that he had sufficient power to confer the status of cabinet 
minister on an individual  That is the big issue and I think it goes to the heart of what I 
earlier described as repurposing and extraneous influences which also seem to align 
with the terms of reference of your commission Chairperson. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you Mr Manuel.  If I might just ask one or two questions 
10 
relating to this particular narrative.  First my understanding from your evidence is that 
Mr Mbalula’s contribution at that NEC meeting did not trigger the discussion on the 
influence of the Gupta family or the perceived influence of the Gupta family on the 
president.  It was in response to a discussion that was already in place or that was 
unfolding that he then made his contribution.  I do not know if you can recollect that 
kind of detail it would be useful if you could. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chair with respect I do not recall it.  It may have 
been something along the lines of a group of Members of the National Executive that is 
starting to argue that the President does not exercise control and then it sort of 
developed into a particular discussion.  It may have been something along those lines, 
20 
but I, I, I could not confirm at this stage that it was Fikile Mbalula who, who sort of 
started who triggered the enter discussion.  I think there was a discussion happening 
that arose from a concern about [indistinct] his influences on the exercise of power. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So is my understanding correct that while because of the lapse of 
time you might not recollect certain aspects correctly but you have no doubt that there 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 43 of 149 
 
was at that meeting some discussion around concern, the concern that was being 
expressed or had been expressed about either the influence of the Gupta family in 
Government or that the then President was not controlling certain things properly?  That 
part, is that part one that your recollection is clear about or not really? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  No, I, I, Chair I think your, your, your reading of 
what I am saying is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  In fact at that time there was a climate where it 
10 
seemed as though certain individuals were invited to Saxonwold not, not only 
Minister Mbalula, but he was the first to make that declaration, and it is almost a public 
declaration because the NEC comprised of more than 80 people, of how he had been 
appointed.  There had been speculation about a number of others and a bit of banter 
even about whether somebody was a Gupta minister or whatever, but this was the first 
to the best of my knowledge a first confirmation which was in the form of, of, of I am 
saying a very emotional statement by then Minister Mbalula about how he had been 
appointed.  So it broke, in many ways it broke, it broke, it broke the, the taboo had 
broken the myth that it confirmed that these things were actually happening. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  It is, it is interesting that this is a discussion that took place 
20 
in August 2011. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Huh-uh. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  The appointment of Mr Mbalula was in October, effective 
1 November 2010? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Yes. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 44 of 149 
 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Almost a year later as when you had this discussion at the 
NEC meeting.  Are there events that may have unfolded between 1 November 2010 
when he was appointed Minister of Sport and Recreation and the August 2011 date that 
sparked this discussion? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chair I, I do not want to subject this, this 
Commission to my conjecture. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Because, because I mean in, in, in the form of, of 
these discussions in the NEC and I hope I am not breaking any confidences, but it 
generally starts with a political overview provided by the President and then 
10 
discussions.  Discussions are generally free flowing and they would be supportive of 
the views and sometimes there would be, there would be opposing views.  They never 
come together.  They never resolve, result in, in formal resolutions, but I think it is an 
opportunity to clear the air.  To try and persuade others of, of positions held and so I, I 
do not actually read in, anything into. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  The fact that there was not an immediate reaction 
in November 2010.  Perhaps. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  It took, it took some time for. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  For the matter to actually just state just in the 
minds of, of some people there. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  I, I would then go back to my term application of authority 
and say that the essence therefore of, of that discussion was about the President being 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 45 of 149 
 
influenced by a family to the extent that he appeared to abdicate his authority to take 
critical decisions that the Constitution confers on him and him alone. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chair I have not the slightest doubt that that 
application is, is in evidence in the example, but I would hazard that if you take many of 
the State Owned Corporations the Ministers, I, I used, I used the word repurposing.  
The Ministers who were appointed to particular portfolios part of the exercise of their 
powers to recommend frequently, recommend to Cabinet certain appointments at State 
Owned Corporations/Enterprises, same thing and I think that they, they, they acted 
frequently to advance certain positions.  You could only Chairperson arrive at the 
situation where Eskom lived through 12 CEOs and six Chairs in a decade.  If the 
10 
repurposing was the objective and so it is, I mean I have no doubt that if there were 
recalcitrant, not recalcitrant, reluctant Ministers there would be removed and replaced 
with, with people who were more pliable.  I, I, I want to, to say that I, I do not have the 
slightest doubt that that is what transpired with removal of Minister Nhlanhla Nene on 
9 December 2015 and his temporary replacement with Des Van Rooyen who arrived 
with advisors in tow and if my reading of Advocate Madonsela’s report is correct had 
spent the previous week visiting a particular house in Saxonwold every single day.  
When I say repurposing it is my reading of those kinds of circumstances that shape it 
for me.  Somebody who is reluctant in, in, in performing certain functions then being 
replaced with somebody who might act quite differently and receive instructions from 
20 
strange places. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  One, one small, little matter just to confirm.  At the NEC 
meeting of August 2011 you confirm that the President of the Republic was present? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  The President of the? 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  The President of the ANC, he was there? 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 46 of 149 
 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Yes indeed Chairperson. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  He was there. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  I just want to confirm [intervenes]. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  No, he was there.  I mean it is, it is, you know 
perhaps it is just, it is just the way.  If Advocate Gcabashe in this environment said 
something, she cast judgment on, on something I am doing I am going to actually say 
with respect Advocate Gcabashe I, I fundamentally disagree with your view on this 
matter.  I would not leave it, but you know that is just how things are. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Was there a reaction from the President? 
10 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  I certainly do not recall any reaction. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  I would then like to take you to the issues that Mr Ajay Gupta 
raises in his Rule 3.4 application and the statement annexed to that and I will really just 
set them out, paraphrase them briefly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Gcabashe [indistinct]. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  My learned. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are getting a lot of assistance. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  My learned leader thought you were preparing to ask a 
question Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, no, no 
20 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  And he knows that I. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  I do not spot talking until I am asked to stop. 
[Laughing]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 47 of 149 
 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  He was, he was just. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Asking me to pause for a second. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I did not intend to, but certainly there was a question in my 
mind.  So that part he, he read quite well.  There was a question in my mind, but I am 
not going to interrupt you for now. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you, thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  The first issue really is that both Mr Mbalula and Mr, 
Mr Ajay Gupta said that it was Mr Ajay Gupta who had the discussion and not 
10 
Mr Atul Gupta.  My question really is does anything turn on which Gupta brother had 
this discussion with Mr Mbalula? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chairperson I do not think anything turns on it.  I 
think the admission that there was a discussion is sufficient to confirm what 
Ms Gcabashe refers to as a sense of application.  I know that in, in, in this open letter I, 
I said it was Atul or did I say Ajay? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I think you said [intervenes]. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  You said Atul Mr Manuel. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Atul, yes but you know that that may have been 
what I thought I heard but I, I, because I do not know the individuals I do not think that I 
20 
would ever attempt to distinguish between one and the other and, and I do not think it is 
material.  I think the fact that there is an acknowledgement that ahead of 
Minister Mbalula’s appointment that there was a discussion about the fact that he would 
assume a particular position or, because there is also a sense argued by, by, by 
Mr Ajay Gupta that he did not say it will be Minister of Sport but that you would go into 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 48 of 149 
 
Cabinet.  I think that is immaterial.  How did he, how did he come by that knowledge I 
think is an important question. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  I will get to that point in a minute, but can we just clear the 
issue of Sahara Computers in Midrand and Saxonwold.  Your recollection, and really I 
am just placing this on record, your recollection is that Mr Mbalula said he had been 
summoned to Saxonwold? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chair I, I do not think that I could assert the words 
summonsed or summoned, but certainly he was called to Saxonwold.  That that, that is 
my recall of, of what he said. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  The next area of dispute is whether Mr Ajay Gupta, this is 
10 
his version, is correct when he says he simply read media articles and realised that 
Mr Mbalula was up for promotion and congratulate, congratulated.  Wanted to 
congratulate and did in fact congratulate Mr Mbalula on his appointment to full Minister.  
He denies in his affidavit mentioning the portfolio of Sport and Recreation.  Is that your 
recollection of what you heard? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chair it is, it is, it is but my recollection over a long 
period that that Mr Mbalula said that he had been advised that he would assume the 
position, because it, it would not be, it would not be an unreasonable expectation for 
somebody who occupies a position of Deputy Minister say of International Relations to 
aspire to occupy the Cabinet position.  It would not be unreasonable, but where you 
20 
have a kind of diagonal move where, where there is no, there is no evidence skill set.  I 
think it is, it is, it is worth, it is worth recalling and that is certainly what Minister Mbalula 
or Mr Mbalula has seen to, to suggest about the engagement. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Of course if you look at page, paginated page 35 which is 
one of Ajay Gupta’s annexures and you go down to three quarters down that page.  It is 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 49 of 149 
 
a Fin24 archive report.  It reads as follows: 
“The 
Weekend 
Argus 
reported 
that 
Deputy 
Police 
Minister Fikile Mbalula was set to take up a full Cabinet post as 
a reward for leading the campaign that saw Zuma elected ANC 
President in 2007.” 
This is what Ajay Gupta’s version is.  He says a full Cabinet post.  He did not mention 
Sport and Recreation.  Again if you look at page 37.  Again it is an annexure relied on 
by Mr Ajay Gupta.  The top paragraph again speaks to: 
“Taking up a full Cabinet post as a reward for leading the 
campaign that saw Mr Zuma elected ANC President in 2007.” 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course Ms Gcabashe we have to remember that Mr Manuel was 
not there when there was that conversation.  He only knows what on his recollection 
Mr Mbalula said at the NEC.  So he probably might not be able to say what 
Mr Ajay Gupta may or may not have said to Mr Mbalula that what he certainly did here 
is what Mr Mbalula said at the NEC meeting.  So I just mention that, but you might be 
wanting to say something Mr Manuel. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chair I mean you know press speculation will also 
obtain.  I would imagine that ahead of the elections on 8 May and, and subsequent to 
the announcement of results and so on the press will speculate Ranjeni Munusamy 
would put together a Cabinet.  It is just, it is just a way this thing works but if, if 
20 
Mr Egypt sees his name in Ranjeni’s list it would, it would be quite extraordinary for me 
to call Mr Egypt and say well congratulations on your appointment.  Why would I do 
that?  What authority would I have to do it and I would not just call him on the telephone 
I would invite him to my home to do it and I think that gives the entire exchange a, a 
particular meaning and, and you know my reading of it is if, if you have the authority to 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 50 of 149 
 
call somebody to your home to break that news unless he was going there for, for 
general shebeen activities but, but if you were called to the house to be told this there, 
there must have been a sense of authority and perhaps expectation from one side 
about how this would pan out. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Even if you were called to Sahara Computers in Midrand. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  I think. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  The same would pertain? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  The same issues would apply. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  In any event I really am just putting Mr Ajay Gupta’s version 
to you and that version is contained in his statement which you find on pages 30 and 31 
10 
paragraphs 4, five and six speak to the issue that those newspaper reports speak to.  
So really this is just the Commission’s effort and, saying to you Mr Ajay Gupta may not 
be here but he has given us a version and this is what his version records. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chairperson I would like him to be here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [Laughing]. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  I would like him to give up the hiding place in Dubai 
CHAIRPERSON:  [Laughing]. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  And be here and face consequences. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [Laughing], yes. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  With respect to those media reports when Mr Mbalula 
20 
addressed the, the, the NEC meeting in August he certainly did not make, and this is a 
question, did not make any reference to what he might have read in the October 
additions of various newspapers which are the ones that Mr Ajay Gupta relies on.  This 
is a question. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chairperson it is not my recall.  My recall and, and, 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 51 of 149 
 
and I mean the, the, the matter referred to as, as the emotional breakdown is about the 
fact that in retrospect he felt violated by being told.  So it was not that I read in the New 
Age that I will be appointed Minister of Police and then I was not appointed Minister of 
Police.  This was a different kind of exchange that then triggered the, the emotional 
response. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Yes.  If you would then turn to, back to TAM page 4 just 
above paragraph 11.  So we are looking at page 4 and these are the last few questions 
Mr Manuel.  We are almost done. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Yes. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  I, I, I really want to interrogate very briefly the annexures 
10 
that you annexed to your statement.  The paragraph I have a particular interest in is the 
second one.  Well at the top really Mr Mbalula talks about newspapers that have all 
kinds of leaks and this is in his response to you.  It is the very next paragraph that I 
have a particular interest in.  If you would please read that into the record. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Thank you very much Ms Gcabashe and, and I 
quote from an open letter from Fikile Mbalula which is dated 11 June 2017 and I quote: 
“Manuel did not understand what my tears were about.  He did 
not get the point that I am on record as stating that I have 
fundamental problems with the way capitalists operate and the 
Gupta family show us how, just how ugly capitalism is.  Indeed 
20 
they abuse privately learned information to try to position 
themselves somehow.  I was not about that which is why I was 
the first to report this to an open NEC.  I am still not part of that.  
I do not stand for that.  On the other hand Manuel was one of 
the people who at that NEC meeting did not agree with my 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 52 of 149 
 
stance on the Gupta family.” 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you Mr Manuel so the first part of that paragraph 
speaks to Mr Mbalula’s what he calls his fundamental problems with the way capitalists 
operate.  Was this the sense you got from his contribution at the NEC meeting? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chairperson I, I would have to, I would really have 
to stretch the point to, to think that Mr Mbalula was taking an ideological point against 
capitalism.  I do not think that that, that was articulated in any shape or form, because 
you know there is, there is a general capitalism and then there is the behaviour of the 
crudest kind of Rand seekers.  Now I think in the minds of many the Guptas would be 
categorised as crude Rand seekers and, and so, but you know to the best of my 
10 
recollection Mr Mbalula was not articulating an ideological point.  He was, he was upset 
about the exchange and, and as we, we referred to earlier the abdication of 
responsibility by the Head of State. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you.  The second part of that paragraph is, the very 
last sentence which reads: 
“On the other hand Manuel was one of the people who at that 
NEC meeting did not agree with my stance on the Gupta 
family.” 
Your comment? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  It, it would be very strange.  I mean I, I have never 
20 
had any relationship or any brief for the Gupta family and I would not in any shape or 
form Chairperson countenance the idea that individuals should be the bearers of tidings 
to members who are about to be appointed into the Executive.  It is in, it is in total 
violation of everything that I think the Constitution requires of the exercise of Executive 
Authority.  Now when you have an NEC of 80 people and generally no time limit and 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 53 of 149 
 
how long people can speak for the fact that another person does not speak on the 
same topic that does not mean that they disagree with the view articulated.  You would 
only know that if you know I see, I saw Cheryl Carolus here earlier.  She used to, we, 
we, oh she is still here.  We served on the NEC together.  I would never know what her 
views were on a particular matter unless she articulated those views, because this is 
not, this is not something that, I mean the NEC forums are not, are not arranged so that 
each of the individuals can articulate a view.  So I mean this is, this is trying to; I think it 
is, it is, it is an attempt by Mr Mbalula to distinguish himself as a, as pure as driven 
snow but I, I mean you know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well in your letter to Mr Mbalula that we have here that, to which he 
10 
responded in the Daily Maverick I think you raised the issue of what he said at that 
NEC meeting in a certain context and he responded in the manner in which he 
responded, but am I right so say part of what you are saying here about what he said at 
that meeting is that he was expressing an objection to being told by somebody outside 
of Government, being told by one of the Gupta brothers that he was actually going to 
be moved from being Deputy Minister to being a Minister.  Am I correct to say you are 
saying he was objecting to that as, as you understood what he, what he said and what 
his crying was about? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chairperson let me just, let me just try and couch it 
in, in an understanding I have. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  In the circumstance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  If Atul, Ajay what is the other brother’s name, 
Tony? 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 54 of 149 
 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Rajesh. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Rajesh, if any of them were to phone me and ask 
me to come and see them at home I do not think I would go.  I have never been called 
so I, I, I do not have any, any, any grounds because it is not, it is not a resolve that has 
been tested in anyway, but if you do not have a relationship why would you go there?  
Whether it is Saxonwold or the Sahara Computers Offices in Midrand why would I go 
there and in the course of the exercise of, of Executive Authorities you have to meet 
business people and so on, but it is always very important to do certain things as I tried 
to do.  If a business person wanted to see me I would ask them to indicate in writing 
and almost inevitably I would ask that the meetings take place in my office and so I am 
10 
saying for me the context is important.  If you did not have any relationship my question 
would be why did you go?  What was, what was said to you as part of the invitation to 
go to wherever that exchange took place and I think that it is fair to presume a 
pre-existing relationship and so Chairperson the, the, the open letter I write is kind of to 
say to Fikile Mbalula do not pretend that you had no relationship, because you were in 
tears about this issue and I am trying to signal that there was a pre-existing relationship 
of whatever, whatever form because I was not privy to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well there may, there may or may not have been a pre-existing 
relationship, but he spoke at the end is a meeting and I am just trying to and, to try and 
understand to check that my understanding of what you are saying is correct.  Let us 
20 
assume there was a pre-existing relationship.  His crying and his raising this issue that 
he had been told for the first time by the Guptas that he was going to be made Minister 
before the President could tell him.  From what you have said I understand that he was 
unhappy about that, about, about the fact that he was told by the Guptas before the 
President could tell him, is my understanding of what – of your understanding of is 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 55 of 149 
 
attitude incorrect? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  No Chairperson I concur with that, the question 
though is the one that Ms Gcabashe asked earlier, if those events took place in October 
of 2010 it was a very long gestation period before the remorse was felt, because the 
essence of it is he was at first elated at being told that he has now made it into cabinet 
and then in the cold light of day realises that there was something wrong with the way 
in which he was communicated with and by whom, so if there were signals of earlier 
remorse before that particular NEC meeting I wasn’t privy to them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well part of what I am doing is because the approach would be 
where he or anybody expresses a view that is a good view, or takes a position that’s a 
10 
good position, you know it may be that you give credit, credit for that, but where or 
anybody takes a wrong decision, a wrong procedural position you deal with that and 
say but that was wrong but that was right.  Now so I’m trying to see whether from your 
evidence I can say that he expressed unhappiness in the NEC that a situation had 
arisen where the Guptas knew in advance that he was going to be made Minister and 
he was saying this is wrong, or at least part of what he was saying, whether part of 
what he was saying was this. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chairperson you know we – as Mr Mbalula says in 
his response to me that he was the first time to make such a declaration in the NEC 
and I would grant that point to him.  The recognition of something that was 
20 
fundamentally wrong, even though with the lapse of time I think it’s an important point, 
because if the corridor speculation around the cabinet room and the NEC was correct 
at the time there were also a number of other individuals who had been called in the 
same kind of way and they have never made a similar declaration.   
 
Yes Chairperson if the work had been done as the former public protector did 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 56 of 149 
 
in her report of communication and presence because the GPS on our telephones 
would tell us who is in this room right now, if those things were done for a number of 
other individuals I would not be surprised if others were told at about the same time by 
the same individuals about the positions they’d occupy and you know it – because 
Chair for me it speaks to on the one hand the abdication of power and on the other 
hand a very public expression of power, supposing and you know it doesn’t happen but 
supposing the President were to ask for my ear about a particular appointment I don’t 
think that it would ever be my place to communicate to the individuals that we 
discussed.  It’s not my place.  And unless we can conduct ourselves correctly with the 
confidences I mean I go back Chairperson and this is learnt behaviour when President 
10 
Mandela said to me alright so I am going to appoint you, but don’t go and discuss this 
thing with anybody.  It’s what you accept.  I mean you – I think if you accept that you 
will serve in the cabinet system you must abide by the rules, and if outsiders come and 
demonstrate in a boastful way that they have access to information that they’re not 
entitled to then I think it speaks to the violation, which is at the centre of an enquiry into 
capture. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I will allow Ms Gcabashe to continue and finish  but after that I 
just want us to have quite some conversation about some of these issues because, 
one, they are very important, two, you served for a long time in government and you 
have a clear understanding of how government works and cabinet and so on, and you 
20 
were in the NEC for a long time too, so I would like us to discuss that, but just to go 
back to the issue of what it is that you understood Mr Mbalula to be raising or to be 
crying about in the NEC.  It’s important and you have indicated that you would grant 
him that credit in terms of raising that issue, being the first one to raise that issue.  It’s 
important because in this Commission I have heard Mr Jonas who came here and gave 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 57 of 149 
 
evidence and I know that there may be a challenge to his evidence, he might still be 
cross-examined and I will make a decision later at some stage but he gave evidence 
that was to the effect that he was offered a position of Minister of Finance by I say just 
the Guptas, it was one of the brothers, and he rejected it outright there and then so you 
might then have a situation where Mr Mbalula might not have raised any concern 
necessarily to the Guptas when they told him but maybe that it wasn’t an offer, they 
were just telling him what they understood to be – what was going to happen as a 
matter of fact, you know that he was going to be made Minister, but then he on a 
certain understanding of his evidence he – of what he said he then raises it at an NEC 
and he says this is what happened to me and therefore brings it to the attention of the 
10 
leadership of the governing party for them to know what has happened and then take it 
from there, but I am just mentioned that, I think Ms Gcabashe is finished we will have a 
chance to talk more about these issues. 
 
Thank you, Ms Gcabashe? 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you Chairman, just one or two more questions.  Mr 
Manuel if you go to page 3 of the paginated bundle to your paragraph 9 which is part of 
this exchange this open letter that you wrote, that’s what I want to focus on, the very 
last sentence of the extract reads: 
“Perhaps there are still a few debts to be called in by Saxonwold.” 
Could you explain what you were communicating in this sentence? 
20 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chair the vituperative of open letters are the 
creative juices generally of about three am.  I go back to the way in which I tried to 
answer the question put by you Chairperson.  I’m saying that my reading of it was that 
there must have been a pre-existing relationship.  That’s the gist of this, and a pre-
existing relationship, I mean relationships can be based on all kinds of things.  Perhaps 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 58 of 149 
 
they are just general friendships.  Mr Nyanda over there and I are friends and we meet 
occasionally and we have a chat and we have been friends and that would be – he 
doesn’t need anything from me and I don’t need anything from him, it’s just a friendship, 
but the sense that I have of the way in which the Guptas have interacted was never 
about the need for friendship, it was a need for favours, and it’s in my reading of that 
word of repurposing.  
 
Chair let’s go back to the portfolio that Fikile Mbalula was promoted into, 
Sport and Recreation to replace a person, the Reverend Makhenkesi Stofile, and the 
late Reverend and I have been friends and comrades for many years, his involvement 
in sport was lifelong.  When as early as 1981 we tried to stop the Springbok Tour to 
10 
New Zealand it was to the Reverend Makhenkesi Stofile that we turned to go and 
campaign because sport was his life.   
 
So you take somebody who is a committed – well active sportsperson in his 
youth, active sports administrator as he grew a bit older, and you replace him with 
somebody in that portfolio who has no visible or no experience of participation in sport, 
apart from as we’ve seen flying to a Mayweather boxing match, you replace a person 
who has reached into the sporting fraternity because that’s what’s important about a 
portfolio like that than somebody who has no evident communication with the fraternity.  
These are actually important issues and so it’s against that backdrop I ask if there are 
still some outstanding favours to be called in. 
20 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  In that context there’s an open source report I came across 
that suggests that Mr Mbalula was actually supposed, or the intention had been to 
appoint him as full Minister of Police and that for some reason somebody put the 
spanners in the works, my words, not the article’s words, and he was then moved to 
sport and recreation.  My question is, is this an issue that arose at the NEC meeting of 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 59 of 149 
 
August 2011, which is what you are dealing with today? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  No Chairperson it didn’t arise, but let me just infuse 
into the question, my understanding of what you said may be a legal matter, the rational 
exercise of power, if – and you know with cabinet positions because they are itinerant 
you don’t necessarily have somebody who has all the schooling in a particular portfolio, 
but to Ms Gcabashe’s question I don’t know and you’re not meant to know if that 
speculation in your open source is correct what the criteria would be to evaluate that he 
might be an appropriate candidate to occupy the position of Minister of Police.  Perhaps 
it’s that he fears nothing, perhaps there’s some other gift that he has that we are 
unaware of, but you know all I’m saying is that it’s fundamentally important to look at 
10 
how a power is exercised in a rational and objective manner. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you Mr Manuel.  Can I ask you to look at page 15 of 
your paginated bundle, at paragraph 2 thereof, page 15, this is what Mr Mbalula writes 
in response to our open letter and I really am only interested in the first sentence.  He 
says I have asked before where were all these people when Trevor Manuel appointed 
or accept R J Gupta as cabinet advisor on economy and an ambassador of Brand 
South Africa during his tenure.  I just want to focus on that and nothing else.  What do 
you know about this particular allegation? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chairperson in terms of cabinet advisor, cabinet 
doesn’t have advisors.  Ministers have advisors but cabinet doesn’t have advisors so 
20 
the position of cabinet advisor from somebody who was a cabinet minister he should 
know that it’s a non-existent position so why he dredges up something that doesn’t exist 
or attempts to dredge up something that doesn’t exist I don’t know, it’s a question that 
he might be in the best position to answer. 
 
The second issue that he draws attention to is that he served as an 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 60 of 149 
 
ambassador of Brand of South Africa, I think the term ambassador is used very liberally.  
Now to the best of my recollection when (indistinct) was Minister in the Presidency one 
of the responsibilities he had was for Brand SA and generally ministers have the license 
to approach cabinet to appoint people onto boards, and in this context I don’t know if 
it’s Ajay or Atul and I don’t want to be on the wrong side of these brothers, one of the 
Gupta brothers certainly sat on the Board of Brand SA.  I do want to make the point that 
I have a sense that when the Gupta brother was appointed very little was known of their 
activities and if there were nefarious activities they were certainly not in the open.  
Chairperson in my limited experience there are people who were public servants, whilst 
I was a Minister, for whom I had regard for their conduct and integrity and diligence and 
10 
who later emerged for instance in the Madonsela report, but I didn’t know that in that 
way, that happened in the fullness of time.  And my sense is though I had no personal 
relationship with the Guptas as I’ve said before having somebody who has arrived in 
South Africa, appears to have a network of contacts and can assist in brand building 
would have been the motivation by a minister but it’s not an ambassadorial position, it’s 
serving on the Board of Brand SA, so to try and inflate the position as something that 
cabinet would have dealt with and handing over diplomatic passports and that kind of 
thing could not be further from the truth. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you, thank you Mr Manuel.  The remainder of the 
annexures that you have relied on I do not think are particularly relevant to term of 
20 
reference 1.3 and unless you can point to some relevance in that discussion that will 
assist this commission beside the question of appointments and dismissal and the 
influence on the decision maker by a family or by unauthorised persons I will pass on 
the rest of the content of those two annexures.  I don’t know if you think there are 
particular issues you want to draw on in those two annexures that you believe are 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 61 of 149 
 
relevant to the reason that you are here today. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  No there is nothing else Chairperson, I mean you 
know I’ve mentioned in passing that the notion of repurpose, and I have made 
reference to the appointment of Des van Rooyen, which is common cause, and his 
arrival in the Treasury with advisors, which I think may have evinced here as evidence 
by amongst other people Mr Lungisa Fuzile because all of that speaks to the same kind 
of cavalier use of power I’m afraid, so you know because trends set in and it’s quite 
important to understand that.   
 
Thank you Chair. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  My really last question Chairman, it is really an open-ended 
10 
one to Mr Manuel, are there any other matters that you would like to bring to the 
attention of the Chairman even if they are matters that don’t fall strictly within the 
preserve of term of reference 1.3 but there may be matters that you would want to 
come back to the Commission to explore because they are matters that are germane to 
the discharge of the mandate of this Commission.   
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chairperson there is nothing at the moment, but 
you know I am willing to make a commitment under oath that I would do whatever I can 
to assist with the success of the mission to you to deal with State Capture, I think all of 
us as rational South Africans need to be invested in the work that you’re doing, we must 
try and ensure not only that the evidence becomes public but I think that it’s very 
20 
important that there be consequences for those who were involved in wrongdoing, 
those who have wittingly been instruments of corruption and state capture need to be 
brought to book and the role of this Commission I think would be paramount in ensuring 
that justice is seen to be done on that matter, so in whatever small way I can assist 
Chairperson I want to give you the assurance that I would, thank you. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 62 of 149 
 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you Chair, thank you very much Mr Manuel.  
Chairman I have no further questions for Mr Manuel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Thank you very much Mr Manuel, I did say that I still 
wanted to have an engagement with you in regard to a number of issues that are very 
important but before we look at how to handle that I am mindful of the fact that your 
statements, both statements, may have given the impression, they certainly gave me 
the impression that we might take a very short time with you, and we have taken much 
more and you may have made travelling plans that might be disturbed if we keep you 
for longer, so I just want to check how  your situation is in terms of being around a little 
longer? 
10 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chairperson having just declared my commitment 
to avail myself to the Commission I will have to stay here, I couldn’t otherwise.  Thank 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay so maybe we might have to go into the lunch hour just so that 
when we release you then we are done, is that fine with you? 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  I would appreciate that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you Chairman, may I take my seat? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja thank you.  As I have said on a number of occasions before this 
Commission in terms of its terms of reference must among other things investigate 
20 
allegations of State Capture, and whether or not those allegations are well-founded is 
something that I will decide much later, but should I decide that indeed those 
allegations are well-founded and that there was State Capture one of the things that I 
will have to look into is what recommendations I should make with regard to measures 
that may need to be taken to be adopted to try and make sure that State Capture never 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 63 of 149 
 
happens again in our country, and in order to deal with that question I have to look at, in 
part I have to look at how did State Capture happen, how did it start, and how was it 
allowed to go on for X number of years and that question includes looking at the 
question of what organisation or what structure of Government or who could have had 
an opportunity to contribute to having State Capture stopped as quickly as possible, 
what could they have done and if they didn’t do it what were the circumstances, so it 
seems to me one would have to look at all of those things in order to make very 
informed decisions, or recommendations. 
 
Now I then want to hear what your views are in this regard, with regard to 
well maybe I should start by saying as far as you know when did NEC of the 
10 
government party become aware that there seemed to be what everyone now calls 
State Capture, and if you are able you can just talk about how you understand they 
might have come to be aware of that, and it may be that you are not able to say as to 
when they became aware but you are able to say generally your view is that by a 
certain time you know many people within either the NEC or the MC had become aware 
that there was something happening which should not be happening that we have come 
to call State Capture. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Thank you Chairperson.  The question you posed 
is difficult, because the – my own reading of the situation, and a lot of this is with 
benefit of hindsight of course. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Is that the period, I mean you know persons whom 
I was present for nine years, in the first five years it seemed as though at some point 
the institutions of government, because if one reads literature on State Capture then 
the role of the institutions is always fundamentally important, and those institutions 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 64 of 149 
 
across government are very wide, and if you look at the institutions of the Criminal 
Justice System for instance there will be the judiciary because the judiciary has held up 
amazingly well and they’ve got a Judicial Services Commission etcetera, etcetera, that 
could in some way fetter the powers to appoint whomsoever the Head of State likes.  
But if one looks at the rest, if you look at – and there I know, I’m mindful of the fact that 
Makgoro Commission is sitting as we speak. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  But if you look at some of the events that transpired in 
relation to the National Director Of Public Prosecutions then there was clearly stuff that 
happened there that is – that weakened the institution.  Now you can track back – you 
10 
can track it back perhaps even into the administration and then look at the particular 
appointment and look at the subsidiary appointments.  You can look at the police 
service and you can look at some of the occupants of the position of National 
Commissioner and some of the heads of the particular branches and if the police is 
rendered ineffective and the prosecutorial authority is rendered ineffective then the fact 
that there would be consequences for wrongdoers diminishes rapidly so.  I allude to 
that big cabinet reshuffle of the end of October 2010.  Now you have asked the 
evidence leaders to find .. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The listing. 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  The extent of the changes and so on and so on it would be 
20 
useful to look at those kinds of [indistinct].  And ask whether there were particular kinds 
of actions because of – because of changes of ministers.  And some of the changes I 
mean you know you lay the basis over a period of time and some of them may actually 
only have been triggered after the 2014 election.  You could also in a not dissimilar way 
look at some of the state owned enterprises or corporations.  I mentioned the number of 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 65 of 149 
 
CEO’s of Eskom for instance and you could look at the boards of the state and 
corporations could the boards exercise governance over the management appointed?  
In senior executives of the organisation at what point did they start changing their 
behaviour?  At what point does somebody trained as an engineer who understands 
generation at what point do they start changing and what is the inducement for change?  
I do not know the answers to these questions Chairperson.  You could similarly look at 
Transnet, you could look at SAA, you could ask why it is that particular individuals were 
preferred to occupy certain positions in boards or in executives?  And it is – you 
probably going to find Chairperson that if you paid very careful attention if there were 
research done on the timelines of behaviour no.  At Eskom we had power outages 
10 
perhaps as early as 2008 when there were certain challenges that arose if my memory 
serves me at the nuclear power station at Koeberg.  They were remedied.  Eskom 
seemed to be able to cope – to deal reasonably and effectively with the period of 
significant growth in the economy.  The economy in that period was growing at about 
four a half to five percent and because of we live in an energy intensive industrial 
country the demand for electricity grew.  And it – Eskom could accommodate the 
increased demand and then certain things happened.  And when those certain things 
happened certain skills were lost.  Even employment for particular kinds of experts 
appeared to become almost impossible.  They were driven away.  And I think that the 
timelines across even just the state owned corporations are going to be very different.  
20 
But I have no doubt that in the appointment of certain persons to perform functions be 
this is chief executives and chief financial officers, be it as technical officers I think 
PRASA for instance or be it the ministers that gave license to certain things if I were to 
try and map this that is certainly where I would look and the one thing I have learnt in 
the past while is that some of the footprints and fingerprints that are left by things like 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 66 of 149 
 
emails and so on do not lie.  And so it should be possible Chairperson with appropriate 
expertise to begin to synthesise some of those things.  And then you could say well if I 
am looking at say PRASA I know that it is not the – it may not be the subject of the 
Madonsela inquiry at what point did certain changes happen?  What I am aware of now 
is that the ability of PRASA to act as a reliable, safe, affordable commuter rail system 
for working people in this country is very seriously diminished.  At what point did it 
happen and why?  I mean I can – all I can offer you Chair is that that kind of analysis 
would be key to unlocking and if that were the case at what point did it happen and 
what may have been the chain of command that gave the licence to bad things 
happening?   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  But in terms of when the NEC may have become aware that there 
were things happening that we now call state capture are you able to give an indication 
as to say well by a certain time surely you know most people were aware and therefore 
they should have been aware or are you not able to [indistinct]. 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Chairperson I know that one of the ongoing discussions and 
debates in this country would be the role of party and state. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  The role of party in state. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  Actually that is where I am getting to – well let me – maybe 
let me finish before because you have raised it before you answer.  I would like to know 
20 
what your views are about whether the governing party once it became aware of what 
we now call state capture whether if you would expect that it ought to have taken some 
steps to try and make sure that no further damage was done by state capture to the 
country, to the state or whether you take the view that well there is a difference 
between the state and the party and the party had – it could not do anything and I 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 67 of 149 
 
would ask also the question so you could think about it, you could deal with it as well.  
Whether Parliament with its obligations of oversight of course which has got you know 
members of Parliament whether you think once they became aware whatever that time 
is they also should have or may have had to take some steps to try and make sure that 
state capture did not cause any more damage to the country as it may have done by 
that time?  So and I know that some of these questions might not be easy questions.  
You might not have prepared to deal with them so just feel free to deal with what you 
are able to deal with and to answer what you can but your views might be very helpful 
because of the experience you have had both in – I mean in government. 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Thank you Chair.  Let us start with your question about the 
10 
National Executive Committee.  I think the – the election to the National Executive 
Committee is always on the basis of seeming popularity and the choice of the four to 
five thousand delegates who assemble once every five years is quite material.  There is 
a process of course that starts with branches and goes through regions and so on to 
produce lists of people but of course there are also slates within it.  So you may well 
end up with the 80 members – the 60 members or so who were directly elected who 
merely happen to be popular or maybe one side of the slate and because these events 
are so fiercely contested it may overlook skilled people who happen to be on a different 
slate.  It is just in the nature of how this happens and when the NEC is assembled I 
think it is very important not to imbue it with an authority that it is not meant to have.  
20 
Chair because you can look – you can look at the issues of state capture as described 
in the State Of Capture Report.  And the kinds of information expressed in that report 
by former Public Protector is not information that the NEC would readily have.  Because 
it is not – it is – I mean that deals with a particular set of state owned corporations but if 
you look at some other issues and let me just pluck out of the air some of the difficulties 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 68 of 149 
 
in the distribution of grants and pensions and there are many people who would say 
when individuals in society are so vulnerable please do not take chances with their 
access to survival resources.  But there is no voice – there is no place that this is 
articulated the NEC has committees but frequently the people who chair the 
committees and who are most active in the committees are also the ministers.  So it 
does not – it does not – it is not very good at holding up a mirror to itself.  So you need 
other mechanisms in society.  I think if one looks at Parliament then as the second part 
of your question Chair the – the – I mean there are a number of issues where 
Parliament ought to have acted sooner.  Not a secret because I have expressed it to 
successive speakers of Parliament I think our Parliament actually spends very little time 
10 
dealing with matters.  If you look at how Parliaments across the world convene and how 
debates are managed and you look at the [indistinct] debate in our Parliaments I think 
we should be a bit concerned about it.  Also as we prepare for the sixth Parliament from 
about May the question of the skill set that obtains there and whether there is sufficient 
independent mind on a range of issues.  Now I think late in the day I was impressed by 
the way in which Parliament responded to certain challenges.  The SABC the response 
to the State of Capture Report and the particular look at Eskom for instance.  And one 
holds the hope that that could become the way in which Parliament functions however – 
however it is going to be important that there be consequences.  I know that on both of 
those reports there were very clear recommendations from the committees put to the 
20 
prenery of the National Assembly.  That may have been signal to – to what the 
prosecutorial authority and police should have done.  It has not happened yet.  One 
looks at other institutions I pluck out of the air also the example of VBS.  There is a 
report; the Mortal Report is there and public and perhaps it is not read by a 
prosecutors, perhaps the police are not interested in it but I get very concerned about 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 69 of 149 
 
this because if we act in a way where individuals who seize power by whatever way can 
act with impunity then the vulnerable in society are always punished.  And if we go into 
this matter Chair the question is how – how does our constitution protect the vulnerable 
and create the kind of society that is articulated in the preamble to that constitution?  
How do you say to South Africans that we take serious the living standards of all 
citizens and we want to free the potential of each person?  How do you do that when 
we have an education system that does not reach people?  It is that kind of enquiry that 
I think because our commitments made in the constitution that we adopted in May of 
1996 ought to be durable.  And you can only deal with them if there are measurements 
– you know if you cannot measure it you cannot manage it as they say.  How do you 
10 
know – how do you look somebody in the eye and say your life today is better than 
what it was yesterday.  Because that is what the constitution implies.  But on other 
issues I mean I really and I have pondered the question Chair we have seen – we have 
seen the exercise of presidential power in the assembly of cabinets.  There are not 
always automatic choices.  I know that there were people who were unhappy with 
President Mandela when he appointed me as Minister of Finance because I was not a 
trained economist or anything.  So it is not about ticking the boxes for academic 
success or otherwise.  I mean I have said before as well when we appointed Pravin 
Gordhan as the Commissioner for the Revenue Service there was nothing self-evident 
about appointing a pharmacist to head the Revenue Service but I think that if you look 
20 
back at his record in SARS it is impeccable. So it is a difficult call and I do not know 
how – how you advise in that call.  Even the other issue that is frequently debated 
about political representation Chair where some people argue as the late Van Zyl 
Slabbert did that we should have a blended system that also brings in constituency 
representation which is the system we have in local government.  But even there the 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 70 of 149 
 
system does not provide the answers we are looking for.  But I – you know my own 
sense is that the state – the state capture issues should in fact trigger and hopefully it is 
the kind of stuff that you can do in your report trigger a wider discussion about how we 
exist as a nation?  What matters and what does not matter from people purporting to be 
religious leaders to children who murder a man in the street to all kinds of issues.  
There is something wrong in society and it is because it appears as though there are no 
consequences.  So the word consequences has to be – has to have a particular weight 
in this judicial enquiry that looks at what went wrong in the functioning of government.   
CHAIRPERSON:  You may or may not have been still serving in the MEC when 
according to Mr Ramatlhodi the NEC or maybe not the NEC or but some members 
10 
within – of the NEC raised the issue according to him with the former president of his 
friendship with the Gupta family.  Mr Ramatlhodi said some of the members of the NEC 
raised the issue and he said not once he said many times and said to the former 
president “Why do you not terminate this friendship with this family because I am 
paraphrasing now it is not good for the parties, it is not good for the country or for 
government and he says that the former president’s answer was something along the 
lines that the family – this family had helped I do not know whether his family or helped 
his children when nobody else could – was prepared to help them and as I understood 
Mr Ramatlhodi’s evidence the matter would end there.  And my con – so my question is 
whether that was ever raised when you were still a member of the NEC and my 
20 
question that arises from that also would be how the NEC would think that that was an 
issue to be left there if this friendship as far as they were concerned was doing a lot of 
damage to the country or to government and maybe to the party as well?  So you might 
not have been there but there is this evidence that we heard and I do not know if you 
are able to say anything? 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 71 of 149 
 
MR TREVOR MANUEL:  Chair these kinds of issues were raised by members of 
various parties.  I would hope that one of the results of this commission would be – 
would encourage deep introspection.  I am saying that whilst the exchange of letters 
between Fikile Mbalula and I appear to suggest the state of war between us.  Ultimately 
– ultimately as I said we are on the same page and I commend him for having been the 
first to publicly raise that.  The influence of the Gupta’s and – now the issue was raised 
but I am saying the introspection that is necessary is what do you do – what should the 
NEC do when it observes that there is wrongdoing?  Is it just left to the personality of 
the individual who occupies or the individuals perhaps the top six, is it just left to their 
personality?  Or should there be approaches because part of politics is also 
10 
persuading.  It is not always about the formal disciplinary processes.  The ANC has 
formal disciplinary processes.  There is a national disciplinary committee and a national 
disciplinary committee of appeals and so on and so on that is very formal.  But they key 
issue I think in a political movement has always been the value systems.  And how do 
you work it that continuously because if somebody was good once how do you help 
them along the line if in the mind of General Nyanda I was politically okay when we first 
met and I veered off the path does he have the means to raise this matter and help me 
back?  What is in the mind of an organisation like that?  I had big fallouts about 
particular matters and I was declared a free agent but be that as it may I will not go 
there now.  The in membership based organisations I think there has to be an ethos 
20 
and a platform of values that binds people together.  In the exercise of power in 
government Chairperson there would in my mind be two areas where the capture has 
happened.  The first would be supply chain management. The procurement system.  
And my own sense retrospect and Ms Gcabashe gave me accolades for having worked 
on the PFMA I am compelled to ask where the PFMA which is based on outcomes to try 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 72 of 149 
 
and move away from this kind of rules based system.  Did not – I mean was not 
designed for people who would always act together in common public could and we do 
not find ourselves – we do not find ourselves in a rather strange position where it has 
been grossly abused.  Should the – should the PFMA be tightened up in certain areas?  
So that is the one side of what I see as risk.  The other side is the employment of 
people.  Now from 1994 there was a – there was a mammoth task to work to represent 
– to work for representivity and the development of skills in the public service.  And so I 
think it would be understood that there may be certain shortcuts.   But some of what 
has happened where people who have no competence and even less interest in the 
positions they occupy have been appointed.  You on an incredibly slippery slope and 
10 
that might be an area where there might be an excursion into how you deal with these 
matters.  And the last point I would raise in this regard Chair is black economic 
empowerment.  I know that we need to retain BEE to ensure that we can have a more 
inclusive economy and greater participation.  I know that – that the constitution requires 
of us in the Bill of Rights at Section 9 it allows us to tweak and to favour by 
discriminatory measures people have been historically disadvantaged and so that is the 
constitutional premise in my mind for having BEE but it has to be rules based.  And so 
these are issues – and because we have started the journey and some of what should 
be told about what has gone wrong in state capture is that it was just BEE I think that 
the measures are actually too precious for future generations to allow to be abused.  
20 
And so you know if Mr [indistinct] and I set up a BEE partnership to sell airplanes to 
SAA neither of us I do not know about her but I do not know much about airplanes but 
we would add a premium onto what SAA can purchase airplanes at.  Somebody has got 
to pay for it.  The economy pays for it.  That is very different Chair from encouraging 
individuals who have been historically disadvantaged from entering into industry and so 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 73 of 149 
 
on and so on and then being able to pursue a growth path.  So some of these things I 
think have lent themselves to abuse and I hope that we can have a discourse 
nationwide discourse about how to remedy some of these matters that have created the 
difficulties that we have.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe the last question would be this but before I put this question I 
go back to what you said about Eskom.  You said that at one stage Eskom was one of 
the top entities in the world and I think you were not the first former Minister of Finance 
to say that.  I think Minister Gordhan may have said the same thing either here or 
elsewhere and, and maybe one of the DGs or former DGs of, of National Treasury as 
well and you were drawing attention to where Eskom is now if you look at where it once 
10 
was and of course we have to examine the question of how did all that happen.  How 
did we come from up there to be where Eskom is now and what needs to be done to 
make sure that whatever caused that insofar as it may have been part of state capture 
does not happen again.  So, but I just mention that because Eskom I think represents 
quite an example in terms of an entity that on your evidence and on what I have heard 
elsewhere was an entity that was quite high up internationally, but has had all kinds of 
problems, but the one issue that I want to ask is with regard to what Parliament could 
have done or could do with special reference to members of Parliament.  When 
members of Parliament exercise oversight over the running of Government 
departments by Ministers and, and the President when they look at how they execute 
20 
their Executive functions.  There may be times when in the past they may have been 
called upon to stand up and say this is wrong and there should be certain 
consequences on a certain Minister or a certain President, but maybe they might have 
felt that their party did not want them to take that stand.  Are you able to throw some 
light as to whether that is something that may have happened?  You were a member of 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 74 of 149 
 
a Parliament for a long time.  That may have happened, because if it happened it might 
well have led to a situation where when certain decisions could have been taken were 
not taken because they simply were not enough Members of Parliament who stood for 
what many would have seen as the right decision to be made and, and, and to the 
extent that maybe it has been our constitutional arrangement in terms of how people 
become members of Parliament and so on that you have that tension.  If you are able 
to indicate whether it is something that should be looked at for purposes of making sure 
if state capture reared its head again it was stopped immediately.  Then you can 
indicate what you think. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chairperson I think that that I would start from the 
10 
premise that lives of our Members of Parliament is actually quite difficult, because they 
have to do so much without support.  If one looks at, at Congress in the United States 
for instance I think every Congress person would have about 10 support staff.  You can 
do the research.  You can help them and so on and so on and that can happen without 
a caucus functioning.  Just by the by I, I yesterday or the day before I heard a bit of a 
discussion on the radio where a member of an opposition party refers to what a 
member of the Government party said about a matter and he said ma’am there is just 
too much stuff to read.  I did not read these documents.  Now that would be that would 
be intolerable.  So somehow we need to find something that recognises that our 
Parliament represents I suppose what we are as a nation, skill set and so on and so on, 
20 
but you cannot just leave that to chance and you do not just leave some officials with 
computers to write speeches for these MPs.  We need to equip them to deal with issues 
differently.  I am pretty sure that if we took Members of Parliament and taught some 
things, if we taught Members of Parliament for instance to read especially those who 
serve in particular Portfolio Committees like Public Enterprises or Finances and so on 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 75 of 149 
 
what a balance sheet is, what it looks like, what the numbers there represent etcetera, 
what to look for and if, if you were to put out a call to accountants and you were to a 
ABASA, Association of Black Accountants of South Africa or you went to CICA and said 
can you put Members of Parliament through a course so that they can see what these 
papers are when [indistinct] report.  You might actually get different lines of questioning.  
I mean I, I remain of the view Chairperson that you know as they say sunlight is the 
best disinfectant and if, if, if a delegation of any State Owned Enterprise arrives in 
Parliament and parliamentarians across the Board are asking questions along certain 
lines as you saw with the State Owned Enterprises Enquiry or with the SABC Enquiry in 
about the end of 2016.  Then it changes the colour of the horse.  Then these 
10 
Executives cannot just come there with some pretence at Parliament because you can 
call people comrade.  You are going to get away with stuff.  I think that we need to 
empower parliamentarians to deal with the issues differently and I think we need to do 
the same in, in provincial legislatures.  Chair you; it is outside of your, your terms of 
reference to look at Local Government, but I get very scared when I read about a 
contract to deliver storm water drains in Nelson Mandela Bay Municipality where 12 
people have been shot because of disputes over contracts.  We cannot live, we cannot 
live according to the laws of the jungle.  We must empower our public representatives 
to act appropriately and, and I think that is a responsibility that needs a big and 
repeated call and, and I do not believe that we should, we should now try and change 
20 
and, and ask for academic qualifications of people who go to Parliament, but I think we 
must ensure that there be an adequate investment in time and training to ensure that 
they are better equipped to do what they have to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well municipalities do fall within our terms of reference.  They are. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Oh. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 76 of 149 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  They are organs of State. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  You may be here for a very long time Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [Laughing].  No that is true, but your, your, your answer Mr Manuel 
relates to matters where somebody might just need some knowledge and in, in order to 
be able to make certain decisions, but there are very many issues where even if you do 
not have to read up any reports or do not have to be, to take less, lessons.  You know 
what is right and you know what is wrong.  If there is theft going on in a particular 
department you will, you will see that there is theft going on there and therefore as a 
Member of Parliament who must contribute to oversight you ought to be able to stand 
up and say there is theft going on here.  This Minister or this Member of the Executive 
10 
needs to be dealt with in a certain way.  So, but, so when you look at that are you, are 
you, what would you say in terms of the ability to, to do what is right and not to be 
conflicted maybe between what your party might tell you and what you might think is 
the right thing to do. 
MR TREVOR ANDREW MANUEL:  Chair let me make two points.  The first is when I 
read the Auditor-General’s reports and that is quite important as a, as a kind of flag 
raiser of issues.  There are a number of municipalities and I, if I, if I said somewhere 
between 20 and 30 who for a number of years have not completed any audits.  The 
Auditor-General cannot audit them because there are no records.  Why are there no 
records, because it is easier to destroy records than to have a negative opinion?  We 
20 
have tolerated this for a number of years.  Surely we must embolden the 
Auditor-General.  I know that there have been amendments to the Auditor-General Act 
or the Public Ordered Act that allow for actions, but we have tolerated these things for 
too long.  That is one kind of example and I think similarly the Sections 85 and 86 of the 
PFMA that deals with, with financial wrongdoing in public enterprises.  We need to 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 77 of 149 
 
shore that up.  We need to shore up the terms and conditions of the PFMA and you 
know it is, it is quite important I think to be seen to be taking action against people.  The 
other thing that is necessary and I am not raising this begging to do things, when I look 
at any number of people Chair when occasionally when I turn on the TV and I see 
people who have appeared before this Commission whom I know whose skill sets I can 
vouch for.  Almost without exception none of us are ever called to help out.  Sitting over 
there is a retired General Nyanda.  We know him from the work he did over many years 
in exile.  We know of the risks that he placed himself and his family under.  We know 
him as a, as a Minister.  Why is it that his skills are not called upon as they would be in 
any other society and the people we speak of are not people who think that is an 
10 
opportunity to get rich, to get a tender.  If one looks at, at, at former Presidents of our 
country who happen to be in the same party as the ruling party they cannot be persona 
non grata.  Why did they govern in the way that they did?  Why did they lead 
Government in the way that they did?  What are the issues that go into consideration?  
I wish that that there could be consideration of how it was that Cabinets were put 
together that that operated successfully.  Why is it that skills are not drawn upon?  Is it 
because of insecurity?  Is it because people think if I asked Trevor Manuel what did the, 
he, he might get my job.  We can make declarations we do not want anybody’s jobs, but 
skills that have been accumulated I say they are not my personal skills Chair.  I do not 
have proprietary, ownership of the skills I have.  They should be put at the disposal of, 
20 
of the country.  I am not saying that that they are, they are faultless and flawless, but 
even if it is merely to facilitate discussion with people about what one is seeing and so 
on and so on.  I think more people have been through the ranks need to be called upon 
to assist.  We cannot be enemies.  We cannot utilise our skills elsewhere.  We, we are 
South African.  We are, we have pledged allegiance to the Constitution and it was not 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 78 of 149 
 
for purposes of getting a job as a Member of Parliament or as a Minister.  It has to be a 
continuous pledge to the Constitution and that I hope is what we can look at to try and 
prevent what has happened over the past decade or so which I think imposes an 
enormous burden on successive generations. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, thank you very much Mr Manuel.  I, I really do hope that your 
appearance before this Commission will encourage many others who are former 
Ministers and current Ministers who can contribute and who know, who have knowledge 
of matters that fall within our terms of reference to come forward and take the attitude 
that the issues that this Commission is investigating are very important for the nation 
and that they would want to be part of those who make contributions to make sure that 
10 
the work of this Commission is a success.  Thank you very much.  You are excused.  
We are going to take the lunch adjournment.  I see that it is much, much later than I 
thought we would take, but these were important matters we needed to deal with.  
Mr Pretorius I see you are up.  Do you? 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  [Indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, okay. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  [Indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes as is normal.  Yes.  No thank you.  I think we should take 
the lunch adjournment.  It is now quarter to two and maybe resume at, resume at 
quarter to three.  That that gives us the usual hour.  Okay, we adjourn. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Ms Sello. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair, Chair with your leave we will present the 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 79 of 149 
 
testimony of General Siphiwe Nyanda. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Before he is sworn in Chair I would like to make a few 
preliminary remarks.  The relevance of General Nyanda’s testimony today concerns in 
particular Term 1.3 of the Terms of Reference and my learned colleague, Mr Bashu, 
referred to it previously, for the record I will state that it provides thus whether the 
appointment of any member of the National Executive functionary and/or officer bearer 
was disclosed to the Gupta family or any other unauthorised person before such 
appointments were formally made and/or announced and if so whether the President or 
any member of the National Executive is responsible for such conduct. 
10 
 
General Nyanda’s evidence will then to a large part be confined to the 
specific term.  Having submitted a written statement to the Commissioner General 
Nyanda had opportunity to reflect on some issues he considered pertinent to his 
testimony today, and in particular these are issues relating to the period after what 1.3 
relates to, which is the alleged declaration by Mr Mbalula of the offer made to him and 
in that regard he has made available this morning certain documentation which is not in 
your file Chair, which I will beg leave to hand up when we get to that part of the 
evidence. 
 
Against that background Chair then I would request that General Nyanda be 
sworn in. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, registrar just swear him in now, administer the affirmation 
whichever the case may be. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state our full names for the record. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Siphiwe Nyanda. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection with making the prescribed affirmation? 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 80 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I have no objection. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear then that the evidence you will give shall be the truth, the 
whole truth and nothing but the truth.  If so please raise your right hand and say I truly 
affirm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I truly affirm  
REGISTRAR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good afternoon General Nyanda, I don’t know I seem to understand 
that once a general always a general.   
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Particularly in the Military. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, so I just want to say before you start with your evidence thank 
10 
you very much for coming forward, and I have called for past and present ministers to 
come forward and assist the Commission and DG’s and past DG’s, I thank you for 
coming forward to assist us. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  It is my pleasure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair.  For the record Chair I will state that 
General Nyanda is unrepresented and he has dealt with the Commission directly and 
with the evidence leaders. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  General Nyanda you submitted a statement to the 
20 
Commission have you? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes I did. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Chair Ms Gcabashe introduced Exhibit V to the Commission 
this morning and indicated that it is split in two parts, V1 and V2.  The portion that 
relates to General Nyanda is under tab V2. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 81 of 149 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, I’ve got that.  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  General Nyanda you have next to you a file, on the spine it 
should be written Volume 2, by rights it should be Exhibit V instead of Volume V, please 
go to the second tab and turn over, you will find an index and that index indicates 
...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  It looks like he is at the statement already. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, I think he is ready for you. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  If you have located the statement it is the one that is 
paginated SN01 at the top right hand corner. 
10 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Okay, please consider that statement and confirm is that the 
statement you made to the Commission on the date reflected, which is the 2nd 
November 2018? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes it is. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Is that your Annexure appearing at the bottom of that 
statement? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  It is my signature yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Do you stand ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you said Annexure 
20 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  You said is that your Annexure. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Your signature. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He corrected you. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Oh, I am indebted to the General, I apologise, your 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 82 of 149 
 
signature.  Do you stand by the averments you have made in that statement? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes, I do, I do. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Now before you confirmed it under oath are there any 
corrections you would like to effect to that statements, any amendments, changes? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  In the statement I say that I swear under oath that I was a 
member of the African National Congress on the dates and that in a meeting of this 
committee the ANC following a cabinet reshuffle in which Mr Fikile Mbalula was 
appointed as Minister of Sport he said that the said Fikile Mbalula told the following 
meeting the things that I say there. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Is there anything you would like to change in this statement 
10 
currently? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No, not in the statement except the dates I think in relation, I 
don’t know whether they are here the dates that I state in the meeting about the 
meeting. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  No, we will get to that detail, it forms part of your statement, I 
just wanted to know if there are any corrections you would like to effect, before 
...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  I think he is saying he is not sure about the dates, I think that’s what 
he wants to say he is not sure whether he should correct.  General is that what you 
were trying to say or did I misunderstand you? 
20 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  It’s just the date that I put I don’t know whether it’s in this 
affidavit about the exact meeting or the exact date of the meeting that took place. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe do you want to – it’s a short statement, do you want to just 
silently read it and see whether you will be in a position to say it’s correct, there is 
nothing you want to correct? 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 83 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I said in the meeting of the abovementioned committee in 
early 2011 or thereabouts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that is correct, you stand by that? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  It may be that the date ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, might not be accurate. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  It will not be early in 2011. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but do you want to leave it like that because you say 
thereabout, or do you want to change anything in that regard? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I can leave it there, but having rummaged through 
documentation I realise it may not be actually as early as 2011, but it was 2011. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, no that’s fine. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Chair just to inform you, this is an aspect I intend to deal with 
General Nyanda further on during his testimony, I just wanted to make sure that there 
no corrections, there are no errors contained in his statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but he was indicating that he wasn’t sure whether he might have 
made an error with regard to the dates, so you asked him is the statement correct, so 
he was looking at the dates and wanting to make up his mind whether he would say 
let’s correct something about the dates or not and I think the two of you might not have 
been on the same page. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  I think we are clarified now.  On that basis then you accept 
20 
that the Chair can accept this statement as your correct version of events? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Chair as the Chair will note the statement itself is not 
numbered it’s very short however, may I suggest for reference purposes that we 
number the main paragraph as paragraph one which would have the three sub-
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 84 of 149 
 
paragraphs the next paragraph is two and then the last paragraph is three, just for ease 
of reference. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well even if we don’t number them it won’t be a problem referring to, 
it’s got only effectively four unnumbered paragraphs or maybe three if the one, two, 
three is part of the first one, it won’t be  a problem.  It’s a short statement. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair.  General Nyanda before we get into the 
detail of what’s set out in your statement could you give the Chairperson a brief 
background to our service in Government, be it in Executive or legislature or any other 
form of employment you’ve held in Government, just very briefly. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I was appointed in 1994 into the South African National 
10 
Defence Force which was formed then, comprising of the various armed groups or 
armed formations which existed then from the homeland forces, from the old SADF, 
from (indistinct) Sizwe and Apla.  I was appointed as part of the Command of the new 
SANTF.  I was then Chief of Staff of the SANDF. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Later on when General Meyering, who was the First 
Commander of the new SANDF was dismissed I became the Commander of the 
SANDF, it was 1996. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Following I retired as the Chief of the SANDF in 1995 after 
20 
serving seven years as the Commander of the South African National Defence Force, 
or the Chief of the SAND, and went into private business.  In 2009 or in 2007 I became 
part of, I was reappointed to the - or re-elected to the MEC of ANC in Polokwane and in 
2009 I became, I was appointed as Minister of Communications.  2010 I was dropped 
as Minister of Communications and became an ordinary member of Parliament and I 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 85 of 149 
 
left Parliament in 2014, after the new elections, I did not elect to go back into 
Parliament and into Government service. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I seem to have heard you to say you retired as Chief of the Defence 
Force in 1995, did I hear correctly. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  2005. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I think you meant because I thought it happened quite quickly but 
I think you said 1995, you must meant 2005. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  It was my mistake yes 2005. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay, thank you. 
10 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair.  Turning then to your statement you 
indicate, as you’ve just testified that you were appointed to the National Executive 
Committee of the ANC in December 2007 and you served until December 2012. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No, in the National Executive Committee I served until 2014. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  2014. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  The new Executive was elected in Bloemfontein. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Please refer to your statement at SM1, SM01 to be precise, 
at the second line you state that I was a member of the African National Congress, 
National Executive Committee from December 2007 until December 2012.  Would you 
have a ...(intervention)  
20 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No, this was in cabinet this 2012.  2012. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well isn’t the position that the ANC had its own elective conference 
in 2012 in Mangahong?  
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No, it’s 2014, so that is not correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it not the National elections in the country that were in 2014 and 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 86 of 149 
 
the ANC National Elections, ANC Elections, not national, ANC Elections in Mangahong, 
2012? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes, it is, it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  2012 is ANC National Conference 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  In December. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.  And then the elections of the country in 2014. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:   So you ceased to be a member of the NEC at that elective 
conference in December 2012? 
10 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  According to your statement.  You stayed now your 
statement to the Commission specifically refers to an announcement or declaration 
made by Mr Mbalula in a particular NEC meeting, is that correct? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Correct. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Now can you briefly state to the Chairperson which – at 
which NEC meeting was the declaration made? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  As I say in the statement Chair it was following the cabinet 
reshuffle of October 2010, I can’t recall the exact meeting of the African National 
Congress, NEC where this meeting took place where Mbalula made this declaration but 
20 
it was certainly in 2011 following that cabinet reshuffle. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Now you sat through Mr Manuel’s evidence this morning. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes I did. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Mr Manuel stated that that meeting was in August 2011, does 
that assist in prompting your recollection in any way? 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 87 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No it does not, I was rummaging through documentation 
following consultation about trying to establish exactly when this meeting took place, 
and I take notes, I used to take  notes at NEC meetings, and I could not find th at 
meeting where Mr Mbalula said what he said at that meeting, except for the fact that I 
remember or through that documentation I established that there was a – there were 
elections in 2011 for the local government, there were local government elections and 
so it is unlikely that we could have sent through and discussed this matter so early in 
the year because normally meetings of the African National Congress Executive take 
place quarterly, but we do meet form time to time, we do meet either in December or in  
January to prepare for the January 8 statement and then we will meet again to prepare 
10 
for cabinet Magutla, which is again just before there is the State of the National by the 
President to prepare for their cabinet, Magutla, we meet as the ANC to prepare for that 
so it’s an extended meeting which involves Directors General who might be called to 
that meeting and the premiers who are ANC premiers to that meeting to prepare for the 
Cabinet Lagodla, which then involves premiums whether they are ANC or not ANC.  So 
it is possible that we might have had more meetings which dealt with specific issues 
and did not delve into the issue that Mbalula raised at a subsequent meeting. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair.  Now before we get into the detail of Mr 
Mbalula’s declaration could you briefly state how traditionally these NEC meetings were 
conducted? 
20 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Well at the – I had been a member of the NEC before but that 
was before we went into government, I was elected into the NEC in Durban at our first 
conference of the African National Congress internally, so those meetings were different 
from the meetings which took place subsequently when I became a member of the NEC 
in 2007, December because then ANC was in government so these meetings, the 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 88 of 149 
 
meetings in my recollection which took place when I became a member of the NEC 
again they were different from those that we had when Mandela was the President of 
the African National Congress.  The meetings took place, there was a suggestion from 
some of the members of the NEC that the President opens the meeting and closes the 
meeting.  There was some debate about it but some members of the ANC pushed for 
this that the President who was then Jacob Zuma opens the meetings and closes the 
meetings, it gives a political input and then we debate the political input, put our own 
inputs, discuss things that perhaps you may not have raised and then discuss them and 
then the President at the end of meeting then summarises for the salient points of that 
meeting to the rest of the NEC. 
10 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And that method pertained right through the five years you 
served in the NEC? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Exactly Chair. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Now let’s turn the actual declaration made by Mr Mbalula at 
the NEC meeting of 2011, I’m accepting that you don’t remember exactly which one it 
was in 2011, you deal with that in your statement but just state in your own words what 
actually transpired? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Well what transpired is that Mbalula told the meeting, I can’t 
remember the context, in which this matter was discussed by him, or this revelation was 
made by him, except that he made such a revelation that he was approached by the 
20 
Guptas and told that he would come Minister of Sport before he actually knew, before 
he was informed by the Executive Authority, by the President that he would become the 
Minister of Sport and indeed he was appointed to that position, and he was saying so 
because he was upset by such a revelation coming from people who had no business 
to know that he was going to become anything in cabinet because he had been Deputy 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 89 of 149 
 
Minister of Police at the time that he was told that he was going to become Minister, the 
full cabinet Minister. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Now we heard this morning the evidence of Mr Manuel that 
as he made that declaration Mr Mbalula cried and in an open letter, which is annexed to 
Mr Manuel’s statement which was issued by Mr Mbalula he does not appear to deny 
that he cried at that meeting, do you have a recollection of that? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No, I am not as sentimental as Mr Manuel and I have no 
recollection of tears there. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Okay.  Now is it your testimony that when Mr Mbalula made, 
informed the meeting as such that what he was informed of by the Gupta brothers was 
10 
his impending appointment to precisely the Minister of Sports and Recreation or was it 
just generally to become a Minister.  
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  My recollection that he knew exactly where he was going, that 
he was going to become a Minister of Sport. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And it’s common cause that he subsequently was. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes, that’s what he was saying, that’s what he told the 
meeting.  They told me I was going to become the Minister of Sport and indeed I was 
appointed as Minister of Sport. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And he was appointed to that position during a reshuffle in 
October 2010, on the 31st of October 2010 to be precise. 
20 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Exactly Chair. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  At the time immediately prior to the reshuffle you were a 
serving Minister yourself? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes I was a serving Minister. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And for the record you were Minister of? 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 90 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I was a Minister of Communications. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Could you tell the Chairperson what impact that reshuffle had 
on you? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Well I was in Durban ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe before we get to that one let’s go back to Mr Mbalula 
speaking at the NEC.  Are you able to remember how he came to talk about this issue 
at the NEC that he had been told by the Guptas that he was going to be made Minister 
of Sport, do you remember or are you not able to remember what gave rise to this – to 
him saying this or in terms of the issues that may be were before the NEC? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I have no particular recollection of the context. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  As I said earlier on the President would open the meeting with 
a political input and then we would discuss as members of the NEC that point of input 
and also indicate things that the President perhaps would not have alluded to in his 
political input and perhaps it arose in that context.  I have no recollection of the exact 
context, but what was remarkable to me was that Mbalula made this stunning revelation 
this what was actually a criticism of the way in which he had been informed about is 
impending appointment.  He was in other words disturbed by it, that is why he perhaps 
cried although I don’t remember the actual crying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I can tell you that in his response to Mr Manuel’s letter where Mr 
20 
Manuel refers to this incident at the NEC and says he was crying in his response Mr 
Mbalula himself refers – seems to accept that he was crying because he says Mr 
Manuel didn’t understand what is tears were about, or what he was crying about and 
then he goes on to say what he was crying about, so – but you simply say from your 
side you have n o recollection of the crying part but you remember what he said. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 91 of 149 
 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  I remember what he said, I remember, one of the reasons I 
remember is because I myself was affected by that cabinet reshuffle and I had my own 
suspicions about what the reasons were for our dismissal from Cabinet and I had 
actually tried to engage or I had engaged the officials of the African National Congress 
to find out why it is that we were removed in the manner in which we were, and got no 
answers and also spoke to the President himself, why, but I didn’t get any satisfactory 
answer, so when Mbalula said this in the midst of the undercurrents that were afoot 
then about the influence of this family in the affairs of government it was for me a 
confirmation that in fact this was the case, it was the first confirmation that people had 
been told before their appointment, and I believed that he was not the only one, and the 
10 
general undercurrent then, was that people who had been called to the Guptas and told 
beforehand that they would become ministers, and we ourselves I had heard whispers 
about my possible removal from cabinet.  So it was an important declaration that he 
made there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So when Mr Mbalula made this disclosure it reminded you of what 
you had been concerned about yourself when you were removed, and subsequently 
that you were suspecting that maybe you were removed under circumstances that 
might involve people outside of Government, or not really. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  To me it was a confirmation that the talk that was going on 
about the influence of some people or they say the Guptas in Government affairs was 
20 
actually corrupt, because it was a categorical statement by him, and I heard Mr Manuel 
making a point here about whether Mbalula was upset or not or whether he had been 
previously involved ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  He had had a pre-existing relationship, mmm.  
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Had a relationship with them, I did not know that at the time 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 92 of 149 
 
and at the time that he made this confession, if you like I did not have any suspicion of 
him having had such interactions with the Guptas before and for me it was just enough 
that he was making this, this disclosure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  To his comrades. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  At the highest level of the African National Congress about. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  What had happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And I thought it was, it was a genuine disclosure and I did not 
regard it as something that, of somebody who was just now showing remorse because 
of a relationship. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  That of course. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Mr Manuel maybe correct in his. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Own view, but my own view was that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Mbalula was now at, at least. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Unlike other people who may have been approached before. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Making this declaration. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 93 of 149 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  To the African National Congress leadership. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  In order for them to deal with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, hm.  So your, your understanding was that in making this 
disclosure Mr Mbalula was genuinely concerned about the fact that he had been told by 
the Guptas that he was to be made Minister before the President could tell him? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  He was upset [intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He was upset about that? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and, and, and then of course it confirmed to you as you have 
said that this family seemed to have quite some influence on Government matters? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes, it did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja.  Okay, thank you. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair.  In fact you have answered the question I 
had posed and just for the record that Cabinet reshuffle that saw Mr Mbalula appointed 
Minister of Sports and Recreation it is through that same reshuffle that you were 
dropped as Minister of Communications? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  That is correct. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Now when Mr Mbalula makes this disclosure to the meeting 
20 
did the President at the meeting give a response to this disclosure in any form? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Not the President nor any of the officials were in that meeting 
and my recollection is that all the officials were in that meeting made any comment 
about that, but of course perhaps the onus would have been on the person at, at, at 
which, at whom these, these, these allegations were being made, because the person 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 94 of 149 
 
who bore responsible for appointments to Cabinet is the President.  So I expected that 
and also the, the President closes the meeting and summarises the salient points of 
the, talks to the salient points of the meeting and this was a very serious claim made by 
a member of his own Executive both in the African National Congress and in 
Government that in other words he was derelict.  That he, he, he had given the role of 
informing if not deciding other people about pending appointments to his Cabinet to 
other people.  So I expected that the President of the ANC when he closes the meeting, 
when he deals with that matter, when he comes to the closing of the meeting will deal 
with that matter at least respond to it, because it was a direct accusation to the 
President of the ANC. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  How, how did the meeting; well we have heard that the President of 
the ANC then did not react.  How did other people in the meeting react to this 
disclosure?  Was there any reaction even if it is not everybody, some, some people? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I think there were people.  The, the, the way Chairman the 
meetings of the ANC are conducted.  If perhaps Mr Mbalula was number 62 in the 
contributions that were being made at that time.  So you will have perhaps only 18 
other people contributing and it depends who they are whether they will feel 
emboldened to engage the point that Mr Mbalula made.  I cannot recall how many 
people spoke after that, but as I said I do not, I, I; the President what I am sure about is 
that the President himself, because it is quite possible that that Mr Mbalula spoke right 
20 
at the tail end of the discussion or it was just a shot from the sky that he spoke about 
this thing and it is quite possible that one or two people may have, but I cannot recall 
that.  There were many people who spoke to that, because it was just a direct allegation 
against a President of the African National Congress who was sitting in that meeting 
and I do not, I do not know whether if Mbalula had spoken first or earlier other people 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 95 of 149 
 
would have said no, Mr President we want you to address this question.  We have just 
heard a serious allegation made against you.  I think people expected the President 
himself to address the matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it is, it is, it is quite an important thing because I would have 
expected that it would have been regarded as a shocking allegation, you know.  That is 
how I would have expected and maybe other people would have expected that.  When 
some, a disclosure like that is made you know people would really find it quite 
something serious that needs to be dealt with, but you say certainly the President did 
not deal with it, did not react to, to it and you have no recollection of anybody reacting 
to it at the meeting? 
10 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes.  I, I think people just took it as here is something serious 
that is being alleged by a member of this National Executive Committee and it is 
directed specifically at the President and perhaps it is, it is too big for me who comes 
after Mbalula to speak. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  To engage with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  We will wait for the President to, to react to, to such a, a 
statement that is being, such a claim astounding claim that is being made here in these 
halls. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know Mr Ramatlhodi gave evidence here sometime last here 
and one of the things he said was that the NEC was quite concerned about the 
friendship between the former President and the Gupta family and was concerned that 
that friendship, I am putting it in my own words, was damaging the party as well as 
Government or the country and that some of the Members of the NEC at some stage, I 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 96 of 149 
 
cannot remember which year he was talking about, but at some stage raised the issue 
with the former President at an NEC meeting.  In fact he said not once, he said many 
times it was raised and he said those Members of the NEC who raised it were saying 
Mr President why do you not terminate this friendship with this family and, because it is 
not doing good to the party.  It is not doing good to Government and he said his, his, 
the response of the former President was that well this family helped my children or 
helped my family.  I cannot remember exactly which one, when nobody would help 
them or when they were, they needed help and he said that is where the issue would 
end each time.  Do you recall anything like that during the time when you were a 
Member of the NEC and it maybe that it was after you had left the NEC, because I 
10 
cannot remember when Mr Ramatlhodi said that was? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  When I was in, in the NEC the issue may have arisen and 
perhaps that is the context in which Mr Mbalula then made that claim, but I think 
Mr Ramatlhodi refers to an, an, a, a period at which I was no longer in the African 
National Congress Executive. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  But when we were pursuing the matters outside. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Of the ANC, because I think the general members of the ANC, 
I think he, he refers to an, a later period. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  When we were also engaging with the ANC about what. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  We saw as. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 97 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  The pernicious influence of this family. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay, okay.  No, thank you. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair.  Now at the time Mr Mbalula made this 
disclosure what was your understanding?  Was it his attempt to place the matter 
officially before the highest body of the party to discuss the problem or what did you 
understand the purpose of this disclosure to be? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  For me it was just a disclosure, because I cannot recall the 
context. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Ja. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I just recall the, the actual statement that he made to the 
10 
NEC.  I, I cannot perhaps. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Okay. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Deal with that.  For me the most important thing was that he 
made such a claim in front of and, and he made a claim about something that was 
being whispered in the corridors and everybody sat up when that happened to say at 
least here is somebody who is validating the things that are being said about the 
President and his relationship with the Gupta family. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  You, you indicated that in that meeting present were officials 
of the party.  We, are we talking about the top six specifically?  When you say officials 
is that who you are referring to? 
20 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And to your recollection who was present at the meeting of 
the top six when this disclosure was made? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  All the officials. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Serving at the time? 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 98 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Serving at the time, yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And is the Chairperson to understand that none of them took 
up the issue when Mr Mbalula made the disclosure? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  None of them.  Nobody took up the, the discussion except 
from the; and it would have surprised me if they took, took up the issue because the, 
the President himself was going to close that meeting and, and there was no push even 
subsequent to that for this matter to be discussed.  This, this matter was never put on 
the table of the, on the agenda of the ANC Executive even sub, in subsequent 
meetings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you, you have answered another question that I was going to 
10 
ask you about whether subsequent to that NEC meeting the matter was ever raised 
again and, and as I understand you, you say it was not while you were a member of 
the, a member of the NEC.  You do not recall that it was dealt with by the NEC as an 
issue.  Is that, is that right? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  The issue of? 
CHAIRPERSON:  The disclosure by. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mbalula. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  It was never discussed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I, I, I am concerned about whether people who were at the 
20 
NEC meeting including the ones you refer to as the officials of the party whether they 
regarded or would have regarded what Mbalula, Mr Mbalula complained about at the 
meeting as something that was wrong if it had happened.  In other words if he was 
speaking the truth that he was told by the Guptas that he was going to be made 
Minister of Sports, whether they would have regarded the issue or they regarded the 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 99 of 149 
 
issue as serious that something that should not have been known outside of 
Government got to be known outside of Government according to what Mr Mbalula said 
and whether they would then have wanted to follow up to say but this is wrong.  We 
need to hear what the President has to say about it.  How could somebody outside of 
Government and actually the Guptas against whom there were allegations and so on 
about their friendship with the former President that they would want to know what does 
the President have to say about it and once we have heard what he says we must see 
what needs to be done to make sure this kind thing does not happen again.  So I am, I 
am concerned whether they may have been concerned about the seriousness of this 
allegation and therefore whether they would have wanted to follow it up even if at a 
10 
later stage.  You might or might not be able to say, but do you have anything to say 
about. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No [intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  About whether you, I must say about whether you, because you are 
a member of the NEC, whether you and the officials were concerned about the 
seriousness of this issue and whether you would have wanted this issue to be looked 
into and dealt with properly by the NEC or by some other structure of the party. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  We were obviously concerned.  I think they also were 
obviously concerned, should have been obviously concerned the officials, but because I 
was not part of the officials I do not know whether they did. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Discuss this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And, and discuss how to handle it, because normally if things 
are discussed and decisions have to be taken going forward with respect to anything 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 100 of 149 
 
that is decided on at the NEC then it is the Office of the SG that pursues such matters, 
puts them on the table of the officials.  I am, I can also say that I was a member of the 
National Working Committee.  Even in the National Working Committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  It was not pursued. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes, so and subsequent NEC meetings as I said Chairman 
did not pursue the matter.  I think people took it as, as gospel that in fact this thing 
happened, but whether to engage in it was another matter for the people who occupied 
those positions in. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  In the National Executive Committee or. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  In the NWC or. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Among the officials themselves. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair.  You, you earlier testified that even before 
Mr Mbalula’s disclosure there were suspicions or rumours regarding the role the Gupta 
family played in particular in relation to the President.  I understood you correctly in that 
20 
regard? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Now can you just give us the sense of what the rumours 
were or what the suspicions were in particular? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Shortly that the, the, the, many of the decisions that are taken 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 101 of 149 
 
are taken at Saxonwold.  That they have got influence on the President, the Guptas and 
that therefore many of the things, chances that take place there in, take place in 
Cabinet are influenced by what is going on in Saxonwold or what those people in 
Saxonwold want. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Now at the time of this meeting did you personally harbour 
those suspicions or had you heard those rumours? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes, I, I heard those rumours. I was also dumped from, from 
Cabinet in, in 2010 at the same time as Mbalula was appointed and, and while I was in 
Cabinet, while I was Minister of Communications I had met I do not know which of the 
brothers, because they would, they would be there in some of the gatherings of the 
10 
ANC, but I met one of them who came to my office.  They made an appointment and I 
gave them an appointment.  They came with Duduzane Zuma the son of the then 
President and they, what they did was to introduce their, their company Sahara 
Computers and, and we had, I had the officials in that little boardroom that I kept next to 
my office and after that introduction they left and, and as I said Chairman I also had 
heard whispers about the impending Cabinet reshuffle and some of them were 
indicating that I might be dumped from Cabinet, but what I, what I know and I have said 
this publically that I have, I had that meeting with them and then subsequent to that 
they did try to, to see me again, but they did not want to see me in my office or that is 
the impression I got, because they sent people.  They sent emissaries and I will not talk 
20 
about who those emissaries, but several people came to me to say these people want, 
the Guptas want to see you and I said they are welcome in my office.  If, if anybody 
wants to discuss to me, with me about Government work they must come to my office.  
So as an afterthought because I did not, I did not suspect anything then, because there 
are many other people who wanted to see me.  Perhaps some of them also privately, 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 102 of 149 
 
but I always insisted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  On people who wanted to do, to talk about my role in 
Government that those people needed to come, to come to my office.  Except people 
who I was close to of course. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes.  Now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe before you proceed. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now you, you were dropped from Cabinet at the end of 
October 2010.  Is that right? 
10 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Do you remember roundabout what time, about when this 
approach was made to you by the Guptas and Mr Duduzane Zuma when they came to 
your office in relation to when you were dropped?  Are you able to remember? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No, I think it was quite early in my. 
CHAIRPERSON:  After your appointment? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  After my, my appointment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  But the subsequent. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And your, and your appointment was in 2009.  Is that right? 
20 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  2009. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I served it for 18 months. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  About 18 months.  I think it was the year 2009. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 103 of 149 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And I think some of these approaches might have been in 
2010. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  So on, on the occasion when you did meet with them in 
your office did they indicate what the purpose was for? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  They. 
CHAIRPERSON:  For them asking for a meeting with you? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  They, they were introducing their company, Computer Sahara. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So they. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  [Indistinct]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  They just introduced. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They were just telling you what, what they are involved in. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  What they do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, what they do. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the meeting ended at that level.  They did not start talking about 
any, any future engagement in regard to your department and their businesses? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I cannot recall Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You cannot recall. 
20 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Whether they said they would seek other meetings in future, 
except that those subsequent requests for meetings indicated that I needed to see 
them well, well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  From emissaries’ people who told, who told me that. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 104 of 149 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  The Guptas would like to see you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did, did they indicate whether they wanted you to go to their 
residence or offices or they wanted to come to your office or there was just no 
indication?  There were just requests for a meeting? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I found it strange because when they made the appointment 
to see me and I accorded them the respect to see them they did it through my office.  
They called my office.  So I did not understand why other people who were not part of 
my office would want me to see, to go and see them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes, yes and you say there were quite a few of such requests.  
10 
Is that right? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You cannot tell how many, but quite a few? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I cannot even tell who. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, even who, yes but you turned them down, all of them, those 
requests? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it was on the basis that if they wanted to see you. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They must do as they had done before and just? 
20 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Communicate with your office? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja and you say it may be that some of those requests happened in 
2010, but you are just not sure anymore? 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 105 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I think it was in 2010. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It was in 2010.  Okay, thank you. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair.  You, you just indicated to the Chair that 
you cannot say who the emissaries were.  I, do you mean that you do not know who 
they were or are you not willing to disclose their identities? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No, I know who they, they are. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  You not willing to disclose their identities? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Now in, in, in your contact when the emissaries, did they 
express to you what the Guptas had expressed as to the purpose of the meetings they 
10 
were requesting? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Did those emissaries impress upon you to honour the 
invitations at any point? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  You know those emissaries happened to be people who I am 
close or close to sort of.  So, because I think they knew the people who I interact with 
on a social basis.  So they would send somebody who, whom they know has got 
contact with me to say these guys want to see you and I would say no. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Okay.  So just to, so we understand the emissaries were 
simply delivering an invitation? 
20 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Or were they impressing upon you to honour the invitation? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No, they were not impressing. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Okay. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Ja. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 106 of 149 
 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Then. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  They know a, a lot about me to know that they cannot do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Apart, apart from, apart from the fact that if you, if they wanted to 
have a meeting with you, you wanted them to go the, through the normal channels and 
contact your office as they had done before.  Was there any other reason why you 
might not have wanted to meet with them at that stage or that was just the only reason? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Chairman I, I meet, if, if I see people especially people who 
are in business in my role as, as a Minister I think I should be careful how I, I do that.  
In the first place I would like to be with either my PA or, or my advisor or, or, or the DG 
of the party.  More likely with PA.  So that there is somebody who takes minutes or 
10 
notes or who knows even if it is a verbal discussion and there is no, there is no note 
taking.  Somebody who keeps a record of what the meeting was all about.  So this 
meeting for instance that I am taking about there should be a record of it with them in 
the office there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay thank you. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And at that time I, I must say that there is, there is not much 
that I knew about them that was negative. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  It is just. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  The question of the principle. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay to say they must go through the channels? 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Like everybody, okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair.  Now getting back then to that NEC 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 107 of 149 
 
meeting to conclude on that.  You indicated that nobody commented on Mr Mbalula’s 
disclosure to your recollection and neither did the, the President respond directly 
thereto. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  What I recall is that the President did not touch on it. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Ja. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  It may have been that one or two people. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Okay. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Spoke about it but my, my interest was, was that or rather my 
curiosity was, was served by that declaration itself.  That Mbalula made that disclosure 
in that meeting.  That I cannot forget. 
10 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  You, you informed the Chair that it was standard that at the 
end of the meeting then the President would summarise the salient issues that arose in 
the course of the meeting and the, the Chair should accept that in this particular 
meeting the President did summarise as was practice? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes, the President did talk at the end of the meeting and 
spoke to most of the things that the meeting addressed, but did not touch on this very 
serious matter. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Now the, the President’s failure to touch on the matter as 
you term it did it have any particular significance for you? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  To me it was confirmation that the President was either 
20 
uncomfortable to, to respond to this matter, because there was credence to it or that 
perhaps later on he would engage with Mbalula and, but the, the damage had been 
done.  The whole National Executive Committee had listened and heard this and it was 
never addressed again in future.  So that all of us then subsequent to that lived with the 
reality that the President was, was accused in a meeting of improper conduct and did 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 108 of 149 
 
not deal with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let me confirm this, because I wanted to confirm.  Your 
understanding, your understanding was that Mr Mbalula’s statement included or was 
criticism on the part of the President in relation to this situation where he got told by the 
Guptas that he was going to be Deputy, he was going to be made Minister.  Was that 
your understanding that it was, he was critical of whatever role the President might 
have played in a situation where ultimately the Guptas knew that he was to be 
appointed Minister or was he simply criticising or critical simply of the fact that the 
Guptas told him what maybe they should not have told him even if they knew or is that 
difficult to? 
10 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To say? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  To me it was very clear that he was saying the President is 
derelict of the President informed other people who informed him before. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  The President actually informed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And he was upset about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He was upset about that. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  That the President did not inform him first before he informed 
20 
other people. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And that these people who, who were the subject of gossip or 
the. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 109 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Subject, subject of undercurrent talk. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Had so much influence on the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  So his, his declaration then. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Or his, his claim then was actually saying that the President 
of the ANC and the President of the country did or according to his knowledge informed 
people before he informed him and that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Really upset him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay, okay.  Thank you. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair.  Now you; did you after this NEC meeting 
personally ever have discussions with any member of Members of the NEC about what 
Mr Mbalula had disclosed to the meeting? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I think we were all as you say Chairman shocked and, and we 
discussed it amongst ourselves and we also discussed the fact that the President had 
not even alluded to it let alone address it during his closing remarks.  I, I cannot recall 
who exactly I discussed with, but I, I, I know that I did discuss with Mbalula himself and 
one of the members who sat next to me we discussed it as Mbalula was in, during the 
20 
meeting of the, and even after the meeting to say it is, it is shocking that the President 
has not address this thing that Mbalula said.  So it really does lend credence to what 
Mbalula is saying, because I could not understand why Mbalula would allege such a 
serious thing and not, and the ANC not get a response because it is serious not only for 
Mbalula but for the, for the NEC which at the time was beginning to, to worry about 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 110 of 149 
 
some of these things as the large Cabinet reshuffle of October 2010 did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Well I, I said earlier on that I would have thought that people 
who had this statement by Mr Mbalula would have been shocked.  At least I am happy 
that you are saying you know you were shocked to hear, to see, to hear, to hear this 
because it must have really been something very serious, but my concern continues to 
be since this issue was raised at an NEC meeting the seriousness with which it should 
have been taken should have led to a situation where subsequently at least it was 
brought back to the NEC to say to the NEC on such and such meeting, at such and 
such a meeting Mr Mbalula raised this issue.  We were very concerned about it and we 
want to hear what the President has to say about it or maybe some of us maybe the 
10 
officials have raised the issue with the President and we are reporting back to the NEC 
as to what the, what, what the position is, but from what you have told us until you left 
the NEC no feedback whatsoever was ever given to the NEC while you were a member 
of the NEC? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Chair first, the first issue is, is, is on the shock. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  The shock was not so much about the revelation that he 
made or the allegation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Or the claim that he made. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  People, because people had always suspected that perhaps. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  There is, there is truth in what is being whispered. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 111 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I think what, what may then have upset many people is the 
second question that you are raising, about the President not having addressed the 
matter which set tongues wagging after the meeting and also that was a shock and also 
concern later like this matter never arose again and I think what I said earlier on that 
what perhaps happened was that perhaps people spoke to the President on the side or 
perhaps people spoke to Mbalula subsequently to that, but nothing happened and even 
I as a member of the National Working Committee did not raise it again to say 
President there was this allegation made.  Can you discuss it because also there the 
agenda that is landed on the National Working Committee is processed through the 
officials and they put the agenda, nothing like that arose and no, not that we were 
10 
prevented from raising anything, but we did not raise it as well.  So I think we were 
remiss as well as Members of the National Executive Committee in not at the 
subsequent meeting of the National Executive Committee not to ask the SG who puts 
that agenda to say but at this meeting, at the past meeting of August I think the next 
meeting would have been in December or perhaps the following meeting.  At that 
meeting this was raised and it so serious as to have warranted a response from the 
President which did not come about and could we deal with it.  Nothing like that 
happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I, I, I think part of what you have just said is quite profound is 
because in the context of the, of that this Commission is about it is quite important that 
20 
various bodies, organisations, people govern functionaries and so on that everybody 
should look at what this Commission is looking at in terms of state capture and being 
genuinely concerned about what may have happened and I will not keep on saying, I 
keep on saying that I, I, I, I am, I will only decide at the end of the whole thing whether 
there was state capture.  I am asked to investigate whether, I will investigate allegations 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 112 of 149 
 
of state capture, where there is something that they could have and/or should have 
done that may have assisted in one way or another in maybe stopping what we now 
call state capture earlier, earlier than a certain time and, and, and in doing so we, we, 
we need people who are going to be able to say I will, I may, I was part of this body and 
maybe we did not do something that we should have done or maybe say look I can see 
that we should have done this and we did not do it and it is, it is wrong that we did not 
do it.  Maybe here are the circumstances that may have led to us not doing something, 
but at this stage we are able to acknowledge that having applied our minds yes we 
should have done something and we were remiss.  We did not do it and, and I think that 
kind of approach would be very helpful.  Obviously one is not saying people must take, 
10 
must say they should have done something if they do not feel that they should have 
done something, but those who look at the whole situation, look at the opportunities 
that they may have had to do certain things and are able to say I think here I could 
have contributed and I did not.  Maybe at that time the situation that was prevailing was 
such that the focus was on something else.  I do not know, but I see that here I did not 
do this and I could have done.  That is that is quite important. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Perhaps one of the reasons why this was so, I said earlier on 
that at the time that I had a meeting with the, the company of the Gupta family. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I had absolutely no inclining that the things that unfolded 
folded later on would. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Would come to. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 113 of 149 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  The point at which they [intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Only later. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Do we get to, to that point.  Otherwise. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  We just took, took them as part of the business.  Obviously 
people who, who are in business are warned to want to, to be close to the powers that 
be and normally at events that we organise as the African National Congress whether it 
10 
is January, the 8th or something like that or it is elections or fundraising the people who 
have lots and lots of money want to sit next to, to the President of the country.  Want to 
sit next to the Minister of Finance.  Want to sit next to the Minister of this and that, the 
important and in fact they are allocated as such also depending on, on the importance 
of the contribution.  I do not know now that the legislation is changing with, in terms of 
disclosure etcetera for contributions whether that will still be the, but I think it is the 
case worldwide that people who have financial muscle and I will do that myself if I had 
tremendous financial muscle.  I would want to sit next to a President of the country.  Not 
because I want to influence the President to appoint so and so and so and so, but 
because the closer to the ear of the President the better for, for me.  Not necessarily to 
20 
do wrong things, but for, for my company, the image of my company and also things 
that I might say that are not improper in any way.  So I, I, I think that when, when the 
things were happening initially and we saw this happen or these people being close to 
the President.  I think earlier on during Mr Manuel’s testimony there was an eluding to a 
former Minister appointing of the brothers as, as part of the, of the, of Brain South 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 114 of 149 
 
Africa. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Board and so on.  So. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  So those people were part of society, normal business people 
and so on, but only, only, only later did we realise that they, there was something really 
sinister afoot and perhaps if this thing of Mbalula was just a first indication that 
something was, was, was wrong that the President may, may have acted incorrectly, 
but it was not yet to us at least evidence of, real evidence of state capture.  It was 
beginning to, to give worries about that possibility if people have got and it was actually 
10 
the first indication of worrying about, about this family apart from things that were being 
[indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you.  Thank you Chair.  Now if you could just go back 
very briefly.  Can you tell the Chair about the circumstances of your own dismissal and 
how you got to lean that you were being released from your post as Minister of 
Communication? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I was in Durban Chairman as I said and I was called by 
somebody from the Presidency to say that I need to go to [indistinct], the President’s 
residence or state house.  I cannot remember which and I indicated that actually in 
20 
Durban it was in the morning, Sunday morning returning to Johannesburg, because I 
had been there for a weekend and then I got another call and I indicated that my flight 
was going to be in the afternoon.  When I got the VIP lounge I got a call now from the 
President to say that I have been, I am being redeployed.  That the officials have 
decided to redeploy me as Ambassador to Germany. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 115 of 149 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  This was now the President speaking to you on the phone? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  The President speaking to me, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And I said I told him no, I am not there.  I think that is why you 
are relaying this message, but I will come there and try to see you, but thank you very 
much for your appointment and I elected to go to the back benches of Parliament where 
I had been sent by the ANC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But when you arrived in Gauteng coming back that same afternoon 
did you go and meet the President and maybe hear more or on anything of the 
subsequent days? 
10 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No, because he had already relayed his message.  I did not 
and see him except Lithuli House.  I saw, I saw him much later where, because I 
wanted to find out from, from officials, because he said it said officials who decided. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  To do this thing and one of them I do not think I have the 
pleasure of saying who, but indicated that he, he knew nothing about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And then I subsequently met the President, because I really 
wanted to find out what it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What happened? 
20 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  That. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I would be, I would be redeployed and. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I saw him in his office and he mumbled something about the 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 116 of 149 
 
SABC which I did not quite understand, but I had, I had received some, some people, 
some gossip about people saying things about me that and I told him this that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I understand you say that I run a, a private, a private 
intelligence outfit and so on and so forth, but he said no, it is not true.  He thinks this 
matter is related to the SABC, but I did not really understand what those matters were 
in relation to the SABC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Which was under my. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Watch as Minster of Communications. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  So, so, the purpose, when you saw him you sought to 
understand the reasons why? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The officials decided to; that you should leave the Portfolio of 
Communication, Minister of Communications and be given an Ambassadorship and you 
sought to understand that from him? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Not necessarily the, the officials, but him because he is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He was the President? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Ja, he is the President.  I mean we serve at his, at his 
20 
[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  He has got the prerogative. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  To. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 117 of 149 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Appoint and dismiss Ministers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  So you say you, you, you did ask him to try and understand and 
he? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In your words mumbled something about the SABC? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not understand what he was saying about it.  You do not 
know what, what, what it was about [intervenes]? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I did not understand what it was frankly. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but you, you left it at that? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I left it at that and. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And informed him that I, I was going to, to go back to the. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You were going to go. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  To Parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Back to Parliament. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  As a back bencher. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.  You did not take up the offer of? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Being an ambassador, okay.  Thank you. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  At the time that the President informed you of, of your 
dismissal and suggested appoint to an Ambassadorial position did you ever, did you 
question or did you have any basis to question the truthfulness of the reason why you 
were being removed from the post of Minister of Communications? 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 118 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I, I think this is what I have just being saying to the Chairman 
that I did try. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  No, I am; but my question if I may be clearer.  At the time did 
you, sorry did you question the truthfulness of the reasons that were being advanced? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No, I know, I knew that there was no truth in those reasons. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Okay.  Chair I see. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So, so just to understand that answer.  He gave you some answer 
relating to the SABC which you did not understand, but you are saying as far as you 
were concerned that was not the true reason.  Is that, is that, is my understanding. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of what you are saying correct? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  That was not the true reason. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  That was not the true reason. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Now did you know what the true reason was? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I, I, I suspected because I did say to the Chairman, to the 
Commission that I heard whispers about. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  A possible reshuffle in which. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I would be affected. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  But I, I, I actually did not believe those rumours because I 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 119 of 149 
 
thought that I was doing quite well in my portfolio. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I had introduced many things.  I, there was a, a stable board 
of the SABC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  There were of course fights in that SABC between Ngubane 
and, and, and the, and the CEO of the SABC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  There were, but generally there was stability in most of the, of 
the portfolios that were under my, my watch there whether it was SANTEC or, or, or the 
10 
SABC.  There was general stability and the, things were beginning to take shape.  
There was of course and issue between me and, which had just arisen, between me 
and the former Director General which I. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of your department? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Of the department. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, huh-uh. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And allegations that she made because we, I had suspended 
her on, on advice from, from and also on consideration of the things that were alleged 
against her and then of course she went to, the thing was before the Public Service 
Commission. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And then she went to allege things. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  That were not correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 120 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And I went to the President also with respect to that, because 
the, the Minister of the Public Service is the one who is the custodian of all these things 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Ja that is all and they were taking time and so on and doing.  
So. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  At that, at that point in time I thought that then we had, we 
had so many things in line and as far as the department is concerned [intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry General it may be that you need to speak a little louder or 
10 
maybe [intervenes]. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  [Intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think the people at the people might not be hearing you. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, ja.  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Ja, I was saying that I, I thought I was doing well and I was 
also receiving credit for the, for the chances that were taking place in that department 
or in relation, relation to the, to all the entities that resides under my watch. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now my question was whether you knew what the reason was and 
you in response talked about suspecting.  So maybe I should ask whether you knew the 
20 
reason or whether you had suspicions only of what the true reason was for your 
dismissal. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No, I, I, I did not, I did not, because he did not provide the 
reasons I, I did not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 121 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I thought that he was creating space for, for somebody else to 
take, to take. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  My place. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Because subsequent to that maybe there were things that 
were put in place with respect to governance of many of these State Owned 
Enterprises or State Owned Companies changes began to take place as well. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  People began, people were shafted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm, hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Members that had appointed to, to boards, people began to 
move the other appointments whether it was Telkom. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Or SANTEC or the SABC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Of course the SABC remained and Ben Ngubane stayed 
there, but then I, I, I can only say with hindsight that. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  There are things that took place after my removal which 
actually confirmed that some of these were the, these were the reasons why I was 
removed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, well maybe you should articulate that if you have looked at 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 122 of 149 
 
what has happened and it throws light as far as you are concerned on why you were 
dismissed just articulate them to say when I look at this and that and that which 
happened after I had left.  I think it throws light and this is the light that it throws is that 
is the position.  If that is not the position obviously do not say that.  I just want to, I just 
want to benefit from your own understanding of issues or your own analysis of this, of 
the issues to say this is why I believe I was dismissed if that, if you. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Hm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you know.  If you do not know you say look I do not know.  I can 
only speculate and obviously speculation is not going to help. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes.  That is what I said to the investigators or to the, the 
10 
Commissions and evidence leaders. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  That I do not have, although I am a military man I do not have 
any explosives stuff or bomb shells. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  But I can, I can only. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Surmise. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  From what happened subsequently. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  That this, this may have been the reason. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  These were the reasons. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 123 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  But I, I have absolutely nothing and I. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I must say also since I was appointed nobody came to me 
both in the, as Chief of the SANDF or as Minister of Communications, nobody ever 
came to me with an idea that I should do something wrong. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Nobody came to me with a proposal that I thought was, was 
not correct [intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, was improper? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And I dismissed them as improper. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  So nothing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  The only time some people came to me they wanted to buy 
shares from Eskom, from Telkom and, and I told them but Telkom is a listed entity.  Why 
if, if, if you made this proposal public that if you expressed an interest then Government 
might even consider your proposal, because it would shoot, shoot up the value had you 
made a, made a good [indistinct].  It would shoot up the value of, of, of Telkom and the 
20 
value, because of that value you might even want to, to look at such a proposal, but 
you cannot come and make a proposal to me as Minister.  It has got a Board although it 
is, the Government has got a significant stake in it, but it is a, it is a public entity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay.  No, thank you. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair.  Chair it is after four, with your permission 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 124 of 149 
 
may I request that we finish. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us try and finish. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us try and finish. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  You, you indicated to the Chair previously that after 
Mr Mbalula had made this disclosure none of the NEC Members to your knowledge and 
do you in particular raise this issue again in the NEC or with the officials.  You stated 
such. 
10 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And you expresses your view that you may very well have 
been remiss in failing to do so. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Now. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And also subsequent to that you know the ANC, when we 
were acting in other capacities now not in the capacity as Members of the NEC, 
because we, when the issues of Mcebisi Jonas and the 2015 dismissal from 
Government of Nene we wrote a memorandum to the ANC expressing disquiet at all 
these things and so and then subsequent to that they were called to the ANC offices 
20 
and one of the things we, we were demanding was an enquiry, Commission of Enquiry 
and. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  May I interject? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  [Intervenes]. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  I apologise with your permission.  Chair what 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 125 of 149 
 
General Nyanda has just testified to relate to the documents that I said he brought this 
morning.  Perhaps it might be an appropriate time to hand them in and when he 
addresses those issues, because he would like to address himself to the documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  [Intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine.  That may be done, but I think he may proceed, because 
on Mr Mashigo’s evidence I think that I have recollection of a memorandum that 
Mr Mashigo handed up which had a list of names of I think former Ministers and 
Directors-General if I am not mistaken.  I seem to think I saw General Nyanda’s name 
there.  General did, was your name in that memorandum or do you know anything 
10 
about it? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  You are. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are not sure about that one? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No, but we are talking about another memorandum. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Because. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  The one from the DGs. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Follows the one we wrote as Senior Commanders. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Of Umkhonto we Sizwe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Former Commanders of Umkhonto we Sizwe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 126 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  To the ANC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  Let me, let me have that, ja. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair.  In fact there are three documents that 
General Nyanda made available this morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  We have numbered them SN02 to SN07, based on the date 
of their production. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, thank you. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And I beg leave to hand them in and Chair if you, if you could 
include them in your exhibit, this is for the witness, if you include then in your exhibit we 
10 
will update the Chair’s index. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  To reflect their inclusion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  I am just thinking whether, so maybe we should, oh you have 
taken the liberty of marking them SN02 up to. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Should be SN08, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay, no, no that is that is fine.  Thank you. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You may proceed, ja. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you.  Now you have been given a copy of these 
20 
documents paginated SN02 to SN08, General Nyanda.  The first is an email dated 
18 March 2016 and according to this document it appears to be an email from 
Mr Mo Shaik to yourself and the subject matter is “Memorandum from Senior 
Commanders and Commissars of…” something to have been omitted there.  You have 
the document. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 127 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  “…of the Military Wing of the ANC Umkhonto we Sizwe”. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Okay.  Now you explain, is this the memorandum you were 
referring to initially when you, when you told the Chair; when you tried to distinguish 
between a document and the one that Mr Mashigo had referred to which is the 
memorandum of the General, of the DGs. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes, but I was not actually referring to the memorandum.  I 
was talking specifically, perhaps I am jumping. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Okay. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I was talking specifically about this issue of being remiss. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Because. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just talk about it, ja. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  At a sub, subsequent to all this the ANC leant us they are 
here in the form of the Secretary General and, and, and actually invited everybody to 
give evidence, to bring evidence to it.  Instead of the Commission that we were 
requesting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And I am saying also because I am just took the question of 
being remised, because even in that I think it is only Mashigo who went. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  So it was also another missed opportunity at least on my part. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  But here I was acting, I was heading a group of people. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 128 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  On my part, because I also was privy to that NEC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Now when the NEC, when the ANC says come and tell us 
about this state capture. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I also did not go back to the ANC to say you remember SG 
this meeting of the NEC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  This was said. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And I would like to submit that is one of the. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  It is an, it is evidence as one of this, the beginning of this 
state capture if it is, was not the, it was not the state capture itself the essence of it. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you, thank you General.  Can we take these 
documents I would suggest by in date form so that we address them sequentially as 
they were produced?  The first one you submitted as what appears as SN02 which is 
that email dated March the 18th 2016, and a reading of that document would suggest 
that it covers a number of issues including the removal of Mr Nene and that you will find 
at paragraph 4, the rise of factions and sleuth within the ANC and that is contained at 
20 
paragraph 7.11, various crises besetting the organisation at paragraph 12, and undue 
influence on decisions of the State at paragraph 14.  Now of particular relevance to our 
conversation and the Gupta Family I seem to find these matters dealt with in 
paragraphs 7 to 9 of that document, do you see that?  
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 129 of 149 
 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Now can you tell the Chair therefore what the issues are in 
relation to the Gupta family that you raised as a concern on this document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe before he does that, which is specific to the Gupta family it 
might help if we were to give you an opportunity to say the thrust of this document that 
you sent to the ANC insofar as it might relate to the work of this Commission was t he 
following, one, two, three or whatever, and then you can focus after that on this specific 
one, but if the specific issue is actually the one that you want to focus on its fine. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  The specific issue that this memorandum deals with is the 
appointment of an independent Commission to look into the matters that arose out of 
(indistinct) disclosure that he was called to (indistinct) and told that he would become, 
10 
that they would make him Minister if he accepted R600 000 and ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  I think R600million. 
MR SIPHIW NYANDA:  R600million ja, and did certain things, I can’t think in terms of 
figures. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  So that was the thrust to say we need to have a Commission 
set up because we thought that what was happening was undermining the African 
National Congress and we were just concerned about our movement that is why even if 
you look at the resolution about saying the ANC should call an independent commission 
to deal with these matters because we were discussing these things on  a daily basis 
20 
until such time as Xolisi made this claim.  I can just give a background as well, I was 
driving from somewhere, Mabula Game Lodge when this thing came, I actually called 
all these people that are signatories to this thing while I was driving I asked somebody 
else to drive, to call these people to say we need to do something about this and all 
these were very senior people in the ANC and veterans of the Armed Struggle, because 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 130 of 149 
 
to us this was now a public revelation not in an ANC NEC as it happened in the past, 
but public, a Minister, a Deputy Minister disclosing what he disclosed because his 
minister had been removed somebody else put in place for three days and then 
subsequently a redress sort of, of that situation when Bavim was then appointed.  So 
we were saying this is a worry to us, with respect to what is happening in Government 
and also with respect to what is happening in the African National Congress  
 
You will recall Chair that there had been elections, local government 
elections in 2014, the previous year ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  2016 was local government elections.  Minister Nene was dismissed 
on the 9th of December 2015. 
10 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The local government elections were in August I think 2016. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  2016 in 2014 the ANC’s majority was reduced, significantly 
and we were worried about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And so we were planning this because we knew that or we 
thought that there were problems in the African National Congress or factionalism and 
so on and so forth and we addressed these issues again in this, but ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, I see that the memorandum is dated 18 March 2016. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  2016. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  You have covered what you think is important for us to highlight 
in this memo? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  If I may read from the memo at paragraph 8 and please 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 131 of 149 
 
correct me if I make a mistake, and in the context of the offer made to Mr Mbalula the 
memorandum state: 
“In the light of these revelations we demand to know what role if any did the 
Gupta family play in influencing the appointment of Ministers and to what 
end, which other ministers have been approached by them in this manner, 
what private arrangements if any have been made with the Gupta family, 
what is their role in the appointment of board members of State Owned 
Enterprises.  Is the leadership of the ANC aware of these arrangements.  On 
whose authority does the Gupta family act.” 
So this would be a specific issue brought to the attention that was central to the memo 
10 
that you submitted on the 18th of March? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  The bottom end as currently appears before us seems to be 
an email from Mr Moshaik to yourself.  Now you speak of a memorandum, can you 
explain the following, to whom specifically was this memorandum addressed? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  It was addressed to the Secretary General of the ANC and the 
officials of the ANC and it went to them, I think Mo sent it to me and I sent it to the SG 
of the African National Congress. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And the document would suggest at page SN04 that it is 
signed by yourself on behalf of the list of people set out there, so the document is 
20 
yours, basically, on behalf of those people, same document at page SN04. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Now can you confirm whether or not the Secretary General 
of the ANC did receive this memorandum? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I can confirm that and I will also say Chairman that this 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 132 of 149 
 
document somebody leaked this document to the media, so the Secretary General of 
the ANC or rather the leadership of the ANC were upset and reprimanded us when we 
met them about such a leak, so it was sent to them and received by them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I suspect that the reprimand was about the leak and not about this 
type of writing expressing your view in this memo? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Ja the reprimand was about the leak Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Now following then receipt of that memorandum by the 
Secretary General, albeit the date is not clear, what did the Secretary General to your 
knowledge do about that memo, what transpired thereafter? 
10 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  We did meet the leadership of the ANC I think it was not just 
the Secretary General but the officials of the ANC, I can’t recall who was present in that 
meeting, among the officials. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And when you say we did meet, do you recall who you were 
with? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  A few people I think Moshaik was one of the people in that 
meeting, I think Kasha Bangu, let me see in my book.  I think General Mngwena, 
Commission Rasigatla, Ambassador Sheik, I think I can recall those, there were about 
five of us. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Now you submitted as part of the documents this morning an 
20 
email yet again, which I have numbered SN052 SN06, could you explain to the Chair 
the relevance of that particular email?  It is dated Sunday April 3 2016. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  This email just talks to – this meeting that we held with the 
officials of the ANC and it also talks to that leak, the last paragraph of that page SN05, 
where I say: 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 133 of 149 
 
“Comrades as you now our last memorandum was leaked to the media by 
one of us.  We were correctly criticised for this reckless action.  I appeal to 
you please keep this communication confidential to ensure that no leak 
ensues.” 
And it spoke to the findings of the – we were asking the President to go. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Can I draw our attention to – you drew the Chair’s attention 
to the last paragraph on that page, can I draw your attention to the paragraph before 
that one. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes, to say the President had agreed to meet us. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  So is it correct to interpret this to mean as at April the 3rd 
10 
2016 you were confirming that there has been an invitation to meet with the President 
on the matter that is reflected in your memorandum. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  But the meeting was yet to be held. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Now was that meeting subsequently held as a matter of fact? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  My recollection yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Do you recall what was discussed in that meeting? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I have a – I have here what I was going to say to the 
President. 
20 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Okay. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  It is actually something, the notes that I prepared for that 
meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And did you actually say these things that you say in this document 
when you met with the person? 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 134 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes, okay, thank you. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Is that the document then that would be the third document 
in that series Chair, paginated SN07 to SN08, it’s got a date there by manuscript 
18.04.2016, is that the document? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  That’s generated then. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  I see that it is addressed to the President. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And at the third paragraph they are numbered but the third 
paragraph you state, or it states: 
“We really appreciate the time and wish we could have interacted long before 
10 
matters reached this state.  Some of us have made such attempts to reach 
you.” 
Now whose handwriting is it at the top there inserting the date 18.04.2016? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  It’s mine. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Is the Chair to understand that the date appearing there is 
the date on which you wrote this document, not the date necessarily on which you met 
with the President, you would have met with him ...(intervention)  
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  The date on which this was generated from my computer. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Do you recall then based on that date ...(intervention)  
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I can’t recall the date that we actually met the President. 
20 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  You don’t recall, okay.  Okay is there anything in particular – 
so is the Chair to understand that these are then your notes of what transpired at that 
meeting, would that be correct. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:   Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  In summary then could you say, could you indicate to the 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 135 of 149 
 
Chair what the key issues were that were discussed and their relevance to this 
Commission? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No, I remember that it was going to be the President’s 
birthday or something there and then we are saying there that we were really are 
saddened by what has happened and I – if I can just can quote what I’m saying? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, briefly. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I say: 
“We come here with pain and heavy hearts believing that our organisation is 
on a slippery slope.  This is not only from our own observation but from what 
10 
we also heard you say at the National General Council last year.  There are 
people who believe it is beyond remedy, some of us think it is still possible to 
cure it’s ills and nurture it back to health in spite of that being a monumental 
challenge.  We are prepared to be part of such an effort.  That will however 
require a complete detour from the practice of the past decade and a will 
form the leadership to unite with its investigators and drive such an agenda.” 
And then it goes into the resignation of Mcebesi Jonas. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  You may read that as well, you may continue reading that 
into the record yes please. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I must read that. 
20 
“President last month after the statement by the Deputy Minister of Finance, 
Mcebesi Jonas, we addressed a memorandum to the leadership on that 
issue.  We believe that the issue of the Guptas and the attendant corruption 
involving the State machinery which was central to that memo has evoked 
such resentment from many in our ranks and the wider society that the ANC 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 136 of 149 
 
is in danger of paying a huge price in future elections.  We have since 
interacted with the SG and the some officials and ANC members, ANC 
members explaining the memo and signalling our intention to participate in 
the process that the NEC has decided in order to give our own evidence 
about what we know on the matter.  We do not wish to rehash some of the 
issues we raised in that memo save to say that it among other things called 
for a special conference.  We are not even sure that a special conference 
can resolve some of the many challenges we face, but we are shocked by 
the assertion by the SG that forcing the President to relinquish office would 
tear the ANC apart.  We however wonder whose interest it would serve to 
10 
tear the movement apart.  We do not believe that you, President, would act 
in such a way as to deliberately wreck the movement in order to stay in 
power.  That would be so un-ANC, but that is the impression we get when 
such statements are made.  Things moved quickly since then, the 
Constitutional Court has now found that the President violated the 
Constitution for which he has since rightly apologised.  That may be okay 
with us but that cannot be enough for the country’s future.  The ANC through 
the SG came out in support of the President and the SG repeated the same 
assertion in aid to ask in that discussion in that memo.  All findings by the 
Constitutional Court set precedents, so too do the actions of those fingered 
20 
in relation to those findings.  Are we saying that all future adverse findings 
against incumbents will be satisfied by a mere apology?   Are we not in so 
doing setting precedents for similar future conduct with which incumbents will 
expect to be satisfied by a mere apology?  Are these the standards by which 
we want our hard won democracy to be measured?  Is it not a better 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 137 of 149 
 
response to take full responsibility and set an example that such adverse 
findings in future have more serious consequences?  We are therefore of the 
opinion that more drastic decisions should have been taken on the 
Constitutional Court ruling on the Ghandla matter.  We agree with the 
(indistinct) and Comrade Kathrada that our country would be better served 
where the President relinquish office as an example for those who follow.  
This would be put the country on a high moral pedestal and be an example 
for future leaders that there is a price to pay for such breaches.  The 
President would set a good example for the ANC and the country.  The 
opposite is the case were this not to happen.  It would open the door to 
10 
impunity, and we do not believe that the President would want that to result 
from his actions.  We do not view this as punishment for the President but as 
a rich example of the respect he would leave for governance and the rule of 
law.” 
I don’t know whether I must go on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well if you think what you have read captures the important points 
that’s fine but if you think there is still something in terms of what you haven’t read that 
you want to capture you can read it. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No I think it does capture it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It does, okay. 
20 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you General.  Now this an interpretation that this is a 
recordal of the meeting you had with the President would be correct? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes, yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Now who besides the President was present in that meeting 
you said, apart from your delegation, who did you – who ...(intervention)  
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 138 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I can’t recall, I know part of the officials, I think Dr Mkizi was 
one of the people that I can recall, or the DSG of the ANC. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  At the time? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Now the document starts with the salutation “President” was 
this delivered to the President himself at that time? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  This document? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So in other words did you come to the meeting with it? 
10 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh and then you handed it over to him? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then you discussed? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No, we discussed, these were my notes but we left them with 
a copy. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Okay and so you discussed the notes, the issues that are 
raised in this document? 
20 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I’m sorry, are we to take it that the sentiments expressed in this 
document by yourself reflected the sentiments of the – over everybody that was part of 
your delegation when you met the President? 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Yes. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 139 of 149 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and maybe a wider group than just those who came to the 
meeting in terms of your delegation. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In other words there was a wider group behind this. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay and that group did it include the individuals that are listed in the 
other memorandum that we dealt with that – in SN02? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It included them? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  But much more or just them? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I think by then we had expanded because following our 
intervention ...(intervention)  
CHAIRPERSON:  Your first meeting. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  That memorandum which was made public, it leaked and we 
discussed with the ANC other people, other former DG’s I remember they called me 
and said they want to – why don’t we take this matter to the people who are serving 
currently because Ministers act through their Directors General, and that it may be a 
good thing for us because these were just commanders, these were veterans of MK, 
some of them were DG’s before. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Somebody came with the idea that why don’t we form a DG’s 
group which would then concentrate on what is happening now in Government because 
we had so many who had served the ANC and had you know a view that the correct 
mindset and was serving Government and not our own interest that we now need to 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 140 of 149 
 
bring it back to people who are serving currently and the one who that has to form this, 
which was then the basis of another group that subsequently was formed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  Thank you Chair.  Now general did the president address 
any of the issues that you brought forward to his attention at this meeting at the time? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  The President was very unhappy about our call for him to 
relinquish office, and according to the President he is serving his term until the ANC – 
because he is elected by the African National Congress and by the branches of the 
African National Congress. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And did you specifically bring to his attention your concerns 
10 
regarding the – the so-called influence of the Gupta family on him? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes we did. 
ADV MAHLAPE SELLO:  And did he deal with that aspect in the meeting? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No, I think that that meeting really did not address many of 
these issues as it should have done.  The officials just decided that they were going to 
follow up on the matters that we were raising and come back to us, and they did take 
note of the concerns that we have and they informed us that the current NEC has got a 
mandate from the previous conference of the ANC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I just want to make sure I understand what happened.  The 
meeting that we are talking about which involved a delegation of which you were part 
20 
and met with the President, did it meet with the President alone or were there officials 
of the ANC at that meeting as well? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  The one relating to the memorandum? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, well the one relating to the letter, well it’s documented letter 
which you said reflects your notes at the meeting. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 141 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, that meeting. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  It is the one that I say my recollection is that there was the 
Treasury General of the ANC of the time Dr Mkezi and the Deputy Secretary General of 
the ANC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, your recollection that there were those it was the President plus 
those two officials of the ANC. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, now the President you said were in regard to your suggestion 
or demand or request of your delegation that he should relinquish office responded on 
10 
what you have said on the basis that he had been elected by branches of the ANC, I 
thought you – the office that you sought him to relinquish was that of President of the 
Country and not President of the ANC. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Exactly yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So did he address the issue of relinquishing the office of President of 
the Country? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He did not address that one, did he misunderstand and thought that 
you were asking him to step down as President of the ANC? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  You know I cannot recall.  Even the issue of the elections of 
20 
the President I cannot recall whether it was him or the Deputy Secretary… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The official… 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Who addressed that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Or one of the officials who addressed that. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 142 of 149 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But the only – what are the issues that you can remember were 
dealt with or responded to by the President himself in relation to the issues you raised if 
there are issues that you recall he dealt with this and this is what he said?  Or you 
cannot tell?  He might have said something or another official might have said you 
cannot tell who said what? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Because the main thing was the issue of what the 
constitutional court findings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  As well as the Mcebisi Jonas. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Which they said they were going to set up a commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  To look into. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And that this matter – all these matters were going to be 
looked at – into by the leadership of the ANC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh they supported the – they were happy with going along with the 
idea of a commission. 
20 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No, not the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  They were – they set up their own commission. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 143 of 149 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh their own party commission? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes party commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the meeting ended on the basis. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That they said all these issues would be dealt with in that party 
commission? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  And what was your – the attitude of your delegation to this 
10 
way of dealing with issues namely the suggestion of a party commission? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  We were unhappy about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  We were unhappy about it but … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you waited to see. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  We said it is fine and then we asked those who had evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Like Mr Masego. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  To go before that – to go to the ANC and give that evidence. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And Jonas who had concrete evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  And give that… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Evidence. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 144 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Report to – their reports to the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  And – thank you Chair for the record in your memorandum at 
paragraph 16 you record the following I can quickly read it into the record. 
“Accordingly we call on the leadership of the ANC to establish an 
independent commission of inquiry composed of eminent 
persons within the ANC and civil society to investigate all claims 
of undue influence especially by the Gupta family on the ANC 
and on the state” 
When you say to the Chairperson that the meeting ended on an understanding that a 
10 
commission of inquiry was going to be established was it to look into these issues that 
you 
have 
raised 
here 
in 
your 
memorandum 
specifically? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No.  In fact I think there were – there were other interactions 
with the – with the ANC leadership that are not spoken to by these documents.  
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  The point at which the ANC then committed to have its own 
internal investigation and to get people and where they told us that they were needed to 
get.  I think that decision in fact was taken even without the President if I recall because 
it was that day what the board of the boardroom of the Secretary General where we 
were told that there is going to be an investigation – the ANC is going to set up its own 
20 
inquiry and that members must need to come to that inquiry.  That is what I said we 
also unhappy about.  But we accept it because this is our organisation and we wanted 
as much as it is possible to cooperate with it without necessarily upsetting it.  Because 
there are other things we were looking to. We wanted a national consultative committee 
who was going to negotiate many things and – and there were other subsequent 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 145 of 149 
 
meetings which we held and I was also part of interactions with the NEC where the 
President was with the stalwarts and veterans not this grouping.  Neither also the DG’s.  
Stalwarts and veterans where they gave us audience to deal with the matters that 
related to us. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Yes.   
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  All these things. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Now earlier the Chair referred to a memorandum submitted 
into evidence by Mr Maseko.  Chair for record purposes it is in Exhibit E which is Mr 
Maseko’s bundle in particular at page 80.  Now this is dated the 22 April 2016.  What I 
have done General Nyanda is to put Mr Maseko’s bundle next to you.  Chair I have a 
10 
copy here for your reference should you so require. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  But I do not expect to be long on this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no that is fine. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you Chair.  Now this document at page 80 of Mr 
Maseko’s exhibit E is dated the 22 April 2016 and if you look overleaf at page 81 it is 
signed by a number of people I think a grouper broader than your first memorandum 
and your name appears – the penultimate name in the first column on that page, you 
confirm that? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
20 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Now it starts off by saying: 
“We the undersigned are former Director Generals in the Post-
Apartheid South African Government.” 
Were you a Director at any point? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  A Director General office speciality. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 146 of 149 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I guess Chief of Staff is taken to be at that level or not?  You were 
Chief of Staff in the… 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I was a Chief of the – I was the commander of the South 
African National {indistinct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  A commander ja.  Is that what you are talking about when you say 
Director General of a special kind? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes because I remember one time the former President 
Thabo Mbeki saw me at the birthday of the ANC in Durban after the event.  I think it 
was the 90th birthday in Durban and then he says “Why are you here Chief?”  I said “no 
but you invited.” DG says but you a DG of a special type. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  [Laughing] 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  So and even when I – even when I retired I could not be 
appointed a Director General because it is a special category of Director General. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.   
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  And now this document is dated the 22 April 2106 as I said.  
The last paragraph on page 80 states: 
“We therefore call for the establishment of an independent public 
enquiry then in terms of Section 41 of Paja” 
You see that?  So by the 22 April you were still calling for an establishment of the 
inquiry? 
20 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  As part of this grouping  yes. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  As part of this grouping? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Yes. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  I see that letter is addressed firstly to the Minister of Finance 
Minister Pravin Gordhan, the Minister of Public and Service and Administration Mr 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 147 of 149 
 
Ngoako Ramatlhodi and the President of the Republic of South Africa and the Deputy 
President.  Was this particular letter delivered to any one of the addressees to your 
recollection? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Addresses which? 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  The Minister of Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan, Minister of 
Public Service and Administration Mr Ngoako Ramatlhodi, at the top there page 80 they 
are listed? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Ja I was told so.  I have no certainty about that. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  No personal knowledge of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think Mr Maseko covered it if I am not mistaken. 
10 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Now you personally or the grouping that you had been dealing 
with thus far did you receive a response to this letter at all in writing or in any form? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Did you make submissions any to the subsequent inquiry that 
was established by the ANC on matters that you had requested that be investigated? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  You not talking to this. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  I am just saying generally. Following your request. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No I did – I did say that perhaps because the ANC won – I 
said earlier on that there was nothing that I could offer any inquiry or any commission 
because I was never approached to do anything untoward. 
20 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  So you did not have any personal knowledge on those 
matters and you did not submit any evidence on that? 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  I did say that I was – I said also that in relation to the matter 
of Mbalula perhaps I should have gone back to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 148 of 149 
 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  That inquiry which was an internal one to say yes you want an 
inquiry whereas I know then Mbalula said this thing and you never addressed it. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  But you confirming that you did not bring that particular. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Mr Mbalula’s issue to the inquiry’s attention okay. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Now is there anything else relevant to terms 1.1 and 1.3 as 
you have read them in the terms of reference to getting appointments and dismissals 
that you would like to bring to the Chair’s attention that perhaps we overlooked and did 
not deal with today? 
10 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  No I think I have alluded to those. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  You have covered everything? Chair unless there are 
questions from you that is the testimony of General Nyanda. 
CHAIRPERSON:  General thank you very much for coming to assist the commission.  
We really appreciate it.  We – if we need you to come back I have no doubt that you will 
have no hesitation to come back and assist us.  But thank you very much and unless 
there is something else you want to say I will be ready to excuse you but I think you 
want to say something and I must give you a chance to say it.  Maybe when you say it I 
must just say this if you are able to encourage any of the other people who were part of 
the groups of which you were a member that expressed certain concerns about issues 
20 
of state capture if you want to take this opportunity to encourage them to come forward 
that would highly appreciated and any other matters that you would like to deal with as 
we close. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Thank you Chair I will encourage others to come on board.  
Obviously I support the commission because a lot of what has happened has affected 
28 FEBRUARY 2019 – DAY 58 
 
Page 149 of 149 
 
many of us that is why we interacted with the movement the way we did and I sit here 
now talking about things that are internal to the organisation.  Meetings of the African 
National Congress where certain things that may be [indistinct] to the inquiry are dealt 
with but things that are internal to the organisation.  But I must say that this issue of 
Mbalula was in the public domain even before it.  I mean after it came I mean it was 
leaked somewhere to the public and that – therefore I do not feel constrained to talk 
about it.  The ANC also has encouraged members of the – of the cabinet, members of 
government, public servants, ANC members who maybe au fait to things that they think 
are relevant in the state capture commission to come on board and give evidence to the 
commission.  So I think it is in that spirit that I come to the commission because my 
10 
organisation as well supports the commission in my understanding. I thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No thank you very much I certainly believe that the governing party 
supports the commission.  I believe the government supports the commission.  I believe 
many civic organisations and many people in the country are very supportive of the 
commission.  But thank you very much once again for coming forward. 
MR SIPHIWE NYANDA:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  You are excused.  We are going to adjourn now.  
Tomorrow we will start at the usual time namely ten o’clock.  So we will adjourn for the 
day.  The commission adjourns. 
MS LEAH GCABASHE:  Thank you Chair. 
20 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 1 MARCH 2019 
