 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
29 JUNE 2020 
 
 
DAY 226 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757 
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 204 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
29 JUNE 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 3 of 204 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 29 JUNE 2020 
CHAIRPERSON: Good morning Mr Soni, good morning 
everybody.  Before we start I would like us to all rise and I 
observe a moment of silence in remembrance of all those 
who have passed on as a result of Covid-19 in this country 
and elsewhere in the world but also to honour the doctors, 
nurses and other health workers who are in the front line in 
the fight against the pandemic.  Thank you.   
Good morning Mr Molefe thank you very much for 
coming back to the commission to continue with your 
10 
evidence.  We appreciate your commitment to helping the 
commission.  I think you are coming to the commission 
probably for the sixth time.  We really appreciate it, we 
understand that it might mean some inconvenience in terms 
of your other work but we appreciate that you continue to 
show your commitment to supporting the commission.   
MR MOLEFE:  Thanks Chairperson I am on pension. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.  You may be seated 
Mr Molefe.  Oh, I think there – there will need to be the 
swearing – the oath first because it has been a long time but 
20 
before that I do not know Mr Soni might wish to say 
something.  I have been advised that it is acceptable that 
whenever I speak or you speak Mr Soni as well as the 
witness, we take off the mask and then we put it back when 
we are not speaking.  Of course, we intend observing the 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 4 of 204 
 
social distance but I do not think there is enough space 
between Zwelihle here.  Just one chair in between I do not 
think is enough.  I think you need to move further – further 
up otherwise I am looking around I think there is – otherwise 
enough social distancing.  Thank you very much.  Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  Thank you Mr Chairperson I would like to 
place according to…(microphone off). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please put on your microphone. 
ADV SONI SC:  Sorry Chairperson.  That is according to the 
advice we have received as well Mr Chairperson.   Mr Molefe 
10 
(intervention). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright then we can do the oath.  
Thank you. 
REGISTRAR:  Please place your full names for the record? 
MR MOLEFE:  My name is Popo Simon Molefe. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR MOLEFE:  I do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  I do. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth if so please raise your right hand and say, so help me 
God. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 5 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.  Yes Mr Soni.   
ADV SONI SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You might need to just re-orientate 
everybody where we left off. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With Mr Molefe’s evidence 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the past and where we are continuing 
there. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson you will recall that the last 
issue that we canvassed with Mr Molefe was the meeting on 
the 20 August 2015 at which former President Zuma 
attempted to persuade Mr Molefe to ask his board to take Mr 
Montana back after he had resigned and this was about six 
weeks after he had left the organisation on the 15 July 2015.  
Then you will also recall Mr Chairperson that Mr Molefe in 
dealing with that matter dealt with a meeting that he had 
held with the top six asking them to create some semblance 
of normality at PRASA on account of the attacks that Mr 
20 
Montana had been making against Mr Molefe and the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second.  The air conditioner 
seems to be on it does not feel like it is a heater it is like it 
is making us cold so I think somebody will attend to that.  
Okay. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 6 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson may I ask if I can just really 
briefly deal with that matter because you will recall that one 
of the questions I asked and you also asked Mr Chairperson 
was whether it – it made sense that the board was being 
asked to take Mr Montana back given the background 
circumstances of which everybody knew.  And you will recall 
that Mr Molefe said that it had been widely reported in the 
media.  We have since then Mr Chairperson and we have 
augmented the file and at pages 222 to page 258… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us just indicate… 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh sorry yes Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which number that file is? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  It will – Bundle D Exhibit SS6. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And what page? 
ADV SONI SC:  So this is the articles are at 222 to 258 Mr 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that would be the same file that Mr 
Molefe has got in front of him, is that right? 
ADV SONI SC:  That – that is so Chairperson yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Page 222 that is where they start. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  That is so.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But the instance when I was looking 
at this file they did not seem to be arranged according to 
dates. 
ADV SONI SC:  The – the articles themselves are not. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 7 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  The article (intervenes). 
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why not?  I thought that they would go 
front the earliest up to – when you read – when you try to 
follow the story. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  I had to try and see which one is 
supposed to – you see for example at page 222 you have got 
an article of 7 August 2015 and at page 238 you have got an 
article of 6 July 2015.  I mean that is 26 and then at page 
10 
243 you have got an article of 23 July 2015. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They should have been arranged according 
to dates. 
ADV 
SONI 
SC: 
 
They 
should 
have 
been 
arranged 
chronologically yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So that one could see the build-up.  
This is how the reporting started. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And how it – how it built up. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Up to the date of the meeting. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In terms of what everyone must have been 
seeing in the – in the media. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 8 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:  In the media, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson can I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not know whether it can be changed? 
ADV SONI SC:  It will be done. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson because with respect it – 
you are absolutely right that is how it should have been 
done. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  I did not… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay the only – the only problem of course 
is that when you refer to the articles now if you mention the 
page numbers and the page numbers are going to change. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It will be problem with the transcript.  But 
it may be that – it may be that later on when the – when this 
has been changed arrangements can be made for you to 
place on record what the latest number – page numbers will 
be.  Okay, alright. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  I apologise Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Okay.  It is quite dark where I am.  I 
do not know whether there is anything that can be done 
about it.  I know that last time there was that same issue but 
we will continue in the meantime. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 9 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Yes Chairperson.  Chairperson may I 
say in regard to the articles. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Just one second.  It may well be if 
that – if there are problems in getting – need to have better 
lighting here it may well be that a gas light might help so 
that when I want to read I can see the words. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Clearly.  So – ja, okay alright. 
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson the – it is not my intention in 
referring to the articles to go into any depth.  The idea is 
10 
merely again to emphasise the point that it just made no 
sense and it was in the public arena that there was this 
incompatibility between Mr Montana and the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well apart from any incompatibility I think 
for me what is most important is the fact that the question 
whether the articles which were in the media made it 
reasonable for us to – to make it reasonable for us to expect 
that people who normally read what is in the media would 
have been aware that at PRASA there are all these very 
serious allegations of corruption. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That was alleged to have been taking 
place so that whatever proposals or decisions people were 
making they were making them being aware of all of these 
things. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 10 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Molefe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think that it would help me a great deal if 
Mr Molefe is able and your questioning can be directed that 
he is able to say based on what I told the Top 6 anyone who 
was in that meeting would have known the following features 
of corruption at PRASA because I told them. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  1, 2, 3, 4 at least some of the important 
ones. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It may be that it is something that he might 
be able to do without going back to refresh his memory. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It may be that it is something that he would 
prefer to refresh his memory before mention – saying it. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So if we do not deal with it now because 
he might not have – he might need to refresh his memory we 
can deal with it later when he has a time – he has had a 
chance to refresh his memory. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 11 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I would like – I would like that – that 
kind of evidence that makes it quite clear that here are some 
of the features of corruption or allegations of corruption at 
PRASA that anyone who was at that meeting was told about. 
ADV SONI SC:  And – and Chairperson with respect the – it 
was not just allegations of small corruption this was billions 
of rands.  For example among… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Exactly. 
ADV SONI SC:  So – so perhaps I should ask Mr Molefe 
whether he would like time to look at it. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Or he can talk about it now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no that is fine. Mr Molefe you have 
heard the exchange between the Chairperson and myself and 
you understand the – the issue that rises because the whole 
question is should something have been done other than 
calling a meeting on the 20t h to say take Mr Montana back?  
But I – do you want to go through the articles or do you know 
them sufficiently? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson I – I do not intend to go through 
20 
the articles unless Counsel would like me to do so and refer 
me to specific ones.  I mean at the time I read a lot of them 
and I did refer earlier on in my evidence to this campaign to 
vilify the board and to attack the Chair of the Board and 
following the – the fact that in November of 2014 the Board 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 12 of 204 
 
had become aware that there was a big tender that was – 
that had been adjudicated upon and the Chair of the Finance 
Capital Investment Committee who had been the previous 
Chair of the Board had wanted the Board that I was chairing 
to quickly approve that tender for the modernisation of 
Braamfontein Depot and of course the procurement of the 
rails and turnouts as part of the preparation for the trains 
that were going to be coming from Brazil which were being 
manufactured in Brazil.  And the Chairperson would recall 
that during my evidence I said that the Board had been 
10 
misled by the former GCE Mr Montana who had said that he 
had a probity report when we had asked for the probity 
report because we needed assurance that the process was 
proper and was clean.  It turned out that that report did not 
exist and he knew it did not exist but he lied to the Board.  
So that is one aspect now we exposing and we stop that 
tender process for that time. It involved well over R2 billion.  
And then the next time is when we discover and actually 
insist that Mr Montana gives a report that in fact the Public 
Protector was not only investigating PRASA but had been 
20 
asking for comments of PRASA on the interim report that she 
had given to PRASA.  The Chairperson would recall that Mr 
Montana then gave me a file containing that report around 
March 2015.  Now the series of media reports come after we 
exposed what appears to be corruption at the time.  And of 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 13 of 204 
 
course we were already saying we have got to investigate 
because the Auditor General also complains about the audit 
of the financial year.  Now there are dots that one can 
connect Chairperson.  Chairperson will recall that I – I had 
also referred to the – what I said was PRASA in turmoil and I 
said it was a – a report by Mr Montana.  In fact, PRASA in 
turmoil was a section in the report of Mr Montana.  The real 
thing is that Mr Montana had written a detailed report on the 
27 July addressed to Minister Jeff Radebe who was in the 
Presidency.  I did say that I had gotten a copy from the 
10 
whistle-blower but I was struggling to find it.  I regret that 
Chairperson I am not computer savvy.  I have found it last 
night. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR MOLEFE:  And I read it but I tried to send it where I 
could – I could print it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  Then it looks like I have lost it so I would 
need to get some computer experts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  There to assist it but it is the report to 
Minister Jeff Radebe on the Board of PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  Recent events at PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 14 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:  It is a very long report. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  When one reads that report there is a – there 
is a link and connection between a series of media articles 
and what that report was saying.  Because a lot of what we 
read in these media articles are also contained in that 
report.  And quite clearly the target in that report and as can 
be seen in the articles as well is the Chairman of the Board 
is a problematic person.  Of course, to some instance in 
some of – instances the Minister of Transport was also you 
10 
know targeted for attacks.  So I will look for that report and 
then it will assist the Chairperson.  Now … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe before you – before you leave the 
report, I must just say I know that Mr Soni is very happy to 
hear that the report has been found.  I am very happy that it 
has been found.  I have been very concerned about whether 
we will ever find it. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They will make arrangements to make IT 
people available to you because obviously we also want to 
20 
have the report.  You want us to have the report so if – if you 
– if the commission can assist with IT people that they will 
be made available to you and then we should have it. 
MR MOLEFE:  I will be pleased to hear that.  But 
Chairperson Minister Jeff Radebe has got the report.  If he 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 15 of 204 
 
wants to help the commission he too… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Can make the report available for the 
commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I was actually thinking as you were 
telling me that – as you were telling me that the report was 
addressed to him then it occurred to me that then we could 
ask him if he has – if he still has it. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But of course, if you can find it let – that 
10 
will enable us to have it quicker but the former Minister may 
have to – to assist with issues relating to some of the 
matters that have come here. 
MR MOLEFE:  If he wants to help the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes – no, no I am – I am confident that he 
– he will make himself available. 
MR MOLEFE:  Now Chairperson when I – I am going to come 
to the meeting of the – the Top 6. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  But when I read the report last night. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  It occurred to me that there is an explanation 
to the question that the Chairperson asked when the 
Chairperson said, you mean you could start the meeting at 6 
and finish at 2?  It is a long report and only Mr Montana 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 16 of 204 
 
knew what the meeting was about.  Him the President and Mr 
Radebe.  Because he spoke for a long time referring. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  And talking from the notes which now turned 
out that it – it was in fact that – that report which of course 
Minister Radebe in the meeting denied to have received it.  
Mr Montana did not say, I wrote this report to Mr Radebe.  I 
had told Minister before he went to that meeting that I had 
received this document leaked to me by a whistle-blower and 
so she wanted Mr Radebe to give her copy and he denied 
10 
that he had it in that.  But it explains why that meeting was 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second.  Just one second Mr 
Molefe I want to understand that part.  Are you saying that at 
the meeting Mr Montana indicated that he had sent the 
report to the Minister? 
MR MOLEFE:  No, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh no. 
MR MOLEFE:  He did not say so but he was saying things 
that are contained in that report.  No, no Mr Montana was 
20 
saying things that were contained in the report.  And some of 
the questions that the President also comments he was 
making it is clear are contained in that report.  And you will 
see the link between that and these articles.  The essence 
was that I am Lucky Montana, I am the best Group CEO of 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 17 of 204 
 
this organisation.  I can build PRASA.  This board does not 
want to give me the opportunity to do that they are 
destroying me.  There is nobody else who can run this 
organisation but me.  And I told them that although I said I 
do not want extension on my contract I have changed my 
mind now.  If you want me I can come back.  And which is 
what the President was trying to do to say no, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And my recollection is that in your 
evidence last time you actually said the President also said 
Mr Montana is the best guy to do this job. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  And as I read the report and of course when 
you 
read 
these 
articles 
you 
see 
what 
South African 
Commuters Organisation says even somewhere and he is 
saying in the article and what Zenzo Mahlangu I refer to him 
in my evidence earlier on he had been the General Secretary 
of SATAWU whose union was also doing business of course 
with the – with PRASA through I think a company called 
Blackstar but they had a trust called Bashume which 
belonged to the union.  When you – so it is a common 
message so around which all of these forces were being 
20 
mobilised against the Board to some extent against the 
Minister of Transport as well.  So – so now was corruption 
widely known at the time?  We had already dealt with the 
Braamfontein Depot and we stopped it.  We made it clear 
that we are stopping it because it was irregular and it 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 18 of 204 
 
involved billions of rands.  When I briefed the Top 6 of the 
governing party – my party I referred to the fact that our 
investigations show that we have been misled.  There was 
this tender that was about to be issued which was irregular 
and we stopped it.  And we are conducting several other 
investigations which I reveal a massive corruption within the 
organisation there.  So – so it was known at that time that 
there was this massive corruption but the speed in which the 
media campaign mass mobilisation demonstration and all 
these other forces are being mobilised against the Board 
10 
clearly to me was intended to stop those investigations.  So 
to get these people out of the way before the investigations 
are fully concluded.  Now Chairperson if you look at what we 
have seen in this process of State Capture itself and I did 
say so at the beginning of my evidence as well that for it to 
succeed systems in organisations must be broken, must be 
weakened.  And I did say that good people were being 
removed from positions and substituted by people who were 
compliant who would carry out the agenda whose objective is 
the looting of the public purse and this central message 
20 
being that one of State Capture.  So – so here to suddenly 
people 
feel 
that 
this 
Board 
is 
a 
problematic 
board.  
Corruption cannot continue for as long as these people are 
in office.  But the most problematic one is this one called 
Popo Molefe who is the Chairman of the Board.  Ja.  Get him 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 19 of 204 
 
out of the way and then we can go back to – to our business 
as usual.  So – so really that – that was the agenda.  You 
see vilification I mean lies that are being told here about me 
being corrupt, me being doing this and that. And the 
judgment 
in 
court 
were 
evidence 
arising 
out 
of 
our 
investigation were presented confirmed the correctness of 
the positions that we took and proves a lie of what Mr 
Montana and all of these people were saying.  Because I 
mean it went right up to the Constitutional Court, and our 
position as the board of PRASA was repeatedly confirmed.  
10 
So, Chairperson, yes, it was public knowledge, the leaders 
knew about that corruption.  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, thank you, Mr Molefe, why what was 
known in the public domain and what you told the top six at 
that meeting is important is because the top six are the top 
leaders of the governing party and most of them would 
have been in government as well and for me, the question 
arises, if they are told by the Chairperson of a board of an 
government entity such as PRASA that there is a lot of 
corruption that we see has been happening, or that we 
20 
think has been happening, and we are taking steps to 
investigate, I want to know what they did after that about 
what you told them.   
I want to know what they did, not from you because 
you told me already that they never came back to you for 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 20 of 204 
 
anything, but I want to know when they come here, I want 
to know what they did about that.   
We are all aware of what is in the public domain 
about PRASA, even now.  We are all aware about what is 
in the public domain about other SOEs about which there 
have 
been 
a 
lot 
of 
evidence 
of 
corruption 
in 
this 
Commission, SAA, Eskom, Denel and it would appear that 
these things do not start just now, these things seem to 
have started a long time ago and it is only proper that this 
Commission should ask the question to some of those 
10 
people, where were you, what did you do about this?  Did 
you not have a responsibility to do something?  So that is 
why it is important to me to know, apart from what was in 
the media.   
We have the advantage that you had a meeting with 
the top six and you told that you alerted them and are 
there no steps that they ought to have taken, maybe which 
would have made sure that PRASA is not where it is today 
in terms of its financial position and that is part of 
accountability and part of what we have to look at.   
20 
I mean, you were here last time when we touched 
on the issue of parliamentary oversight.  I asked the same 
questions about parliament.   
Where was parliament when all of these things – all 
of this corruption appears to have been happening all 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 21 of 204 
 
these years, what were they doing about it?   
They have a right to call the President and say what 
is going on under your government?  What is going on with 
your minister so and so who is not doing his or her job?   
They can call the minister, they can call the DGs, 
they can follow up, they can put that alliance and say if 
you do not fix this by such and such a time, we will pass a 
vote of no confidence in the whole cabinet. 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson, at the – if counsel agrees at 
the end of my evidence, I would like us to do – well, 
10 
counsel can tell us when to do it, but I would like us to do 
what we will call do connecting of the dots. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Because in all of that we can go right to the 
various ministers, the portfolio committees of parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Speaker of Parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   You know, the efforts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   And then letters we wrote. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You wrote, yes, yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   All of those things and then we can say but 
what does this mean? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 22 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   And then when we are busy with this sort of 
thing and the minister stands in parliament says I am 
dissolving this board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, certainly that is a very important 
part. 
MR MOLEFE:   So we will have to connect all of those at 
some point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Because they give a picture. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   Of – and I may want to ask a tough 
question as well which is similar to what the Chairperson is 
saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   That …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, we will do that and I will leave it 
to counsel to see where the right time is.  It might be at 
the end when you have all the evidence to then raise the 
issue.   
I have said publicly that I have spoken to the 
20 
Speaker of Parliament and the Chairperson of the NCOP 
and said that I think that parliament may need to start 
working on the issue of how it has carried out its oversight 
functions over the past x number of years and be able to 
come before the Commission at some stage and indicate 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 23 of 204 
 
what is revealed by an exercise of checking.   
And, in particular. I am looking at the SOEs, 
specific SOEs about which we have heard a lot of evidence 
here but also certain government departments and other 
functionaries to say what did they do?  Did they do their 
job properly because it may well be that if they had done 
their job the way it should be done, maybe certain things 
might not have happened. 
But it may well be that they are able to come here 
and say look, these are our limitations in terms of 
10 
mechanisms that are available to us and these are our 
limitations in terms of resources, we went as far as we 
could.   
If we are in the future going to be expected to do 
more, certain changes must be made to enable us to do 
that, then that is fine but I do not think that this 
Commission can be said to have properly finished its job 
without hearing what parliament did.  Thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Molefe, may I just 
say that I am pleased you raised the issue of right at the 
20 
end connecting all the dots because I just want to make 
this comment before we go on with the rest of your 
evidence.   
You are in a unique position, as I see it, you have 
the communication with the President in regard to the 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 24 of 204 
 
matters you have described already which does not make 
too much sense and we have debated that.   
Then your board is dismissed.  As you have said, 
instead 
of 
parliament 
exercising 
oversight 
over 
the 
minister, the minister goes to the portfolio committee and 
announces the dissolvement of the board before then and 
she is not asked why did you do – I want to raise all those 
things.   
And then you go to the police and say but look, we 
have got people who are involved in fraud amounting to 
10 
billions of rands and they do nothing about it.   
That is all contained in here and so I am pleased 
you have raised this question because I was going to do 
that but I am pleased in the sense you have also looked at 
the big picture. 
But before we go on with your evidence, there are 
three matters I want to raise with you in relation to what 
you have said this morning.   
You said the matter – one of the matters went to the 
CC, that is the Swifambo matter, am I right? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, it did say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You must tell him when you say CC, you 
mean Constitutional Court. 
ADV 
SONI 
SC: 
 
 
I 
beg 
your 
pardon, 
yes. 
 
The 
Constitutional Court, yes.  Yes, is that the judgment you 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 25 of 204 
 
are referring to? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:   And we have been through the fact that 
both the High Court and the Supreme Court of Appeal said 
there was corruption and they fingered two people, Mr 
Montana and Mr Mtimkulu and I mention them because you 
mention them later in your evidence. 
 
The second thing I want to ask you was, earlier on 
you said that the former Chairperson of the board wanted 
to hasten the Braamfontein tender.  Do you recall saying 
10 
that a little while ago? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, I did say that. 
ADV SONI SC:   Who is the Chairperson because, I mean, 
I know – I just wanted a name to it. 
MR MOLEFE:   The Chairperson or my predecessor was – 
is currently one of the Deputy Ministers, Mr Buthelezi, 
Sifiso Buthelezi.   
ADV SONI SC:   Mr Sifiso Buthelezi. 
MR MOLEFE:   But at the time in November when he 
brought the submission, he was the Chairperson of the 
20 
Finance and Capital Investment Committee. 
ADV SONI SC:   And he, at the same time that Mr Montana 
said he was leaving right at the outset of your tenure as 
Chairperson, he also told you he was resigning from the 
board. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 26 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   He actually give me his resignation letter, 
that is in the – when the board was meeting and he was 
making the submission for the Braamfontein – on the 
Braamfontein depot modernisation. 
ADV SONI SC:   So he was pushing this through before he 
left the board? 
MR MOLEFE:   He was – that was the last thing, you know, 
contract he wanted approved before he left.  Whether there 
was reason for him to have delayed it or – I do not know.  
Of course, when I read Mr Montana’s report to Minister Jeff 
10 
Radebe, he blames the board for having delayed that 
tender whereas we were seeing it for the first time at that 
meeting in November.   
But, be it as it may, he wanted it approved as he 
was leaving.  Whether there was any motive or not, I do 
not know, and I do not want to impute any motive to that. 
ADV SONI SC:   No, I understand.  Finally, at the meeting 
of the 20 August, Minister Dipuo Peters asked Minister 
Radebe about the PRASA internal report.  Asked for a copy 
of the report. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, but I did say that the title of the report 
is not PRASA Internal, it is the report of Minister Jeff 
Radebe on the board of PRASA and it set out what it says 
are recent events.  And somewhere in the report of course 
there is a section that refers to PRASA in turmoil. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 27 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I just want to – I know you are 
looking both at me and counsel whereas you answer – 
remember to look more at me than him.  Yes, thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now on your understanding, Minister 
Radebe had the report because it was addressed to him. 
MR MOLEFE:   He had it. 
ADV SONI SC:   When Minister Dipuo Peters asked for the 
report what was Minister Radebe’s response? 
MR MOLEFE:   He said he did not have it. 
ADV SONI SC:   Did that surprise you? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   Well, I – Chairperson, I knew he had it 
because it came – the whistle blower brought it from his 
office and it was addressed to him and clearly the manner 
in which the meeting was conducted found its basis in that 
report because it was about what Montana was saying 
largely. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just to refresh my memory, this report, 
you had – did you have a – had you seen the report at the 
time of the meeting yourself? 
MR MOLEFE:   I had seen it much earlier. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   But because it was such a sensitive 
document... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...I …[intervenes] 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 28 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was not official. 
MR MOLEFE:   It was not official. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   So but what …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But it existed long before the meeting, 
that is the point you can make? 
MR MOLEFE:   The report was written on the 27 July, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   The meeting took place around the 20 
10 
August. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay, thank you.  And it was 
addressed to Minister Radebe? 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV SONI SC:   I take it before the meeting you would 
have told Minister Peters about this report. 
MR MOLEFE:   I did Chair.  Not that day of the meeting, 
much earlier.  I did say to her, you know, I have seen this 
kind of a document.  Of course, I had given it to the 
20 
lawyers also to keep.  Now I have been trying to get it from 
them, they do not know what they have done to it.  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, but I had told Minister Dipuo Peters and 
that is why in that meeting he said …[intervenes] 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 29 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   She asked for it. 
MR MOLEFE:   She asked for it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV SONI SC:   Finally, in regard to the report, Mr Molefe, 
I reiterate the invitation of the Chairperson to make use of 
facilities at the Commission.  I am confident that if you 
gave them the laptop or computer where that was, they 
would find it. 
MR MOLEFE:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   It has taken a long time to get here, Mr 
Molefe, 
but 
may 
I 
then 
ask 
that 
we 
go 
back 
to 
…[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   Did I talk too much? 
ADV SONI SC:   No, no, no, sorry, we have been asking 
questions outside the ambit because, as the Chairperson 
pointed out, this is pivotal to the work of the Commission. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   Certainly in regard to PRASA.  Can I then 
ask, you have this meeting with the President and in the 
20 
next topic you discuss is the dismissal of the board.  Now 
can you tell us – we know that on the 8 March 2017 the 
Minister dismissed the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Soni, I may have I 
misunderstood you but I thought your plan was to take Mr 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 30 of 204 
 
Molefe to the media articles briefly before you go to the 
meetings to highlight all the certain features. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or do you think that – I think it is 
important, he may have mentioned some of the things but it 
is important like maybe to simply highlight some of the 
features in the articles before we go to the meeting or is 
your plan to …[intervenes] 
ADV SONI SC:   I was hoping that I would use the key 
interval to pick out about five of the articles. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, that is fine, that is fine, that is 
fine. 
ADV SONI SC:   But I could do it now, it is just that it may 
take a little longer because I could identify …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, it is fine, we can do it later, ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   So we know that the Minister on the 8 
March 2017 purported to dismiss the board and I say 
purported because that dismissal was set aside.  But what 
were the reasons that led to that decision?  You deal with 
from paragraph 93 of your affidavit, Mr Molefe. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   What paragraph? 
ADV SONI SC:   Paragraph 93, Chairperson, page 24. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:   Well, it starts off with the question of 
appointing a replacement for Mr Montana after he left on 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 31 of 204 
 
the 15 July 2015. 
MR MOLEFE:   Counsel, you are asking what were the 
reasons for the dissolution of the board?  Is that the 
question? 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes.  Well, ja, and what were the 
circumstances leading up to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And insofar as you are asked what the 
reasons were, Mr Molefe, you must feel free to indicate 
what reasons were given by the Minister for her decision 
and to say what, on your analysis of the situation, the 
10 
reasons were, whether you agree that those were the 
reasons or you say the reasons were different for this and 
that that reason.  So I just alert you that even though the 
question is put like that, there may be a difference – you 
might have a different view about what the reasons were to 
the reasons that were given by the Minister. 
MR MOLEFE:   The first point, Chairperson, is that Mr 
Montana leaves because his contract is ending and he says 
he does not want extension but in reality, he wanted 
extension.  He wanted another contract and clearly, the 
20 
Minister herself – it will be coming perhaps when you 
connect those dots you will now see that the Minister is 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I think – I am sorry, Mr Molefe.  If, 
as you give your evidence or as you answer any question, 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 32 of 204 
 
there is an aspect of connecting the dots that you think is 
appropriate to do there and then, feel free to do it, not wait 
until later but later on we can wrap up. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But – so if it is convenient, connect the 
dots as you go along. 
MR MOLEFE:   Will do so, Chairperson.  The board, as 
Montana left, wanted to appoint a new group CEO and it 
had gone through an elaborate process of interviewing and 
had identified a person for that position. 
10 
 
Now in terms of the shareholders’ compact and the 
memorandum 
of 
incorporation, 
the 
board 
needs 
to 
recommend to the Minister and then of course has got its 
own protocols, she has then to take it to the President and 
to the relevant committee of the cabinet and come back.  
Cabinet 
must 
approve 
because 
the 
cabinet 
approves 
appointment 
of 
group 
CEOs, 
Directors 
Generals, 
Commissioners, 
Chairpersons 
of 
board 
and 
directors, 
board of directors, ja.  She was reluctant.  She had told me 
that she agrees with me, she is not going to change 
20 
anything, she is going to present it as it was but there was 
no movement. 
 
And the next thing then, she wanted us to appoint 
in an acting capacity a person who was a Chief Financial 
Officer in the Department of Transport, Mr Collins Letsoalo. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 33 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before you proceed, Mr Molefe, you 
said, I think, the board had conducted interviews and had 
identified a person that they believed could be Group CEO 
and had made a recommendation to the Minister, is that 
correct?   
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It may help, but you – if there are 
reasons – maybe there are reasons you might be reluctant, 
might have to look that, it may help if we know who was 
recommended.  I say that because I have had evidence in 
10 
regard to other SOEs where a board recommended a 
candidate for the position of Group CEO and the board – 
and the Minister at the time gave evidence here and said 
she was in support of that candidate but she said the 
former President made it clear to her that he wanted a 
certain person and no one else to take that position. 
 
Of course, the former President has denied saying 
that and that will be dealt with later on.  He must still come 
to give further evidence.   
 
So I am – and I have, in regard to that matter, I 
20 
asked whether this was a credible candidate and whether 
the former President, if he was not keen to have this 
person appointed, whether he questioned the qualifications 
or experience of that candidate and I was told by the 
Minister – or gave that evidence that no, there was no 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 34 of 204 
 
questioning of the qualifications or experience of the 
candidate that was proposed. 
 
So 
it 
becomes 
important 
– 
it 
may 
become 
important 
to 
say 
here 
is 
a 
candidate 
that 
was 
recommended, he is a credible candidate, has got all the 
qualifications, has got all the experience, what was the 
problem with going with that candidate?   
 
So I mention that because it might be helpful but if 
you have some reasons that make you reluctant to 
disclose, that is fine. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   No, I will disclose it, Chairperson, it was a 
lady.  I did not know her before that and I was not even in 
the panel that interviewed.  Her name was Lauriette 
Modipane 
Sesoko. 
 
She 
had 
previously 
worked 
for 
Metrorail.  Now …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us just get the spelling, Lauriette 
and the surname? 
MR MOLEFE:   Sesoko Modipane.  Modipane. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   M-o-d-i-p-a-n-e. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   Sesoko is S-e-s-o-k-o. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   She had worked for Metrorail. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In what capacity? 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 35 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   She had been the CEO of Metrorail or 
general - the chief of Metrorail, CEO, Metrorail. 
CHAIRPERSON:   CEO, ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   You know, which is the train – the operating 
division of PRASA which moves passengers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Which is fundamentally the mandate of 
PRASA. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  So she had worked in a position that 
is very much the CEO’s position under PRASA. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   But the Minister never raised any concerns 
about that except that they delayed, delayed, delayed, they 
were not moving.  I am sure again I can produce several 
letters to the Minister.  In some instances when the 
Minister would say PRASA is – this board is not doing its 
job or PRASA is not performing, I would say the board is 
20 
not operational, it cannot do the job, we need to have 
proper management team and management team is put 
together by the Group CEO, approve the appointment of 
the Group CEO so that we can get going and get our work 
done.  
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 36 of 204 
 
 
 And she – it was just delaying, delaying and it is 
there, I am sure, correspondence would show that, that we 
raised that.  So we do not know but I, in hindsight now, 
when you look at the meeting of August, you look at the 
report where Montana says and he is writing to Minister 
Jeff Radebe and the President says I am the best man, I 
am available, this board does not want me to do my job, he 
is interfering with me.   
 
So what seems to have been then the reason is 
that they wanted to bring Mr Montana back but the way to 
10 
do so is to block the appointment of the CEO and then 
ultimately to remove the board of directors.   
 
It is linked also to the investigations because when 
Mr Letsoalo, as you would see, probably later on, comes in 
to act, he says – and the Minister says Letsoala must now 
be in charge of the investigations.   
 
Now if you are investigating, the management team 
that is corrupt, you do not know who is corrupt, who is not 
corrupt.  You do not give it to them to do the job because 
then you are not going to get the truth out of it and that is 
20 
why the board wanted this investigation to be done by an 
entity that is outside PRASA which reports to the - and the 
chair of the Audit Committee and the chairman of the board 
and 
they 
would 
report 
regularly 
together 
with 
the 
investigators to the Board of Directors and to the Minister of 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 37 of 204 
 
Transport which... which is what we have done. 
 
But they wanted all of that out of the way uh, clearly 
to frustrate the investigations so that the investigations, they 
not produce uh, the truth about what is happening in the 
organisation. 
And I asked the question why would they not want to 
do that?  H’m?  If they are interested in getting the state-
owned company to function and function properly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, uh, please uh, I want to... to see all 
of those letters you are talking about.  So I want all of that 
10 
evidence uh, because you... you are asking that the... the 
minister delayed for a long time uh, to have a decision made, 
I guess, on your recommendation at the board. 
 
And uh, at a certain stage, she told you what you 
said.  She told you um, in the regard the matter that was 
talking about. 
 
Uh, I mean, it is in the public domain.  Evidence was 
given here.  It is uh, the feeling of the position of Group CEO 
for Transnet after the departure of Ms Ramos. 
 
Uh,... uh,... uh,... Ms Barbara Hogan gave evidence 
20 
to the fact that the Transnet Board at the time recommended 
uh, mister, I think, Sipho Maseko uh, for the position and the 
board was of the opinion that uh, Mr Siyabonga Gama was 
uh, uh, not suitable for the position if he was a candidate. 
 
Um, 
and 
in 
any 
event 
uh, 
there 
were 
some 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 38 of 204 
 
allegations of misconduct that they thought was aware of 
them, but I... I think the evidence was, the board said, “we 
just took him into account whether he was suitable”.  You 
know, “we have left out of the account”.  Even the 
allegations. 
MR MOLEFE:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If I must now give evidence to that effect. 
MR MOLEFE:   Oh, Chairperson.  I was in the commission 
when the minister gave her evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, you were here? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   I was here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So... so that... that position was not 
filled for over a year uh,... um,... and uh,... so I am 
wondering whether now, the delays you are talking about 
after your board had made a recommendation as to who 
should fill the position of group... group CEO, reflects a 
pattern that may have been happening with um, the 
appointment of Group CEO for some of the SOE’s. 
 
So I want... I would like all of that evidence, all of 
those letters.  If you are able to get that, we would like them 
20 
here. 
MR MOLEFE:   Thank you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:  [throat clearing]  Mister [throat clearing] 
Molefe, can I just go back to an issue you said or you 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 39 of 204 
 
suggested what the game plan was, that they would frustrate 
the appointment of a Group CEO and then eventually 
Montana would come back as the Group CEO.  That is... that 
is what you said. 
MR MOLEFE:   H’m. 
ADV 
SONI 
SC: 
 
Well, 
I 
just 
want 
to 
say 
to 
you 
that...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I am sorry Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Um, the connecting of the dots is... is 
10 
quite important.  I mean, of course, anybody can come later 
and say, “no, this committing of the dots that you are talking 
about is not proper because of the following evidence that 
you have not add, Mr Chairperson”. 
 
That uh, with regard to the group CEO for Transnet, 
there was that delay uh, for the filling of the position of 
Gross CEO and the candidate who had been recommended 
by the board had to uh, make his other plans because he 
was kept waiting for too long. 
 
And then Mr Gama was dismissed after a disciplinary 
20 
process uh, in uh, at the end of June 2010.  The position had 
become vacant, I think early in 2009 if I am not mistaken.  
So already by mid-June... by mid-year 2010, there... there 
was um, still the position, it was not filled. 
ADV SONI SC:  H’m. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 40 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then the Minister Barbara Hogan was 
dismissed from cabinet at the end of October.  Uh, another 
minister was appointed and then the evidence will come later 
upon and then Mr Gama was reinstated uh, in February uh, 
or uh, March/April 2011 to become... to go back to his 
position as uh, CEO of GFR. 
 
And then when... when Brian Molefe left for Eskom, 
then Gama was made Group CEO of Eskom, the position that 
uh, was in contest when he was dismissed.   
So... so I just want to paint that picture because I 
10 
want to see whether uh, under PRASA, there are crucial 
things to go along the same lines or not. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja.  With regard to PRASA, Chairperson.  
The... that position has been vacant now for close... going 
onto five years.    
CHAIRPERSON:   For how long? 
MR MOLEFE:   Five years. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Since Montana has left? 
MR MOLEFE:   Since Montana left.  Now...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Five years?! 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, five years.  They... they have been 
appointing acting people... acting this, acting that.  Five 
years.  And that is an organisation that is managing 
R 173 billion of uh, rail and uh, infrastructure investment. 
 
Um, so... so... so... but the difference between Mr 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 41 of 204 
 
Gama and Mr Montana’s case is that in the case of Mr Gama 
they were dealing with disciplinary processes.  So once they 
had removed the minister [laugh] and appointed another 
minister, 
they 
could 
simply 
lift 
the... 
or 
whatever, 
suspension, bring him back. 
 
In the case of Mr Montana, they cannot do that 
without burning their fingers because the investigations have 
gone so far and so much of the plot had been exposed and 
there had already been cases in the courts of law which 
confirmed the correctness of the positions taken by the 
10 
board of directors. 
 
So you... you need to have extraordinary courage to 
go against uh, the judgment of the court and uh, appoint a 
person uh, whose smart in a... in a corruption and there are 
still other pending cases uh, civil and otherwise. 
 
So... so... it... it would not have been difficult.  Uh, it 
would have been difficult for them to bring him back now 
after 
the 
work 
we 
had 
done. 
 
But 
what 
I 
cannot 
understand...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   ...is why then not appoint a prober board?  I 
must also say, by the way Chairperson, since the departure 
of my board, PRASA has not had a proper... a properly 
constituted board.   
 
It had things called interim boards which are not 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 42 of 204 
 
provided for in the law.  Uh, it had all of those things.  It now 
currently has an administrator, you know, no board. 
 
I know that the minister has recently advertised.  He 
will probably appoint the board uh, soon but.. but that is 
what we are dealing with uh, in a country with high levels of 
poverty, unemployment uh-uh, crushing uh, transport costs 
and so on. 
 
Uh, so some of those questions would have to be 
asked later on.  To be explained by those who...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   ...to whom were given the responsibility to 
govern our country. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Well, uh, as I... as I understand it 
even up to now, it seems there is not been a Group CEO 
appointed.  Is that right?  Since Montana left? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And how many years would be... that 
position would have been ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   Approximately five years.  We...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   About five years. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   We asked Mr Montana to leave in 
July...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   2015. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so that is... that is... that is... ja, that 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 43 of 204 
 
is about five years.  Ja, that is five years. 
MR MOLEFE:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that cannot be for a lack of properly 
qualified candidates? 
MR MOLEFE:   No, it cannot be.  It cannot be. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
ADV SONI SC:  [throat clearing]  Mr Molefe, I do not know if 
you were here when Mr Holele gave evidence.  And... and 
just to come back to the point that they wanted to appoint 
mister uh, Mr Montana again. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Uh, I think uh, the witness 
would like some water.  Water should have been put uh, 
placed uh, before him. 
ADV SONI SC:  Where is mine? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Uh, actually, we are at quarter past 
eleven.  Maybe we should take a tea-break. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja and then, when we come back, just 
make sure there is water for the... for the witness.  I see 
also, I have no water here.  So the...  
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think maybe the people concerned 
thought we do not need water in winter.  
ADV SONI SC:  [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is too cold. [laughs].  Uh, let... let us 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 44 of 204 
 
adjourn uh, for the tea-break.  It is quarter past eleven.  We 
will resume at half-past eleven.  We adjourn. 
ADV SONI SC:  As it please. 
COURT ORDERLY:   All rise.  
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Uh, yes Mr Soni.  I... I asked that if 
possible, somebody should try and uh, make sure that it is 
warmer here. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. [laugh] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because it was quite cold. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Uh, I have asked them to bring me a small 
heater next to me but um... uh, I have asked that if there is a 
way of making it warm in the whole room...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...they should try and do that.  Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  Thank you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.   
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson, may I ask one question 
20 
relation to that issue which um, may assist you in joining the 
dots? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Molefe, I do not know if you were here 
when Mr Tiro Holele gave evidence.  His evidence was in 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 45 of 204 
 
around February/March in 2017 when they refused to pay an 
account from Prodigy, which is a company which Mr Roy 
Moodley has an interest in. 
 
He asked them to pay the account and when they 
said, “take it to court”, his answer was “well, there are big 
changes coming and that young man is coming back.  Be 
careful you are not on the wrong side of history”. 
 
So I am just putting it in the context of you are saying 
that they wanted Mr Montana back.   
MR MOLEFE:   H’m. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Uh, I... I am putting that in context to say 
your theory may not be all that farfetched. 
MR MOLEFE:   No, it is... it is correct, Chairperson.  I did 
indicate that and I said it is a pity that people would not want 
to come and give evidence here.  That I was advised that 
there was as teleconference with employees of PRASA and 
they were encouraged by the Minister, Mr Radebe to... to 
continue the pressure.  Keep up the pressure on the board.   
Uh, the so-called PRASA in turmoil was in that 
context.  Created that turmoil so that we can justify removing 
20 
this board.  You see.  So.  [laughs]  The... the... it is.. it is 
exactly that.  It happened.  Get out of the way, so that the 
young man may come back.  
CHAIRPERSON:   So there was a specific reference um, uh, 
in the context of Prodigy uh, to somebody saying, “the young 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 46 of 204 
 
man is coming back”.  Is that right? 
ADV SONI SC:  You... you will recall Mr Chairperson that uh, 
Mr Holele and Mr Letsoalo gave evidence that that is what 
Mr Moodley said to them when they had refused to pay but 
the matter is court. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and that was twenty... 
ADV SONI SC:  27 February. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Seven... 
ADV SONI SC:  ...March 2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, okay. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Um, if I could just put it also in context?  
They said, “changes are coming” and three weeks later, 
there was a change in the ministry and the Minister uh, 
Dipuo Peters was removed as Minister of Transport. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.  Oh, okay yes.  So there is... there is 
a... so Mr Moodley said, “changes were on the way”. 
ADV SONI SC:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   “And you better make sure that when 
those changes happen, you are on the right side”. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   “And the young man is coming back”. 
ADV SONI SC:  That is... yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And uh, you said not long after that, the 
minister was uh, was dismissed. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 47 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and how long after that did your 
board get uh-uh, dismissed or dispended?   
MR MOLEFE:   How long...? 
CHAIRPERSON:   How long after... after did... did the Mr 
Molefe’s board get dispended?  
ADV SONI SC:  H’m...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Or that much longer ... much later on? 
ADV SONI SC:  On the 8t h of March.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  That is 2017? 
ADV SONI SC:  2017. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And uh, this meeting that Mr Holele talked 
about with Mr Moodley was when? 
ADV SONI SC:  Uh, February/March 2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So soon after Mr Holele had heard Mr 
Moodley, Roy Moodley, saying, “changes were about to 
happen”, the minister was fired uh, or before the minister 
was fired, she fired the board and then she was fired. 
ADV SONI SC:  She was... [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  All right. 
ADV SONI SC:  But... but... uh, um, Mr Molefe’s evidence is 
20 
partly with the change in that evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, okay.  All right.  And of 
course, Mr Molefe, you can confirm any of this insofar as you 
may know it yourself what... what... what has been a change 
or the exchange? 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 48 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you certainly... you certainly uh, 
have to just that the minister dispended you... announced 
the 
disbandment 
of 
your 
board 
in 
parliament. 
 
Your 
recollection would be that what... what month of 2017 was 
that? 
MR MOLEFE:   That was on the 8t h of uh, of March 2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:   2017? 
MR MOLEFE:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  And um... and you recall uh, how 
10 
soon... how much later after that she was dismissed as... or 
not really? 
MR MOLEFE:   She was dismissed the same month. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The same month? 
MR MOLEFE:   The same month that was she was 
dismissed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  Okay.  Okay.  Thank you. 
MR MOLEFE:   I say so, because she was too weak.  She 
could not remove the board quickly enough. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She... she [laughs] Just repeat that. 
20 
[laughs] 
MR MOLEFE:   [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just repeat that.   
MR MOLEFE:   [laughs]  No, I... I say Chairperson that uh, I 
think uh-uh...[intervenes]  
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 49 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   She may have been perceived... she was 
too late? 
MR MOLEFE:   To have been perceived to have been too 
late and...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...and too soft. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, on the board. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:  Just one other issue relating to Mr Moodley.  
10 
When you gave your evidence on the previous occasion, Mr 
Molefe.  You say that Mr Moodley and Mr Montana had met 
or you had been told by the... 
MECHANICAL INTERRUPTION 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you Mr Soni.  I understand that 
the heater will make it warm in due course, it might take a 
little bit, for sometime in the whole room so that is good 
news and I am hoping that the electricity people will make 
sure that we don’t have these interruptions that we have 
20 
been having.  Okay let’s continue.  Your mic? 
ADV SONI SC:   Sorry, again for context Mr Molefe may I 
say that at the meeting of the 20 t h of August you 
understood that Mr Roy Moodley and Mr Montana had been 
with the President before you and the Minister were called. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 50 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And actually, your evidence was that you 
got a report that one of your projectors had seen them in 
the premises. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:   So let us now get to the resolution of – oh 
sorry before we do that, you say that Mr Letsoalo was 
unhappy 
about 
the 
Werksmans 
Investigations…[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I just want to make sure, I don’t lose 
track of where we are.  At some stage before the break you 
had asked Mr Molefe to deal with the reasons of the 
dismissals, disbandment of the Board and I highlighted to 
him that, in doing so, he might wish to tell me what the 
Minister – what reasons the Minister gave and what 
reasons, he believes, are the true reasons if he is not in 
agreement with the reasons given by the Minister.  So, you 
might be playing to it later, I just want to make sure you 
have not …[intervenes]. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   I want to do it because in the application 
that is brought the Judge deals with that, then. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, oh okay, thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:   So, if I could just ask – there was 
unhappiness about the Werksmans investigation by the 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 51 of 204 
 
Action CEO whom the Minister had installed, will that be 
correct Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:   Then on the 12 t h of August you say that 
Minister Peters herself, wrote to you to suggest that the 
investigations be stopped. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   And that appears at Annexure PM7, your 
affidavit at page 154. 
CHAIRPERSON:   For the record, just repeat what file you 
10 
are still on Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes the letter from Minister Dipuo Peters 
is Annexure PM7 and it appears at page 154 of Bundle D, 
Exhibit SS6. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What’s the page number again? 
ADV SONI SC:   154, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   1-5-4? 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   That’s fine, I remember the letter very well. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, we don’t have to read the whole – if 
20 
you could explain to the Chairperson what the gist of the 
letter is Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   The starting point of the Minister was to 
express concern that the investigation is not ending sooner 
and that it was costing a lot of money and she was saying 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 52 of 204 
 
that she thinks that we should be focusing on implementing 
performance plans ensuring that our performance plans are 
in order and we’re achieving results in that regard.  She 
referred to the decline in performance and then she says, 
stop 
this 
– 
in 
fact 
she 
uses 
the 
word 
“close 
it”…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 Yes, 
you 
can 
read 
that 
paragraph 
because it is important, at the end of page 154, 
 
“I therefore ask that you close off”, 
 
It’s the last paragraph on page 154. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   The previous page Mr Molefe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At the end. 
ADV SONI SC:   Right at the end at the bottom of that 
page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   She’s asking that we close it off and 
present a detailed report to her by – I think she said, by 
the end of August. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, should you not read that entire the 
paragraph into the record? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   She says, 
“I therefore ask that you close off this investigation 
process and consider the results or report thereof.  
Furthermore, the Board is requested to submit a 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 53 of 204 
 
detailed report indicating the progress and the 
outcome of the investigation.  A determination of 
any further investigation and a way forward will 
subsequently be made after studying the report in 
detail”. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I think that – oh if you feel there is 
something important…[intervenes]. 
MR MOLEFE:   Then she says, 
“It will be highly appreciated if the report can reach 
my office by end August 2016”. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   Now…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And just to confirm, you were reading 
from a letter from the Minister of Transport at the time Ms 
Dipuo 
Peters 
addressed 
to 
you, 
Dr 
Popo 
Molefe, 
Chairperson of PRASA and it’s a letter that she signed on 
the 12 t h of August 2016, ja, thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:   Is that correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   You responded to that letter? 
MR MOLEFE:   I did respond, Chairperson. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   And what is the date of your response? 
MR MOLEFE:   The date of my response was the 24 t h of 
August. 
ADV SONI SC:   And is that the letter or is that Annexure 
PM8 which is at 157 – page 157? 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 54 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now in your report, if you could – I mean 
in your response if you could summarise what you said to 
the Minister, Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   The – in my response, the essence of my 
response, 
Chairperson, 
to 
the 
Minister 
was 
that 
we 
appreciated the concern that she raised but that the 
concern that she raises, in our view, did not necessarily 
relate to whether the forensic investigation was necessary 
or 
not 
and 
I 
went 
on 
to 
say 
– 
and 
if 
I 
may 
10 
read…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes you can read. 
MR MOLEFE:   Maybe I should read it properly, let me read 
that paragraph, Chairperson.  The paragraph says, having 
acknowledged, of course, the letter of the Minister, 
“I understand the concern raised, not to relate to 
whether 
or 
not 
the 
forensic 
investigation 
is 
necessary.  The Minister will, indeed, recall that the 
need for the forensic investigation was discussed 
and agreed at a meeting between the Board and the 
20 
honourable Minister at the airport on 17 July 2015”. 
 
Now the airport here refers to the O R Tambo 
International Airport and I go on to say that, 
“the concerns that I understand to be raised are 
that 
the 
forensic 
investigation 
is 
endless 
and 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 55 of 204 
 
without any scope, constitutes excessive spending, 
is not budgeted for and can be regarded as 
irregular expenditure.  It is also indicated that the 
Minister ’s own preference is for the Board to focus 
on the annual performance.”, 
 
That’s what the Minister is saying there, and then of 
course, Chairperson it will be clearer on page 158, page 
two of the letter that we go in detail to identify why it is 
necessary, we articulate why it is necessary for us to 
proceed with the forensic investigation.  Section 50, sub-
10 
section 1 of the Public Finance Management Act was 
obliging the Board to exercise the duty of utmost care, to 
ensure reasonable protection of the assets and records of 
the public entity.  Act with fidelity, honesty, integrity and in 
the best interest of the public entity in managing the 
financial affairs of the public entity.  On request to disclose 
to the Executive Authority and Minister responsible for that 
public entity or the legislature to which the public entity is 
accountable, all material facts including those reasonably 
discoverable, 
which, 
in 
any 
way 
may 
influence 
the 
20 
decisions or actions of the Executive Authority or that 
legislature and the last one we make there is, to seek, 
within the sphere of influence of the Accounting Authority 
to prevent any prejudice to the financial interest of the 
State.  Now this is what the law says we should do and 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 56 of 204 
 
that is what we are doing and we are doing it, Chairperson, 
against the backdrop of a management that has stolen 
records of the company, covering up, not co-operating with 
our investigation.  Naturally it will take long for forensic 
investigators to uncover things because you do mirror 
imaging of computers, you’ve got to go to the server, you 
do thing, that ordinarily, management should have been 
willing to give to the investigators so that we could do our 
job quickly.  Now the Minister says, no you’re taking too 
long stop. So, the view then, which we took, Chairperson 
10 
was that whilst we appreciate the concerns raised by the 
Minister but we would not stop the investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But before you do that, I think, your 
reference in your letter at page 158 to Section 51(1) is 
also important, do you want to just read that part, A and B?  
Where you say, 
“Section 51(1) provides for the following general 
responsibilities of the Board”. 
 
Do you want to just read that part? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes Chairperson, Section 51(1) provides for 
20 
the following general responsibilities of the Board and I’m 
referring here to the Public Finance Management Act. 
“Must take effective and appropriate steps to collect 
all revenues due to the public entity concerned and 
present irregular expenditure, fruitless and wasteful 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 57 of 204 
 
expenditure, loses resulting from criminal conduct 
and expenditure not complying with the operational 
policies of the public entity and manage available 
working capital efficiently and economically”. 
 
And then I go on to say, 
“The above obligations, that is Section 50(1) and 
general responsibilities Section 51(1) are precisely 
what 
necessitated 
embarking 
upon 
forensic 
investigations and the litigation that followed it”. 
ADV SONI SC:   Then the – then you deal with each of the 
10 
concerns in paragraph 1 on page 159 you say that the 
investigation, contrary to what the Minister says, was not 
irregular, is that the essence of paragraph 1? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson.  When – 
before we appointed the panel, the investigators, we asked 
the Legal Department of PRASA to advise on the law firms 
that were on our panel and those that had the capacity, 
also for forensics and they referred us to Werksmans.  Of 
course, it would appear, of course, when they gave us that 
information, they omitted to tell us that, in fact, they 
20 
should have established a new panel, the time for that old 
panel 
had 
expired, 
that 
they 
should 
have 
invited 
professional companies and established a new panel but 
that only became apparent when one read the Auditor 
General’s report. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 58 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:   Then you deal with her concerns about the 
scope with the investigation in paragraph 2 you say, the 
scope had been determined in the first sub-paragraph of 
paragraph 2 by matters that had been identified by the 
Auditor General and in the second sub-paragraph you say 
the matters raised by the Public Protector, would that be 
correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   And then you make the point that it is the 
Public Protector who had required that all contracts above 
10 
R10million should be investigated. 
MR MOLEFE:   It is so Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   And that, in the pursuit of those 
investigations the – PRASA had embarked on litigation, 
you say that at paragraph 160 you say that…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On the last page 160. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, the litigation that has flowed from the 
investigation 
requires 
the 
assistance 
of 
forensic 
investigation team. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct, yes Chairperson. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   And you make the point that, ironically, it 
is those very people who benefit from – benefitted from the 
unlawful activities who are using those unlawful proceeds 
to fight PRASA with. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes Chairperson the point we’re making 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 59 of 204 
 
was that we are being told, you’re taking too long, stop the 
investigation but in order for anybody to launch an 
effective application in a Court of Law, with the possibility 
of achieving success, we need to have solid evidence and 
we are saying the people we are litigating against, are 
actually using the money of PRASA to fight PRASA and 
that is the irony of the whole thing.  So if we stop the 
investigation, they succeed, you know and – because these 
matters are been so politicised they’ll say, after all, they 
never had a case, it’s just that they want to victimise me as 
10 
has been the charade of the – the narrative of Mr Montana 
throughout.  
ADV SONI SC:   And then you make the point that, right at 
the end of page 160, that Siyagena had benefited to the 
tune 
of 
R800million 
and 
that 
it 
had 
also 
sought 
a 
guarantee, on page 161, of R1.1billion. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   And at that stage had the Siyagena review 
proceedings been instituted? 
MR MOLEFE:   I do think so Chairperson…[intervenes]. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   [intervenes], year 2016. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja I think so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well maybe it’s important to highlight 
the next sentence at page 160, the next sentence after the 
sentence that deals with what you’ve just said Mr Molefe, 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 60 of 204 
 
namely, that people who had gained money from PRASA 
unlawfully were using that money to fight PRASA in the 
Courts.  You then say – this is at page 160, 
“An example of this is the guarantee, you put 
guarantee in quotes, that obliges PRASA to pay 
almost R800million to Siyagena.  As we have 
previously advised the Minister, this document was 
not known by any PRASA official. We are still 
awaiting the reply to the letter addressed to your 
office in this regard.  Siyagena have now instituted 
10 
legal proceedings against PRASA claiming payment 
of an amount of approximately R1.1billion related to 
this very guarantee, in quotes”. 
MR MOLEFE:   So the point we’re making, Chairperson, 
there is that here is a – we go to Court, suddenly Siyagena 
produces a document and they say you, PRASA, have 
given 
us 
a 
guarantee 
of 
R800million, 
here’s 
where 
somebody signed and we had never seen that document 
anywhere, Management of PRASA who might have been 
there at the time were not helping to defend the interest of 
20 
the company.  So this is what we mean, where people use 
your money to fight you and at this stage, if I recall well 
Chairperson,  it was just after we had lost a case against 
Siyagena on a technicality based on the purger rule, which 
of course later on, following the Gijima Guma matter they 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 61 of 204 
 
changed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There was a change, ja thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:   Mr Molefe Ms Ngoyi’s evidence is this is, 
that 
after 
the 
review 
proceedings, 
the 
first 
review 
proceedings were instituted in 2016, in response Siyagena 
brought an interdict requiring payment of this money and 
that was the first time that it had been discovered that 
there was such a contract, that addendum for R800million, 
is that what you’re referring to? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is what I’m referring to. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   And that is a contract that was signed by 
Mr Montana at the end of September 2014, is that your 
recollection? 
MR MOLEFE:   I don’t have the details of the contract for 
now but he would have been the one signing as the GCE of 
the company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I know that – I have heard evidence, I 
can’t remember whether from you or from Ms Martha Ngoyi, 
I’ve heard evidence of a document that PRASA officials 
were looking for, or rather were looking for and they 
20 
couldn’t find which had been signed, I think, by Mr 
Montana, apparently without any knowledge of any PRASA 
official, do you know whether the document you are talking 
about which Siyagena produced when they took you to 
Court is that document or you are not sure which – 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 62 of 204 
 
because you have said that PRASA officials seemed not to 
know about that document until then?  Would you know 
whether that’s the same document or you might not know? 
MR MOLEFE:   That would have been the same document, 
for me it rolls out of the investigations conducted by our 
investigators. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:   Sorry, Chairperson, when we deal with Ms 
– when we continue with Ms Ngoyi’s evidence we will 
produce that document. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   You spoke away from the mic, so that 
won’t be reflected on the transcript, ja, just start again. 
ADV SONI SC:   When we produce – when we lead Ms 
Ngoyi’s further evidence that will be one of the documents 
to which she will be referred. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson earlier on I did say in my – 
one of my interventions that, in one of the letters written to 
the Minister, I had raised concern about her persistently 
telling the Board to perform yet the Board did not have the 
20 
Management team.  I see that I deal with that question in 
this same reply to the Minister and it is at page 163 and it 
is the last paragraph of …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of that letter. 
MR MOLEFE:   Of that letter. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 63 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of that page 163, do you want to read 
that paragraph into the record? 
MR MOLEFE:   The paragraph reads as follows, and again 
it’s the paragraph of the letter written by the Chairman of 
the Board of Directors, myself at the time to Minister of 
Transport on the 24 t h of August 2016, it says, 
“The Minister indicated that, notwithstanding the 
completion of an independent robust process, to 
recruit a permanent group CEO, the Minister ’s view 
was 
that 
PRASA 
was 
not 
ready 
for 
such 
an 
10 
appointment.  The reason we had consulted the 
Minister 
around 
our 
recommendation 
for 
the 
position of the group CEO was that we felt that the 
appointment of a permanent group CEO will assist 
with 
stability. 
 
We, 
however, 
deferred 
to 
the 
Minister ’s preference to second the acting group 
CEO from the Department of Transport”. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Now, 
that 
too, 
for 
the 
sake 
of 
completeness – so you had made a recommendation to the 
Minister of a candidate for appointment as group CEO and 
20 
what you are saying in this paragraph, is that the 
Minister ’s response was that PRASA was not ready for the 
appointment of a group CEO.  
MR MOLEFE:   She says so but she says so after waiting 
for a very long time. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 64 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON: A very long time, yes, yes.   
MR MOLEFE:   I hoped there could be other matters, where 
I consistently said to her, we wrote to you, we gave you 
recommendations, can we please appoint. 
CHAIRPERSON: Yes, yes, so it’s sounds a very strange 
response to me, did she clarify why she thought PRASA 
was not ready for a permanent group CEO, I would have 
thought that any organisation needs a leader, a permanent 
leader like, yesterday.  I don’t understand the idea of an 
organisation not being ready for a permanent leader.   
10 
MR MOLEFE:   She didn’t explain but clearly as one would 
see this happens after several meetings including that 
meeting with the President where an attempt was made to 
bring Mr Montana back.  Of course one of the reasons that 
they – they tried to use to justify that was contained in this 
report to Mr Radebe of Mr Montana which we are looking for 
which says that you know the Organisation for African Unity 
had adopted a resolution that committed South Africa to 
becoming a manufacturing hub for rail and rolling stock for 
the African continent.  And they say that you therefore need 
20 
a person with knowledge of this business like Mr Montana in 
that thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that seems to suggest… 
MR MOLEFE:  So that he does not say it here but I am 
saying it from my own… 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 65 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Interactions. 
MR MOLEFE:  Interactions with them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson I just wonder if I can ask 
the witness to confirm because it may be important Bongani 
has managed to locate a document that may well be the 
document that the witness was talking about. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you want to show the witness the 
document? 
ADV SONI SC:  I just want to show the witness. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja show the witness. 
ADV SONI SC:  Because then we can run out copies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In the meantime ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  Then we can deal with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
MR MOLEFE:  This is the report of letter to the Minister.  
Not the back one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja they will bring it to you Mr Molefe.  
They will bring it to you.   
MR MOLEFE:  Ja this is the document.  [indistinct 
20 
00:02:41].  So what do you want me to do?  Chairperson 
this is the document… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry your microphone is off.  You 
just switched off. 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson this is the document I was 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 66 of 204 
 
talking about.  A report on recent developments at PRASA 
and it is – it was addressed to Minister Jeff Radebe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MR MOLEFE:  Who at that time was responsible for 
monitoring and evaluation in the presidency. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  Okay no, at least now we know 
it is… 
MR MOLEFE:  I am just worried that we might lose it again. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no we must not lose it.  I think what 
Mr Soni has in mind is that once you have confirmed as you 
10 
have that it is the document they can immediately start 
running – printing it and securing it to make sure that we do 
not lose it and making sure they can give you a copy if you 
need a copy or you might have your – a copy.  And then – 
and then Mr Soni you can then see whether you would let 
Mr Molefe deal with the document later or when? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  We thought once we have got the copies, 
we will be able to… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja because you might need to read it as 
well. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  First ja.  But at least now that we have 
got it I think that is very important.  Ja. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 67 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:  It – oh it is a big find Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja thank you, thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:  Ms Molefe is there anything else in your let 
– oh and there is just one part of your letter that I want to 
refer to and that is at 165 where after all those bullet points 
in the middle of that letter you say, the Board does not have 
any reason to stop the investigation at this point and is 
satisfied that stopping the investigation will be harmful to 
PRASA.  That is the stance of the Board would I be correct? 
MR MOLEFE:  I wanted to go ahead here to [indistinct 
10 
00:05:10]. 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh sorry, sorry please do I do not want to… 
MR MOLEFE:  Well of course Counsel can guide me but I 
thought on paragraph 5 I do not know if Counsel would 
allow me to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Remember to look this side.  Yes as you 
did previously. 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson I wonder if Counsel would not 
like to read that? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  It is a… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that part you would like read in the 
letter? 
MR MOLEFE:  There is a part I would like to read. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja please read it. 
MR MOLEFE:  The – it is paragraph 5 of the… 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 68 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes page 164. 
MR MOLEFE:  Page 164 and it… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes read it. 
MR MOLEFE:  The caption is whether the investigation 
should be stopped and a detailed report be submitted to the 
Minister.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  And it goes onto say: 
“As we indicated to the Minister at the meeting of 17 July 
2015 and as clearly indicated from the above excerpts of 
10 
the PFMA we believe that the Board has the responsibility 
to institute and to continue for the forensic investigations in 
its capacity as the accounting authority of PRASA.  We are 
satisfied that the investigation is necessary, is not irregular, 
is cost effective and assist with easing some of the 
operational bottle necks created by the past blatant failure 
to observe the law.” 
I do not know Chairperson if I should stop there and… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja if that was the important part that is 
fine but if there is another important part you can indicate. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  And then… 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Our Counsel will indicate if there is 
another part he wants you to look at. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.   The – and you are quite right Mr 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 69 of 204 
 
Molefe that is an important point but the point I wanted to 
make is that when you say the Board does not have a 
reason what you are saying to the Minister is in terms of 
Section 50 and 51 of the PFMA. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  The Board must act according to its own 
conscience and its own belief and its own understanding 
about its responsibilities and cannot take instructions from 
even the Minister.  That – would I be encapsulating that 
problem? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  To the extent that the instructions are in 
conflict with the law the Board is not obliged to take those 
instructions Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:  And you have mentioned that point 
[indistinct 00:08:10]. 
MR MOLEFE:  Other point we are making and that is why I 
went back to that paragraph again because it restates that.  
And that is why probably the public should understand 
because sometimes people say but what is wrong with this 
Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are disobeying the full [indistinct 
00:08:35]. 
MR MOLEFE:  You are disobeying the leadership. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  It is the President, it is the Minister why do 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 70 of 204 
 
you not just keep quiet and do as they tell you?  But in the 
end, I think I have my own responsibility and my own 
integrity also to – to protect.  I might not be holding a high 
position in society but I have also been heavily done I know 
the values and principles that have inspired me, guided me 
and why I am involved in what I am involved in and – and 
why it is necessary therefore not to equates in anything that 
violates those values and principles. 
ADV SONI SC:  And one of the values that the constitution 
imposes on all repositories of power. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Is that they must exercise power in an 
accountable manner.  That is exactly what you were saying 
to the Minister. 
MR MOLEFE:  That – that is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  And then you say right at the end of that 
paragraph – at the – sorry perhaps you should read the next 
paragraph because this goes to the state of knowledge of 
the Minister where you say we have endeavoured.  If you 
could read that into the record Mr Molefe. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Am I sure?  Okay Chairperson thanks and 
that is page 165. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Just above the three bullet points at the 
bottom there. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 71 of 204 
 
“We have endeavoured to keep you abreast of the progress 
of the investigations.  This has been done through amongst 
others.  A meeting with you in Rivonia focussing on the 
preliminary irregularities found in the Swifambo contract. 
This meeting was held on 28 August 2015.  A meeting at 
Werksman Attorneys during November after the launch of 
the Review Application in respect of Swifambo contract.  
The last written report was on the 7 July 2016.” 
And of course we – we go further to say: 
“It is regrettable that on 1 July 2016 I requested a meeting 
10 
with the Board for you to address it on a number of issues 
including this investigation.  However, to date we have not 
yet received a response.” 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And then I go on, on page 166 Chairperson 
the paragraph – first paragraph on that page and now 
speaking on behalf of the Board and I go onto say: 
“It is my considered view that it will be sad day for the 
Department as a shareholder and for the citizens of South 
Africa if this investigation does not reach its logical 
20 
conclusion.  I trust that this clarifies the Board’s stance in 
this regard.  We shall in correspondence to follow by the 
end of August provide you with a detailed report on the 
forensic investigations undertaken by Werksmans Attorneys 
or on the Board’s instructions.” 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 72 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Now what – sorry you wanted to say 
something. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  I – 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry I did not hear you Mr Soni just 
raise your voice. 
ADV SONI SC:  Sorry I was going to ask a question but I – I 
understood that the witness want – no, no please Mr Molefe 
you… 
MR MOLEFE:  No, no let me. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes please drink – you may drink water so 
that we can proceed so there is no problems because 
advisably adjourn each time. 
MR MOLEFE:  No Chairperson we – the – that report was 
given to the Minister and the Chairperson should by now be 
aware we have regularly reporting to the Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  On a range of sensitive issues.  And the 
Minister obviously accounts to the President and the 
Cabinet. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  I expect that you would have been reporting 
to the Cabinet. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  As well.  So it then means that the 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 73 of 204 
 
government would have become aware. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR 
MOLEFE: 
 Of the 
seriousness 
of the levels 
of 
corruption. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  That were taking place. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  In an organisation that is expected to spend 
R173 billion over 20 years. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Well I – in keeping with what you 
10 
said and what you have just said I think it is important to 
look at the last part of page 165 of your letter.  You say 
there: 
“It is regrettable” 
Writing to the Minister. 
“That on 1 July 2016 I requested a meeting with the Board 
for you to address it on a number of issues including the 
investigations.  However, to date we have not yet received a 
response.” 
So I guess it shows that some of the occasions where you 
20 
were even affording the Minister the opportunity to address 
the Board on various issues but there were delays in getting 
a response. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 74 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Now the matter that you referred to the 
investigation was this Swifambo investigation, would that be 
correct? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now that is the one where the Supreme 
Court of Appeal and the High Court said there was 
corruption and the Constitutional Court refused to grant 
Leave to Appeal against the judgment of the Supreme Court 
of Appeal? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SONI SC:  Then – well not soon thereafter this was in 
the August 24 the next milestone that happened is the 
Minister dissolves the Board. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:  You say that she dissolves the Board on the 
8 March.  Now when she dissolved the Board did she give 
any reasons? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe just before you answer Mr Molefe 
just to make sure we get everything in proper sequence.  I 
20 
think you said earlier on the Board was dissolved by the 
Minister on the 8 March 2017, is that correct? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And did the dissolution take place by way 
of the Minister making an announcement in Parliament? 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 75 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:  That is so Chairperson.  The Minister went 
[indistinct 00:16:32]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And sent the acting Director General in the 
Department of Transport. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR 
MOLEFE: 
 To 
reach 
to 
Parliament 
the 
Portfolio 
Committee on Transport a letter – the announcement that 
the Board has been dissolved.  Of course, on the same day 
letters were sent to each one of us as Directors. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  I was not well on that day so I could not go 
to Parliament.  I had just had an eye surgery.  But on the 
same day I wrote several letters to the Speaker of 
Parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  To the Chair of the Portfolio Committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  Dealing with what I felt was not the correct 
way of managing exercising oversight on the affairs of 
20 
PRASA but also asking the Speaker of Parliament to initiate 
an enquiry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  On Transport. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now so… 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 76 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:  Oh behalf of PRASA 
CHAIRPERSON:  So it is not the Minister who made the 
announcement in Parliament it is the DG? 
MR MOLEFE:  It was the acting DG. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But reading a letter from the Minister? 
MR MOLEFE:  From the Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the DG was reading that letter to the 
Depart – to the Portfolio Committee of Transport? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now before the – this letter was read in – 
10 
in – before the Portfolio Committee had you already been 
alerted by the Minister that the Board – your Board was 
going to be dissolved? 
MR MOLEFE:  Not at all Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Not at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  So – and did you get to know 
about it for the first time when maybe the media report 
heard about what was happening in the Portfolio Committee 
before you got the official letter from the Minister or did you 
20 
get the Minister – the letter – Minister’s letter first then you 
heard that it had – the letter had been read in Parliament? 
MR MOLEFE:  I was called Chairperson by one of our 
directors who was a delegate at the Portfolio Committee 
meeting. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 77 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And he calls me he says:  You are no longer 
my Chairman, you are not Chairman any board because you 
have got no board now.  You are – you have been fired.  He 
explains to me what happened in Parliament and then of 
course when I checked my email box I found that a letter 
had been sent to me advising me that I have been 
dismissed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That seems a very strange way of – of – 
one would have thought that the Board would be informed 
10 
first or at least to be alerted.  So – so unless the letter had 
been sent first to try and achieve that but because you 
might not have been alerted that there was a letter – an 
important letter – urgent letter that you should – were – 
expect in your emails then you only got to see it later. 
MR MOLEFE:  My recollection Chairperson is that the date 
on the letter is the 8 March as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Same day. 
MR MOLEFE:  But besides – besides Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  There is a separation of powers between the 
legislator and the executive. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  The executive is not obliged to go and 
dismiss the Board in – in a Portfolio Committee meeting. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 78 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  The Minister should meet with the Board of 
Directors. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  It is casa concerns.  Well the Minister 
appoints and dismisses directors so if she does it properly 
follows process we would not even have gone to court. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  But the precisely because we too could not 
understand why she chose to act in a manner in which she 
10 
did.  We thought it was improper for us to allow abuse of 
power, abuse of authority in the manner in which it was 
done. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  I know that previously I asked you a 
question and I think you gave me an answer as to whether 
this particular Minister, Minister of Dipuo Peters whether if 
you look at her approach or attitude towards the Board 
when the Board started and later in the life of the Board 
whether her attitude towards the Board might have changed.  
And I think if I recall correctly that – the impression I got 
20 
was that you thought her attitudes towards the Board 
changed at a later stage.  Is that right? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And my view is that it all centres around the 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 79 of 204 
 
investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And the fact that the Board is perceived to 
be stubborn. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  When it is told do not do this, do not 
investigate, it says no, no we will investigate because… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  We have fiduciary duties to be discharged. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  So everything centres around this – you 
know this investigation.  We [indistinct 00:22:28]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  That were beginning to emerge. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  From that investigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Molefe again just expanding on the 
theme raised by the Chairperson the Minister and – well 
through the DG, acting DG announces the dismissal of the 
20 
Board on the occasion at which the Board was appearing 
before the Portfolio Committee. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now as I understand it you did not go to 
that meeting but the rest of the Board members went? 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 80 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:  Well a significant number of directors we 
normally feel that you do not have to take the entire board 
to a Portfolio Committee and expand its money in hotels 
and air tickets unnecessarily so normally we take a 
reasonable 
number 
with 
executives 
– 
executive 
management to go particularly the Group CEO, the Chief 
Financial Officer and the Company Secretary. 
ADV SONI SC:  And that is quite an expensive… 
MR MOLEFE:  That is – that is… 
ADV SONI SC:  Sorry. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  That is what… 
ADV SONI SC:  But that is quite an expensive business to 
the Portfolio Committee from Pretoria in Cape Town. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now if the Minister was dismissing the 
Board and had reflected on this one would imagine that she 
would have done it before the Portfolio Committee actually 
met because that would have saved that expense 
MR MOLEFE:  That would have been the case or after the 
Portfolio Committee has met and after the Board had 
20 
discharged its duties to the Portfolio Committee because 
that will report had to account.  It did not matter if after a 
week or so she decided now you have done your job go.  
But then she does it in the manner in which she did then 
which 
means 
actually 
this 
is 
fruitless 
and 
wasteful 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 81 of 204 
 
expenditure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I do not know whether Mr Soni was 
going to ask this question but I want to ask this question.  
You have had time to reflect on the events that happened 
throughout your – the term of office of your Board at 
PRASA.  Are you able to say whether on your analysis of 
the events there was – that the dismissal of your Board 
happened on the day on which the Board was appearing 
before the Portfolio Committee was a mere coincidence or 
is there some significance in the convergence of the 
10 
Board’s appearance before the Committee and the dismissal 
and I see you said the date the letters were signed on the 
8 t h on the same day.  Is there a certain significance in these 
two things happening on the same day or the dismissal 
happening on the day when the Board is appearing before 
the Committee?  Or was it a coincidence or is it a matter 
you have not had time to reflect or you would prefer not to – 
to leave it to other people to analyse this? 
MR MOLEFE:  Chairperson the difficulty one has is that 
there appears to be a group of people some of the Ministers 
20 
including the President and members of Parliament who was 
in 
May 
go 
to 
conferences 
and 
adopt 
resolutions 
on 
corruption but they do not mean what – what they say.  They 
do not mean to fight this.  So the – everything pivots around 
the investigation, the fight against corruption.  So it is a – it 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 82 of 204 
 
is an all-round mobilisation of various vast instruments at 
the 
disposal of those 
who 
do not want to 
confront 
corruption.  And they were found – that Portfolio Committee 
maybe if Counsel might later take us to the letter I wrote to 
the Chair of the Portfolio Committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  That Portfolio Committee itself says we do 
not want this Board, dissolve it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  Now it is not their duty to say to a Minister 
10 
dissolve the Board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  The Minister has got the executive authority.  
She must decide. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  Whether you know the Board is serving its 
purpose or not.  But they saying all of those things.  They 
are not saying to the Minister we want you to account. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  For staying for such a long time without a 
20 
Group CEO for such an important company. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  Company and somebody was reminding me 
by the way that it was not only the CEO, the Group CEO.  
The company also did not have a Group Chief Financial 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 83 of 204 
 
Officer. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  It has to put in place financial controls.  It 
must ensure that it manages the finances of the business 
allocated to it by National Treasury to Parliament properly 
but there is no Chief Financial Officer.  The Oversight 
Committee that should be demanding this thing is not 
saying it.  It is worried about why are you keeping the 
Chairperson of the Board?  Why are you keeping this 
Board?  Why do you not get them out? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  So – so the – the – I think the Minister 
reached a point where she had to pander to this thing to the 
demands of the Portfolio Committee.  Secondly the meeting 
we had with the President and Minister Jeff Radebe was 
sending a clear message that we do not want this Board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  We do not want this Board.  We do not want 
this Chairman. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  So it must go. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  So I had said earlier on in my evidence 
Chairperson that there was something that I have also 
found 
strange 
whilst 
professional 
organisations 
could 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 84 of 204 
 
investigate all kinds of things vetted through their normal 
regulatory bodies and so on. 
 
In the case of this investigation there was a demand 
that National State Security Agency should vet the people 
who were investigating at PRASA.  That investigation had 
begun to shake the tree so much that there was a lot of 
discomfort in many quarters which sometimes make you 
wonder whether many of these people were not aware of 
the wrongs that were happening at PRASA and whether 
they themselves were not beneficiaries of what was 
10 
happening there in one way or the other. 
 
So I think the dismissal of the board was planned, 
was being discussed elsewhere and it was staged in such a 
way that it must give maximum publicity and embarrass the 
directors.  I would have expected the Minister to call at 
least me, as the Chair of the board, to say do not be 
surprised, I have considered this and that about your board 
and I have arrived at a conclusion that we should dissolve 
it.   
 
I would probably have said ja, but Minister, let us at 
20 
least arrange for you to meet with the board so that you 
can explain to us and maybe then tell us to go at that 
meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is there – to your knowledge was there 
anything that the Minister or anyone else might have 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 85 of 204 
 
expected that the board would say before the Portfolio 
Committee that the Minister or somebody else might not 
have wanted the board to get the chance to say because 
the moment you are dismissed I take it that the Portfolio 
Committee might say you have no – once you are no longer 
a board we do not – we have no business asking you any 
questions so you stop this appearance before the Portfolio 
Committee the moment you announce that the board is 
dismissed.  Do you know whether there was anything that 
the board may have been expected to say that somebody 
10 
might not have wanted to board to say before the Portfolio 
Committee or you would not be sure? 
MR MOLEFE:   The purpose for the board appearing before 
the Portfolio Committee is to account for its work of the 
preceding year.  Now naturally given what we had been 
busy with, the board was going to have to talk about 
rampant corruption, the litigations that were under way.  
They would have had to talk about the police refusing to do 
their job, many reports that we had given to them, civil 
actions taken and so on.   
20 
They would not have loved that to happen and one 
of the things that would probably had featured there would 
have been what appears in the Swifambo matter where 
monies were paid to individuals who came to say look, you 
are going to get this big contract, you know, you have got 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 86 of 204 
 
to share that money with somebody, you know?   
 
So all of those things may well have been things 
that made people restless at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  I do not know how everyone 
feels, it does not feel – it feels like the aircon is – the 
heater is taking too long to make us warm.  I do not know 
but maybe when we come back after lunch it will be fine.  I 
think you wanted to ask question before we adjourn. 
ADV SONI SC:   I want to just raise a – Chairperson, you 
have raised something that I have not thought about and I 
10 
had not asked the witness to think about but perhaps we 
could raise it because the witness has mentioned two 
letters that he had 
written, one to the Speaker 
of 
Parliament and the other to the Chairperson of the 
Portfolio Committee.  Certainly the letter to the Speaker of 
Parliament is dated the same day as they are dismissed 
and it may be after the witness has looked at it, he can 
reflect again as to whether there is a connection between 
the timing of the dismissal and the issues you have raised.  
It has only occurred to me now, Chairperson, but if there is 
20 
something that I submit needs to be considered. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It does need to be looked at because it 
is quite extraordinary. 
ADV SONI SC:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That the Minister who I assume would 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 87 of 204 
 
have known in advance that the board would be appearing 
before the Portfolio Committee on a certain date does not 
dismiss the board before that but actually dismisses the 
board on the day or when they are supposed to appear and 
I would imagine that if she dismissed the board before the 
date she would have achieved the same thing if part of her 
concern was that the board was going to reveal certain 
things. 
ADV SONI SC:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But it may well be that coinciding the 
10 
dismissal with the date of the board’s appearance before 
the Commissioner – before the Portfolio Committee, might 
have been based on some other reason. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I think Mr Molefe has mentioned 
that also it might have been intended to embarrass the 
board and to get a lot of publicity for that. 
ADV SONI SC:   Clear publicity. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so after lunch we can wrap that up. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I see it is two minutes past one.  
Let us take the lunch adjournment and we will resume at 
two o’clock. 
ADV SONI SC:   As you please, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 88 of 204 
 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  And the way it is cold here 
in Jo’burg, it makes some of us who come from Durban 
want to go back to Durban.  Okay, let us continue. 
ADV SONI SC:   Mr Chair, may I place on record that we 
have now retrieved that document and I would like Mr 
Motlana to hand it up.  I mean, Mr Molefe, to hand it up. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, is that the report which we have 
been calling the Turmoil at PRASA? 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   PRASA in Turmoil. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it may be that it is convenient to 
call it that even if that is not the heading that appears 
because we – as long as there is mention of that in the 
body of this document. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if you have seen the report, I have 
not – there is another word that we can use to call it, that 
is fine, so I am just saying that because Mr Molefe 
emphasised earlier that he had noticed that it is not what it 
20 
is called.  So that somehow one may end up …[intervenes] 
ADV SONI SC:   One of the headings is PRASA in Turmoil. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV SONI SC:   One of the headings in the report is 
PRASA Internal. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 89 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Somewhere in the report, you mean not 
at the top? 
ADV SONI SC:   One of the headings. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not at the beginning. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think it is convenient to call it that. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We will know what document we are 
talking about when anybody refers to the PRASA in Turmoil 
report or document. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.   
ADV SONI SC:   So, Chairperson, just for the order we 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think, Mr Soni, you have confused 
both me and Mr Molefe about what you wanted – about the 
reports. 
ADV SONI SC:   Oh, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said you want him to hand it up but I 
suppose you wanted him to identity it but I think you left 
20 
that in between. 
ADV SONI SC:   So, I was …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I can take it from Mr Molefe.  
Sorry, let me take it from Mr Molefe.  Mr Molefe, I am 
sorry.   
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 90 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, give it to me.  Yes, so that is the 
document called – or rather, written at the top: 
“Report on recent developments at 
PRASA.” 
ADV SONI SC:   That is so, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, you want to – have you got – I am 
sure, Mr Molefe, you have got your own copy? 
MR MOLEFE:   I do have, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, do you want Mr Soni to let 
10 
him identify it so that we can admit it? 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes.  We could call it as you suggest, 
Chairperson, PRASA in Turmoil and we could …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, we do not have to write down on 
page 1 at the top PRASA in Turmoil, we can leave it as it 
is. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What I meant was, anybody who says 
the PRASA in Turmoil report, as long as we know which 
document it is. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That would be fine. 
ADV SONI SC:   And we could include it at the end of 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want Mr Molefe to identify it 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 91 of 204 
 
first? 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, do you want me to take him through 
it – not through it but to identify it first? 
ADV SONI SC:   He can identify it first, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   Mr Molefe, you have been referring to a 
document produced by Mr Montana. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   And you referred to it in general terms as 
10 
a document called PRASA in Turmoil. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is so. 
ADV SONI SC:   Is this the document? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, this is the document, Chairperson, 
which is written: 
“Report on recent developments at 
PRASA.” 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes and then the last page …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   Made at 27 July in the last page and it also 
states that the report compiled by Tshepo Lucky Montana. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and it has got 11 pages, right? 
ADV SONI SC:   Right at the end you will see it at the 
bottom. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, it is pages 1 to 11 so it is an 11 page 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 92 of 204 
 
report. 
MR MOLEFE:   Oh, 11 page report, yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  What do you propose we mark 
it as exhibit what, Mr Soni? 
ADV SONI SC:   Let me just find… 
CHAIRPERSON:   You want it to be inserted?  We could 
have it separate.  We could have it separate. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because unless we add it at the back 
of… 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   It may be a good idea, Chairperson, to 
have it as a separate document. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As a separate document. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes because I have no doubt it will come 
up again. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  Okay, then we need to know 
what exhibit it will be. 
ADV SONI SC:   Shall we make this EXHIBIT SS6A? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Exhibit? 
ADV SONI SC:   SS6 - Mr Molefe’s affidavit is SS6 and we 
20 
can make this 6A. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, should we not make it SS7 
because when you say... 
ADV SONI SC:   There is already a 7, as I understand it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, is there another one because when 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 93 of 204 
 
you say 6A it will give the impression that it comes before 
6. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes.  I will just check. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is the last exhibit we have 
admitted?  Even March, there may be other documents that 
we admitted or otherwise we could use SS6A, as you say. 
ADV 
SONI 
SC: 
 
 
Can 
I 
make 
the 
suggestion, 
Mr 
Chairperson, can we have it as 6A provisionally and then 
when we have worked out what is the last SS number we 
could then convert it to the number after that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   My difficulty is that we will refer it with – 
we will use and then later we change. 
ADV SONI SC:   Oh, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, this bundle D consists of Mr 
Molefe’s affidavit and annexures thereto, is it not? 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes.  Yes, it does, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Should we not – and there is no other 
bundle that has got annexures to his affidavit, it is only 
this one. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then should we not put it at the back so 
that it becomes simply an annexure? 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it is not an annexure because the 
affidavit – well, the affidavit does, I think, refer to it 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 94 of 204 
 
although because it was not available it was not annexed. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I think we can put it at the end and 
we – it will become in terms of pagination as a PSM331. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I think let us do – what was the 
document before that?  What was the document before 
that?  Was it PM11?  PM12?  PM15?  Ja, it looks like the 
last document is PM15. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So if we – let us make it PM and 
annexure even though – because it is referred to in the 
affidavit, is it not? 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is just not given an annexure number. 
ADV SONI SC:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I think let us make it annexure PM16. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would that be alright? 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   So let us mark it PM16 and then in terms 
of the pagination it will be PSM333 and I write SS6 before 
PSM.  Okay, alright.  So if you refer to it as PM16 or 
PRASA in Turmoil we will know which one you are talking 
about. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 95 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:   Talking about, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Thank you. 
PRASA IN TURMOIL DOCUMENT HANDED IN AS PM16 
ADV SONI SC:   Can we refer to this a little later? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, later. 
ADV SONI SC:   I will lead Mr Molefe on it a little later. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now, Mr Molefe, we were still dealing with 
the dismissal by the Minister of the board on the 8 March.  
When the Minister announced her decision, what was your 
10 
reaction to it?  I am talking about active reaction in 
relation to her decision.  But perhaps let me ask more 
directly.  Did you challenge the decision? 
MR MOLEFE:   I did, Chairperson, I called the rest of the 
directors and suggested that we challenge the decision.  I 
did also say, of course, regardless of whether they joined 
me in doing so or not, I was going to challenge it, so – and 
that is what we did, we instructed Webber Wentzel firm of 
attorneys to be our attorneys-of-record. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes.  You then took the decision to quote 
20 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Soni, it is more logical for 
us to deal with the reasons, if any, that were given by the 
minister for dismissing the board and what Mr Molefe 
thought of those reasons before we go to challenging, is it 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 96 of 204 
 
not? 
MR MOLEFE:   There should be a letter of the minister, 
very scanty. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, yes, I did not hear, just 
repeat, Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   I said there is a letter that simply dismisses 
us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I was …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   Recollection is that it does not even give 
much reasons to say performance or something to that 
10 
effect. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, that is what I would like Mr 
Soni to traverse first.  We must – because you have told us 
that the – you have told us that the acting DG read the 
letter of dismissal to the Portfolio Committee.  So we do 
need to see – to identify the letter, if it is here.  If it is not 
here then I must be told it is not here because maybe from 
it we will see the reasons.  Or if the reasons are not there, 
Mr Molefe can indicate whether at some stage or another 
prior to the challenge in court of the decision the Minister 
20 
did give her reasons or was asked to give reasons and 
what was her response.  I think it is more natural if we 
cover that first. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is an issue that is covered in the 
judgment, that is why I wanted to go to the judgment. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 97 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us deal with it now even if it is in the 
judgment because when one is listening to the story the 
first thing when one is told that the Minister dismissed the 
board, the next thing you want to know is why. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   So it is better to hear it now even if the 
reason the court deals with them later on. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  So, in other words, what I want to 
know, do we have the letter that was read to parliament 
10 
where the Minister communicated the – or that was written 
to the board, to members of the board saying you are being 
dismissed and these are the reasons, if they were given, 
and then the reaction to those reasons, I would like to 
know what he thought of those reasons.  Probably did not 
think much of them, that is why they decided to go to court. 
MR MOLEFE:   To court, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But that is the – I am looking at getting 
the story in a logical way. 
MR MOLEFE:   No, I understand.  As it unfolded. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja.  The court later on – we can say 
what did the court say about those reasons, but that is 
later. 
ADV SONI SC:   I place on record, Chairperson, that the 
DG’s letter is something we have only heard about this 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 98 of 204 
 
morning for the first time.  I had thought until this morning 
that 
the 
Minister 
had 
announced 
it 
at 
the 
Portfolio 
Committee but that letter is not part of the documents 
before you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay and – so even in the court 
proceedings that ensued it was not part of those…? 
ADV SONI SC:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was not part of this. 
ADV SONI SC:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Mr Molefe, have you found that 
10 
letter by any chance?  I think you are looking for it. 
MR MOLEFE:   The letter would be really addressed to 
each one of the directors by the Minister.  It would not be 
the one read in parliament. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   It was not there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  The one read in parliament would 
have been addressed to the Portfolio Committee? 
MR MOLEFE:   Would have been addressed to the Portfolio 
Committee advising them that …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of the dismissal. 
MR MOLEFE:   That the board is being dissolved. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  But even if you do not find – 
if you can find the letter that was addressed to you, we can 
deal with it.  If you do not find it you can just tell me what 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 99 of 204 
 
your recollection is of what reasons it gave, if it gave any. 
MR MOLEFE:   I will do, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV SONI SC:   Well, did she give any reasons at the time 
she dismissed you, Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   I would rather wait to see the letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The letter. 
MR MOLEFE:   My recollection is that the reasons were 
really not substantive. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   They simply said poor performance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, did …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   That is why in court it was dismissed as an 
irrational decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What you can do, Mr Soni, of course, is 
to look at the reasons as were understood in court. 
ADV SONI SC:   They are quite revealing, Chairperson, 
that is why I think Mr Molefe cannot give an answer.  I will 
refer you to a paragraph of the judgment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   Which addresses this very issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, alright.  Let us proceed.  If 
the letter is not there, let us proceed and then we will see 
how the court deals with it.  It is just that it is – when you 
say somebody has been dismissed in circumstances that 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 100 of 204 
 
appear to be strange the first thing you want to know is, 
why was the person dismissed, what was the reaction, 
before you hear what happened in court later. 
ADV SONI SC:   But what happens in court actually 
explains in a sense the fact that no reasons were given. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Let us go ahead.  If we find 
the letter later on we can come back to it but that is fine, 
let us go ahead. 
ADV SONI SC:   Okay.  So, Mr Molefe, may I ask you to 
look at bundle A and it is the judgment of the court in the 
10 
matter …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You say it is bundle A? 
ADV SONI SC:   Chairperson, it is bundle A. 
MR MOLEFE:   Is it this one? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I do not have – oh, there it is. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, I do have it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What page?  That is bundle A of 
EXHIBIT SS1. 
ADV SONI SC:   That is right, yes.  SS2, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And what is the page? 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   Page 83, that is where the judgments are.  
The report starts page 83 and you will see, Chairperson, it 
has Mr Molefe and the other board members against the 
Minister of Transport and members of a newly appointed 
board. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 101 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on one second? 
ADV SONI SC:   At page 83, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said page 83? 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think the people who were paginating 
here departed from the norm.  You know, these bundles, 
the numbers, the pagination is supposed to be sequential 
from page 1 up to the last page. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I see that the first document goes up 
10 
to page 59.  The next document starts from scratch. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes., 
CHAIRPERSON:   On page 1, it starts the pagination 
afresh.  It should not be like that.  Okay, page 83? 
ADV SONI SC:   Of SS2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that is now – ja, will you just make 
sure that these things are checked beforehand because the 
numbering, the pagination, there must be consistency with 
everything. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because when I see page 59, I think 
okay, I am only 20 pages away from 83 only to find that 
when I think I have reached the twentieth page it is not 83 
and I still a long way because the pagination has started 
afresh.  Yes, okay, I have got the judgment. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 102 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:   Now, Mr Molefe, can I ask you in respect 
of that judgment, could you turn to page 124, paragraph 
51? 
MR MOLEFE:   I am on 124, paragraph 51, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say paragraph 81? 
ADV SONI SC:   51, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Five one? 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now in the earlier paragraphs the judge 
10 
deals with the duty to give reasons for administrative 
action and then at paragraph 51 he sets out what reasons 
were given.  Could you read that into the record please? 
MR MOLEFE:   Paragraph 51, Chairperson reads as 
follows: 
 “For the first time the Minister purported at press 
conference that she held on 13 March 2017 to 
justify her decision to remove the relevant directors, 
she did that through the media instead of through 
the concerned directors.  She stated that the board 
20 
was found wanting relating to, amongst others, the 
declining performance, lack of good governance, 
lack of financial prudence and ever deteriorating 
public confidence due to spats of infighting.” 
ADV SONI SC:   Okay, if you could just stop there.  Was 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 103 of 204 
 
that the first time you heard the justification for the 
dismissal of the board on the 13 t h? 
MR MOLEFE:   That was the first time. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, so …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   That was the first time, Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   So you were dismissed on the 8 t h but the 
first time you were given a reason so to speak was on the 
13 t h? 
MR MOLEFE:   The media, the media, the public were 
given a reason. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Yes, no, that is an important 
factor to remind that she was talking to the media. 
ADV SONI SC:   And not talking to... 
CHAIRPERSON:   And not to the board and to yourselves.  
Yes, okay. 
ADV SONI SC:   As emphasised by the judge. 
CHAIRPERSON:   By the judge. 
ADV SONI SC:   By the judge, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   And then in the next – then the judge says 
what she had said in her answering affidavit.  Could you 
read that into the record? 
MR MOLEFE:    
“In 
her 
answering 
affidavit 
she 
set 
out 
two 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 104 of 204 
 
fundamental reasons for her decision.  Firstly, she 
claims that the trigger for the relevant directors’ 
removal was their decision to terminate Letsoalo’s 
secondment to PRASA.  She states that the board 
was removed because the board acted in unison in 
frustrating the actions of Mr Letsoalo and ultimately 
removing him.  Furthermore...” 
And I am on now page 125, Chairperson. 
“Furthermore, she claimed that she substantially 
complied with the procedural fairness, obligations in 
10 
respect of this complaint because she wrote to the 
board on 1 March 2017 and asked it to explain its 
public spat with Letsoalo and to furnish reasons 
why she should not intervene in order to restore 
good governance within PRASA.  Secondly, the 
Minister 
claimed 
that 
she 
had 
wide-ranging 
concerns about the board management of PRASA.  
She 
considered 
it 
to 
have 
been 
involved 
in 
corruption and in irregular expenditure since its 
appointment.  Quite clearly, nowhere does she state 
20 
that 
she 
afforded 
the 
relevant 
directors 
an 
opportunity to be heard on these issues before she 
took the decision to remove them from office.” 
ADV SONI SC:   Mr Chair, Mr Molefe, can I ask you to turn 
to paragraph 56? 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 105 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Does anybody feel like it is warmer than 
before lunch? 
ADV SONI SC:   It is slightly warmer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is slightly warmer, okay.  Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   It is slightly warmer, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV SONI SC:   So this, Mr Molefe, is after the judge 
decides that she was setting aside her decision and this is 
the third reason he gives.  Can you place that on record: 
MR MOLEFE:   Paragraph 56 of the judgment, Chairperson, 
10 
reads: 
 “Thirdly and lastly, the Minister’s decision to 
remove 
the 
concerned 
directors 
was 
so 
unreasonable 
and 
disproportionate 
as 
to 
be 
arbitrary and irrational.  The board took a decision 
to terminate Letsoala after it had sought and 
obtained legal advice.  The decision to terminate to 
terminate Letsoalo’s appointment was thus plainly 
reasonable given the fact that it had a discretion to 
terminate his appointment at will.  The Minister 
20 
should have accepted that the board’s decision to 
terminate his secondment rather than disciplining it 
for it.  Her decision was accordingly unreasonable 
on that basis alone.  The decision, however, is 
rendered wholly disproportionate by the fact that 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 106 of 204 
 
the Minister appears to have given no consideration 
to 
the 
serious 
and 
prejudicial 
impact 
of 
the 
wholesale 
removal 
of 
the 
board 
on 
PRASA’s 
interest.” 
ADV SONI SC:   Okay, you can stop there.  Can I then ask 
you to look at paragraph 60?  If you could just read the 
first sentence?   
MR MOLEFE:   Paragraph 60, Chairperson, the first 
sentence reads as follows. 
“I have reached a conclusion that the applicants, or 
10 
should I say the removed directors, have proved 
that they have a clear right to challenge the 
decision taken by the Minister and furthermore, to 
have the decision reviewed and set aside or to 
obtain an order suspending the operation of the 
notices of removal.  The removed directors…” 
Okay, that is the sentence, Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes.  And then if you look at page 135, 
paragraph 3, the court sets aside the decision to remove 
the members of the board and in paragraph 6 orders the 
20 
Minister to pay the costs, is that correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So whatever reasons the Minister 
furnished to the court for the decision to remove your 
board were found to be wanting by the court. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 107 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   That is so, Chairperson.  So maybe we will 
still get to know the real reasons from their side. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now after the – after you took the 
decision to court but before the decision of the court, the 
change and they have already discussed it, where Minister 
Peters was removed as Minister of Transport and Mr Joe 
Maswanganyi was appointed minister.  Is that correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is so, Chairperson.  That... by the way, I 
should also say that immediately after she announced the 
10 
removal of our board, she appointed what she called an 
interim board.   
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja.  And uh, of course, shortly after that the 
president uh, reshuffled the cabinet and she was uh, 
replaced by Minister Maswanganyi.   
ADV SONI SC:  Now, what has Minister Maswanganyi’s uh, 
approach towards the board?  The... uh, Minister Peters had 
dismissed the board.  You had been reinstated.  What was 
his approach to your reinstatement and your continued 
20 
existence as a board? 
MR MOLEFE:   Uh, immediately when Minister Maswanganyi 
and me was appointed, I wrote him a letter congratulating 
him and welcoming him and saying that uh, the board would 
uh, wish that he... he comes and meet with the board.  Uh, 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 108 of 204 
 
and of course, I also advised him that uh, the... the court 
had reinstated us.  Um, he...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   In the meantime, while you are waiting for 
the outcome of the court application, there was an interim 
board that was um, uh, in operation or they waited 
because... for the outcome of the application without putting 
in place an interim board? 
MR MOLEFE:   No, the interim board had been put in place.  
Uh...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   But it... it...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   It had to go once you ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   It had to go ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...while... while you waiting on the case, 
ja. 
MR 
MOLEFE: 
 
 
It 
probably 
had 
one 
or 
two 
meetings...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...and let it go. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  I can... did Mr Maswanganyi 
20 
respond positively to your request for resignation?  
MR MOLEFE:   Mr Maswanganyi did not respond positively. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He did not respond at all or he did 
respond but ... 
MR MOLEFE:   He... he did not respond to my letter. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 109 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   Um, and I think I have got correspondence 
uh, in that... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...in that regard which we...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...I can avail to the court. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Uh, he showed me after that, also served 
notice on us. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   A small detail and given reasons, detailed 
reasons why we should be uh... he... he demanded that... he 
gave us seven days. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   Uh, to show cause why we should not be 
removed ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...as a board for... for failure to perform. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   He has... he has not even met with this 
board but he wanted to dismiss it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  The correspondence you are talking 
about, if we do not have it here, it will be important to have 
it. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 110 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   It... it...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Between yourself and ...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:  I was just going to that Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  It is here now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, it is here?  Oh, okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   [Indistinct 00:03:39] ...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:  Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Molefe, can I ask you to look at page 176 
10 
which is Annexure PM10 to your affidavit? 
MR MOLEFE:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Are we going back to the 
other bundle 3 or are we staying with this one? 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh, sorry.  We are going to bundle... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Uh, you just announce if done. so 
that uh...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:  Yes, yes...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...whoever reads the transcript will 
understand...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV SONI SC:  And how...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Then now we are dealing with a different 
bundle or exhibit.  Okay, what page?  We are now 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:  On page 170, Chairperson. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 111 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are going back to Bundle D which 
is...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:  Page 25...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Page...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:  And then Annexure PM10 is page 170.   
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, page 170.  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  So this is the minister’s letter to the board in 
which he gives notice that he intends dismissing the board 
10 
and asks you to make representations why you should not. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chair... Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now, in fact, we are just looking forward.  
The... he did not go uh, ahead with his threat to... to 
terminate the... the board or... or the cleaning of the board. 
MR MOLEFE:   He did not go ahead with the treat 
Chairperson. 
ADV 
SONI 
SC: 
 
Just 
in 
brief 
then, 
would 
you 
say...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry mister...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...Soni.  I was trying to look for the date 
to see... of the letter to see how soon after he was 
appointed, he sent this letter. 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 112 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   But I see no date has provided where he 
signed and I do not see any date on page 1 of the letter. 
ADV SONI SC:  You are quite right. [laugh]   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SONI SC:  I must have missed... I did not see that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is your recollection Mr Molefe as to 
how soon after he had appointed, he sent the board this 
letter uh, PM10? 
MR MOLEFE:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Or is that something you are not able to 
10 
remember? 
ADV SONI SC:  If you look at paragraph 99 of your affidavit 
uh, Mr Molefe at page 25, you will see you give a date there. 
MR MOLEFE:   Page...? 
ADV SONI SC:  Page 25 of your affidavit, paragraph 99. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, let me see. 
ADV SONI SC:  No, your affidavit here uh, Mr Molefe. 
MR MOLEFE:   I am looking at my... 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Uh, page 25. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Page 25, paragraph 99. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You give... you gave the date of 
5 June 2017. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In paragraph 99 ...[intervenes]  
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 113 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...as a date when Minister Maswanganyi 
asked the board to show court why it should not be 
dissolved. 
MR MOLEFE:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So then that... that... that is right there.  
You confirm that that is the date? 
MR MOLEFE:   That... that is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  And you then responded through PM10 
10 
which appears at... ah, sorry.  Through PM11 which appears 
at page 179. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:  And in essence, again because that much 
happened as a result of this, you asked for more time so that 
you could give a more considered response to his invitation? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now, he did not go ahead with the threat to 
terminate the chairman of the board but you said he 
achieved the same result through a different means.  What 
20 
do you mean by that? 
MR MOLEFE:   He... we asked for time extension and he 
gave us only day because he said [laughs]... his initial 
timeline was a year.  The 21s t uh-uh, of June. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 114 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   And he said, “okay, I give you until the 22 nd”. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   Uh-uh, so the... and I am saying he is 
achieving the uh, seeking to achieve the same objective, the 
same goal of uh, the previous uh, minister through uh, a 
different uh, means.  And... and he...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   What did he do? 
MR MOLEFE:   Uh... 
CHAIRPERSON:   He achieved the same result through 
different means. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What does he do? 
MR MOLEFE:   So... so what he did was... by the way, I 
should say that, when I wrote to the minister, I also advised 
him that there were vacancies on the board.  That the board 
did not have a quorum.  And he needed to speedily appoint 
uh, directors to those vacancies. 
 
Even if he was not to follow the tedious process of 
nominations, there were two directors who were working for 
government.  One was in his department.  The other one 
20 
would have come from the National Treasury. 
 
A vacancy there arose because that individual who 
was a 
nominee of National Treasury resigned as 
an 
employee of National Treasury and that could not continue 
as a representative of National Treasury on the board. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 115 of 204 
 
 
So I was asking him to fill uh, those posts.  And uh, 
so he did not.  Uh, he refused to do so.  So achieved the 
dysfunctionality of the board by simply not discharging his 
responsibility as a minister to appoint a board so that the 
board could function properly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So uh... ja.  Were there two vacancies or 
were there more than two vacancies? 
MR MOLEFE:   There... there were four vacancies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There were four vacancies? 
MR MOLEFE:   Uh, four. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you know to create a quorum you 
needed two... up two appointments? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you... you are saying that those two 
appointments could be somebody of his department and 
somebody from National Treasury? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then the board would be able to 
function properly? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is true. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  And... but he...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   He... he does not do it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He did not do it. 
MR MOLEFE:   Uh...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Did he respond in any way? 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 116 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   He... he did respond in a very irrational 
manner.  He says, “no, it takes a long time to... to appoint 
directors”.  He has got to follow the process of nomination as 
required by the law. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MOLEFE:   And then he says, “with regards to these 
nominees of the department, even if they come from those 
departments, I must still take them to the cabinet”. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MOLEFE:   [laughs]  For the cabinet to... to decide. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   Now, the... the cabinet is unlike... it is to say 
to the Minister of Finance... when the Minister of Finance 
says, “my nominee ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...”to that board is this person...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...”whom I trust...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...”works for this department”.  They would 
20 
not say, “no, no...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...no, we cannot.  We challenge you”. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   He, as a result of what... what he is, he does 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 117 of 204 
 
not... he... he can notify the cabinet...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...that I have nominated so and so on that 
board and then we have got this nominee of National 
Treasury. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   Not to say to the cabinet “decide for me 
whether I can nominate...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...”my employee...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...”who in terms of the law, I am prepared to 
nominate...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...”and appoint as a director to that board”. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   But... but he was saying that.  So clearly the 
intention was not bad. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But of course uh, if he... I mean, once the 
board did not have enough directors or members to be 
20 
quorate, that was an item matter on its own.  The filling of 
those positions was urgent because it meant the board could 
not sit, is it not? 
MR MOLEFE:   It was an urgent matter.    
CHAIRPERSON:   And the ...[intervenes]  
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 118 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   The question is whether there was the 
intention...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   ...to have a functioning board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So... so... so one would have expected 
that he would have appreciated the urgency and would... and 
would have known that the cabinet itself would regard the 
matter as urgent if he says, “the board of PRASA cannot 
operate because it does not have enough members of the 
board.  I need at least appointed.  Here is my nominee.  
10 
Here is the nominee of the Minister of Finance”. 
 
There is no reason why the... the cabinet performing 
its duties the way it should, would not have regarded that as 
urgent now. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Ms Molefe, there you make a slightly 
different point that in the second sentence at paragraph 100, 
you say,  
20 
“I later found out that the directors were lobbied to 
resigned from their respective positions on the 
board”.   
Who...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, what page? 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 119 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Sorry, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Page? 
ADV SONI SC:  Page 25. 
CHAIRPERSON:   25. 
ADV SONI SC:  Paragraph a hundred. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Thank you.   
ADV SONI SC:  Are you there Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   On what page are we on? 
ADV SONI SC:  Page 25, paragraph 100, the second 
sentence. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   Oh, the affidavit? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Okay.  Um...   
CHAIRPERSON:   I think he should read paragraph 100 in 
its entire context. 
ADV SONI SC:  So that it is on record.  Okay, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Read that paragraph Mr Molefe. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
“When 
everything 
else 
failed, 
he 
attempted to weaken the board by ensuring that it did not 
have a quorum” 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that is the reference to the Minister 
Maswanganyi ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   And that is the point I made earlier on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That... that... the E is reference to 
Minister Maswanganyi? 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 120 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   That is Minister Maswanganyi. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, continue. 
MR MOLEFE:   “I later found out that the directors were 
lobbied to resign from their respective positions on the 
board.  The intention being to isolate me as the chairman so 
that I could not be effective”. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   “Some directors including the representative 
of the National Treasury did resign”.  And I have given the 
circumstances under which that one resigned. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.   
MR MOLEFE:   “They were not replaced.  The nominee of 
the 
Department 
of 
Transport 
stopped 
attending 
board 
meetings.  These developments left the board ineffective as 
its quorum could not be formed”. 
 
Now, the... I... I was advised by some of my directors 
um, that they were actually approached and asked to resign. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Look this side again. 
MR MOLEFE:   [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Look at me.  [laughs] 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, I am learning the hard way how 
...[indistinct 00:16:59] [laughs] 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs] 
MR MOLEFE:   Refraining to ...[indistinct 00:17:02] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, you were advised by some 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 121 of 204 
 
of...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   My... by my directors. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   They were lobbied to resign. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That... that they have been approached 
and asked to resign. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  Uh, in fact, one of them told me that 
the acting director general...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.   
MR MOLEFE:   ...promised her that “if you resign, we will 
10 
appoint you to another board.  Do not worry”.  For now, you 
know?   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   He would not... he will appoint you again. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Um, of course uh, the chair of the Audit 
Committee resigned and the chair of uh, the Human Capital 
Committee uh, also resigned. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   Um, so it was quite clear that that was a 
20 
drive to uh, to make this board dysfunctional. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   Because of the big job that it was 
doing...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 122 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   ...which other people cannot ...[indistinct 
00:18:04] 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Uh, are you able to tell... give us 
the names of the board members who resigned around that 
time? 
MR MOLEFE:   Uh, it was uh, Zodo Manwazi(?) [00:18:15] 
who was the chair of the Audit and Risk Committee.  Um, 
and Mr Pitsane, Bernard Pitsane. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja.  Uh... well, there... there have been 
10 
another director, by the way.  I should have said this.  Who 
had resigned much earlier but it had nothing to do with... 
with this uh-uh... um, she is an attorney by trade. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Uh, Ms Kesho.  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja.  Um, from KZN. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   From Kwazulu Natal. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   So uh, that was the position. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the... were there two who resigned 
roundabout this time when you say it looked like there was 
an attempt to render the board dysfunctional? 
MR MOLEFE:   Correct so. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 123 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it is two that you have told me about? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And there was one, I think one of them... 
did you say one of them told you that explicitly that he had 
been approached or she had been...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   She.  She. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She. 
MR MOLEFE:   But she refused to resign. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, but that one refused to resign? 
MR MOLEFE:   That one refused to resign. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja.  The other two resigned but of course, 
they all said, “no, we are not lobbied.  It is okay”. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes.  Um, so um, because ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...part of the difficulty uh, Chairperson we 
have...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   ...is that uh, there are people who are 
experience things but would not have the courage to come 
and talk here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 124 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   That is the problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   With that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, it is a serious problem. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, it is a serious problem because a person 
would say, “this colleague of mine resigned and he... he also 
tried to persuade me to resign but I refused”.  But if I were to 
say to that person “come and... the story you told me, go and 
say to the commission”.  Yes, you see?  Uh, he might, of 
course... 
the 
Commission 
has 
got 
the 
power 
to 
10 
subpoena...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   There is no way we can... we can 
compare. 
MR MOLEFE:   You can do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We can compare.  Because it is... it is 
very important that the Commission understands how it came 
about that in certain SOE’s, for example, corruption reached 
the kind of levels that we have heard about in the 
Commission. 
MR MOLEFE:   H’m? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   How did that happen?  What was the 
method used by those people who sought to uh, engage in 
corruption?  Is it true that the sought to remove people 
who... who wanted to do the right things, who were not 
prepared to do wrong?   
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 125 of 204 
 
Is it true that they sought to remove them, make it 
difficult for them to do their jobs so that they could then 
bring people who would dance to their tunes?   
If that is true, the Commission needs to hear that and 
people who have knowledge of these things, when they do 
not come forward to tell the Commission, it... it makes it 
difficult.   
And it... what the Commission is doing is trying to 
see what caused these problems so that it can look at 
recommendations that it can make to say going forward, 
10 
what measures should be in place to make sure that um, the 
country is a better country than uh, a country that is mired in 
corruption and state capture and so on.   
So... so one wishes that there will be more people 
who come forward and say: 
“This is what I know.  This is what happened.  I... I do 
not... I know that certain of my friends would not like 
me to come before the Commission and say this 
thing.   
I know my party would not like me to come and say 
20 
this thing.   
I know that my minister or whoever would not like me 
to... to do this thing but I believe that I owe it to the 
country to come to the Commission because I love 
my country more.   
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 126 of 204 
 
I want this country to be made a better country.   
I do not want to see it mired in corruption the way the 
present is mired in corruption”. 
 
So I just wish that there would be more people who 
would do that because, at the end of the day, if the 
Commission does not get to get all the information and to 
understand how these things happened, it cannot come up 
with good recommendations because it has not been enabled 
to have proper understanding on how these things happened. 
 
So that is why I continue.  I continue to be grateful 
10 
that you... you have been able to come here and share with 
the Commission all the experiences that you are aware of 
and that you went through yourself and your board.... your 
board members. 
 
I hope that other board members um, uh, will be 
cooperative with the Commission and uh, share what they 
know.  Thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:  What the Chairperson has said is... goes 
back thousands of years in Ancient Rome when Caesar’s 
...[indistinct 00:23:54] is asked why he said, “because I 
20 
love...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Please raise your voice Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  Oh, sorry.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Your voice goes down and...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:  Sorry. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 127 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  What he says, “I killed him because I love 
Rome more than I love Caesar”.  And that is exactly the point 
you are making Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  It is what human nature needs to go beyond.  
But let me... Mr Molefe, when I check at another thing raised 
by the Chairperson.  The Chairperson pointed out that it was 
important for a board to function because it has been such 
an important job in the R 173 billion enterprise. 
10 
 
Now, everybody knows that the term of the board was 
going to end on the 31s t of July.  Where there any attempts 
made 
to 
fill 
the 
vacancies 
that 
would 
arise 
on 
the 
31s t of July? 
MR MOLEFE:   No... no attempt was made Chairperson to 
prepare for the time when the term of office of the then 
board was coming to an end.  So it was going to be dealt 
with as if it is an after-thought. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   But uh, on the resignation... I must make this 
20 
point.  On the... on the resignations of the directors, I was 
saddened deeply when the chairperson of the Audit and Risk 
Committee of the board was one of those who resigned. 
 
And resigning at a time when the board is busy with 
the audit for that year, finalisation.  Who was supposed to go 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 128 of 204 
 
and give an account for how it will be used, the finances 
appropriated to by uh, PRASA. 
 
But that chair of the Audit Committee goes away and 
that is a function backed by the chair of the Audit 
Committee.  So... so I... I think it is important that people 
explain their actions as well.  It is a very important position 
of a professional. 
 
And... and it... it shows how for experienced people 
could lead to a collapse of a very important organ of state 
which served the poor people to please somebody who is 
10 
into my office elsewhere.  Uh, Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now at... at... why the level uh, Mr Molefe.  
The minister, the previous Minister Dipuo Peters, dismisses 
the board on the 8 t h of March.  It is quite clear that they do 
not want the board.  Then the Minister Maswanganyi, he 
comes.  He says, “please tell me why I should not dismiss 
you?”  So it is quite clear that the powers that be did not 
want your board.  But...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   Ja, it was clear. 
ADV SONI SC:  ...they want you to further a gap.  Wants to 
20 
appoint a new board.  Have you any idea why they did not 
put any steps in place, and as you have pointed out earlier 
five and a half years later, we still do not have a permanent 
board? 
MR MOLEFE:   Well, I do not know Chairperson.  But I... I... 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 129 of 204 
 
it boggles my mind also.  I mean, if you take the Minister 
Maswanganyi of Transport, he writes to the board in June.  I 
think it was something like the 14 t h of June.  He says, “show 
me cause why I should not dismiss you all?”.  Now he writes 
that letter...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Earlier? 
MR MOLEFE:   ...and he notes that at the end of 
July...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.   
MR MOLEFE:   ...the term of office of that board is ending. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so the point you are making is, he still 
wants to dismiss the board at a time when... in a few weeks’ 
time, the term of the board will expire anyway? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, Chairperson.  He should have used that 
time to identify directors he wanted to serve on the board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   And run the process.  It does not make sense 
to dismiss people when they are left with a few weeks. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  H’m. 
MR 
MOLEFE: 
 
 
Even... 
even 
Minister 
Dipuo 
20 
Peters...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.   
MR 
MOLEFE: 
 
 
...dismiss 
the 
directors 
in 
March...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.   
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 130 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   ...when... at the end of July. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   The term of office is ending. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   And you have failed to discharge your own 
obligations to what that board...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.   
MR MOLEFE:   ...which in terms of the shareholder 
compact...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.   
10 
MR MOLEFE:   ...you should be discharging because it is 
one-way uh, street.  Where... when... when the board had to 
perform, the minister required to give the necessary support 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.   
MR MOLEFE:   ...from the department and the executive to 
enable the board and management to do their work. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   But she chooses rather not to do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.   
20 
MR MOLEFE:   And focus on removing the Board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   And all of these things they gain momentum 
after the meeting of July of 2015 tell us Mr Montana you 
go, and after the meeting with the President and Minister 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 131 of 204 
 
Jeff Radebe where we said in the meeting that as far as we 
are concerned this man’s contracting is ending he’s got no 
lifetime employment with the company, the Board has got 
no intention to retreat on his decision.  We have asked him 
to stay previously, he told us he doesn’t want to stay.  So, 
all of these things – and by the way I keep coming back to 
this thing, they come also against the backdrop of the 
Swifambo matter where now, you know, we’ll prove in the 
Court that there’s huge corruption here.  We have this 
litigation, the Siyagena matter and so on, so all of this, you 
10 
can 
see 
that 
there 
is 
a 
relationship 
between 
the 
determined fight against corruption by the Board on one 
side and those that don’t want that work to continue and 
we had nobody to protect that Board.  At some point I was 
the only one dealing with the issue of corruption, at one 
point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And this was at a time when you had 
previously told the top 6 of the Governing party, you had 
told the responsible Minister – Minister responsible for 
PRASA what was going on, you were busy trying to get 
20 
corruption – allegations of corruption investigated properly 
and of course, you had resisted the suggestion – I don’t 
know if it was a suggestion or by – on your evidence by the 
former President to say, the Board must take back Mr 
Montana or review its decision about Montana.  So, all of 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 132 of 204 
 
these 
things 
were 
happening 
after 
all 
of 
this 
had 
happened, is that right?   
MR MOLEFE:   That is so Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   So basically, what people are saying is that 
we’re going to show them that power resides here not with 
them.  Something similar to what we are experiencing in 
the United States of America now where the President of 
the country is perceived to be doing things that are flouting 
the constitution and doesn’t respect the rule of law but 
10 
because he’s a powerful man with big monies, people just 
support what he is doing and then they allowed the 
impeachment process again, his colleagues, even when 
they know that they are wrong, they stood behind it.  Then 
the next thing, what does he do, he goes and remove all 
the good – the best prosecutors out, he once promised he 
goes to the Court he wants the Judges to be – those who 
would 
ignore 
the 
basic 
tenets 
of 
the 
law 
and 
the 
constitution and defend him as a person and we have seen 
it here. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MOLEFE:   We have seen it with our own President and 
all of those people representing the Governing party in 
Parliament.  We’re behaving as if we didn’t see anything 
wrong 
with 
how 
public 
funds 
were 
appropriated 
for 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 133 of 204 
 
personal benefits.  They defended that position until the 
Courts decided – okay because we are failing to do what 
you’re supposed to do, we as a Court will tell you what the 
right thing is. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  
MR MOLEFE:   So, there is a danger in allowing this kind 
of abuse of power, abuse of office by anybody, because it 
can lead to losses of lives, it can destroy the economy and 
livelihoods 
of 
ordinary 
citizens 
and 
it 
is 
important, 
therefore, that there must be people that stand up against 
10 
this and by the way, and I said so before, the fundamental 
issue that drives us to be our values and principles, rather 
than to say, I have a membership card, this party, I love 
these colours of this party, it’s not about the party, it’s 
about the liberties, the rights and freedoms of ordinary 
South Africans because even when people engaged in 
challenging the old system it was not so that a particular 
party must be the one that must be one that is in power it 
was so that South Africans must be able to choose who 
must govern. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m yes, no thank you Mr Molefe. 
ADV SONI SC:   Mr Molefe on a number of occasions 
you’ve referred to the Swifambo matter, you remember? 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes sir. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now I just want to point out, Mr Chairman, 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 134 of 204 
 
I don’t need to take either the witness or you there, that in 
fact, the judgement in the High Court in the Swifambo 
matter 
was 
handed 
down 
on 
the 
3 r d 
of 
July 
2017…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   During the – 2017, that would be their 
last month, the last month of the Board. 
ADV SONI SC:   It’s about the time that all of these things 
were coming out and the significance of that will come out 
in later evidence as Molefe is going to testify. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay that’s fine. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   But that date is important Chairperson 
because you would think that where a Board has saved the 
country R3.5billion there would be a reward in terms of, do 
further service for the country but they are snuffed out as 
Mr Molefe says by getting people not continue serving on 
the Board, 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja well one keeps on looking for 
patterns because there was evidence in relation to Denel 
that the Board that was there before 2015 or that left in 
2015, if I’m not mistaken, I don’t know whether the 
20 
Chairperson was Ms van Rensburg or Professor van 
Rensburg had done a very good job, to the extent that the 
Minister of Public Enterprises had also commended them 
for their good work and said that they are – they should 
continue, they were going to have their term extended but 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 135 of 204 
 
according to Ms van Rensburg that changed inexplicably 
and they were all either dismissed or allowed to go when 
their term expired and – except for two Board members, ja 
okay. 
ADV SONI SC:   But that is – seems to be the pattern. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now, your Board’s term of office ended 
then in July. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:   And – because you were not re-appointed 
10 
and were any of the other – well were any of the other 
Board members appointed to any of the intern Boards? 
MR MOLEFE:   There is the – the law requires that the 
Board should have a representative of the South African 
Local Government SALGA so that was the only person re-
appointed, Mr Xolile George. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was coming from…[intervenes]. 
MR MOLEFE:   Am I saying re-appointed to? 
ADV SONI SC:   To the intern Board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry he was coming from your 
20 
Board. 
MR MOLEFE:   He was coming from my Board, he had also 
been in the previous…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, he continued? 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 136 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   He knows PRASA more than anyone. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja was he the only member of your 
Board that continued beyond the time of your Board? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is so Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now, Mr Molefe can we go on – we’ve now 
dealt with the Minister or firstly we dealt with the President 
then the Minister. On a number of occasions, you’ve 
mentioned Parliament and the Portfolio Committee, what 
10 
steps did you make to secure protection for your Board 
from Parliament and/or the Portfolio Committee. 
MR 
MOLEFE: 
 
 
Maybe 
before 
we 
deal 
with 
that, 
Chairperson, 
we 
should 
also, 
maybe 
counsel 
knows 
whether he wants to bring it, this Minister, Maswanganyi 
sent two business men to my house, both of whom came 
from his province, Limpopo…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry just raise your voice a bit. 
MR MOLEFE:   Both of whom came from the province, 
Limpopo. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   George Sebulela and Solo Rasta to come 
and say to me, look man – in fact they were the ones who 
got to know, even before me, that some of my Directors 
had resigned – some of the Directors had resigned and so 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 137 of 204 
 
they 
come, 
they 
say, 
your 
Directors 
have 
resigned…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s before you knew. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR MOLEFE:   And you know, the Minister says we should 
come and talk to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We should come and?  
MR MOLEFE:   Talk to you, ask you, to agree to an 
amicable separation, that he is willing to organise a media 
10 
briefing press conference where he will announce that you 
and him have agreed to part ways, that you have agreed to 
– you have decided to resign.  I said to the Minister – to 
these gentlemen go and tell the Minister that if that is what 
he wants to communicate to me, he should rather come and 
do it himself, let it not be you. I thought that was an 
important 
point 
that 
needs 
to 
be 
made 
because 
it 
emphasises the extent to which – and the lengths to which 
they were prepared to go, to get this Board out or 
especially the Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, did they share with you any 
reasons why he was saying this, why the Minister had 
asked them to say this to you or was it simply that he was 
saying, the two of you were not seeing eye to eye and I’m 
saying that, knowing that you said you had hardly worked 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 138 of 204 
 
with him here and then he sent you a letter to show cause 
why you should – the Board should not be dismissed? 
MR MOLEFE:   No, they didn’t say that Chairperson, the 
only reason they were latching on was that, look, you now 
do not have a complete Board you don’t have a quorum.  
Which is what you will see later, when I have a meeting 
with the Minister which would have happened before these 
guys came because I insisted on meeting with him to say, 
look I need to talk to you about PRASA and you need to 
come and meet with the Board.  He was not interested in 
10 
any other thing I wanted to say to him, his first prize was 
to drive home the fact that there is no quorum so we don’t 
have a Board and he is not going to appoint a Board, so 
he’s basically saying, why don’t you go.  So, these guys 
come now to continue what he was telling me when I met 
him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, could it mean that he was reluctant 
to take any action that you could challenge in Court and 
wanted you to agree to resign, failing which then, you’d 
just have to be there but not be able to do anything 
20 
because the Board did not have a quorum? 
MR MOLEFE:   I think earlier on, he wanted to find an easy 
way of …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Getting rid of you. 
MR MOLEFE:   Dissolving the Board because as we can 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 139 of 204 
 
see, by June he had mustered enough courage now, to 
want to take us to Court on which he attempt he retreated 
as soon as we wrote to him and told him that, you’re 
actually trying to achieve the same things that your 
predecessor tried to achieve but you’re trying to do it by 
different means.  So, I think he wanted to do it quietly, I 
think he didn’t want damage, maybe publicity or something 
because when you do it that way, you are the only one who 
talks and say, no the Chairman came, he said to me he’s 
resigning, I’ve accepted his resignation, it was a clinical 
10 
way of doing it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SONI SC:   And about when was that meeting, did 
those two gentlemen come to you? 
MR MOLEFE:   I have to check but I think around April or 
so, maybe somewhere there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That’s April 2017?  
MR MOLEFE:   2017, April/May 2017. 
ADV SONI SC:   So just more or less about the time he 
came because he was appointed the end of March? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he had not even met you or the 
Board in your capacity as Chairperson of the Board and the 
Board? 
MR MOLEFE:   He had never met the Board, but I had 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 140 of 204 
 
asked to see him. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   To persuade him, firstly, that he has to 
make sure that his nominee attends meetings, that National 
Treasury sends its representatives and begin the process 
of filling the vacant post but we were not able to discuss 
much when I met him, he was not interested in the affairs 
of PRASA.  His main business was to see how soon this 
Board could go. 
CHAIRPERSON: Did you, by any chance know each other 
10 
before he became Minister, the two of you, I’m just 
wondering why somebody who has just been appointed as 
Minister of Transport who is asked by the Chairman of the 
Board of PRASA for a meeting and to be introduced to the 
Board won’t seem to be keen on that but the next thing he 
wants the Board to show cause why they should not be 
dismissed?   
MR MOLEFE:   I got to know him when he was a member of 
the Portfolio Committee on transport but he had been a 
young member of the governing party, a member of the 
20 
youth league and I think, later on he worked for the 
government of Limpopo but I didn’t know him that well.  I 
got to really see him at the Portfolio Committee meetings, 
so we don’t really have any history or relationship. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 141 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:   Now, Mr Molefe, just before we finish with 
the need for a Board are you aware that in terms of the 
PFMA, every public entity must have a Board of control 
because that is the Accounting Authority for that public 
entity? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   And was this ever discussed at any time in 
your meetings with either of the Ministers, Minister Dipuo 
Peters or Minister Maswanganyi? 
MR MOLEFE:   Well Chairperson with regard to Minister 
10 
Dipuo Peters it was not necessary to discuss it because 
the Board was there, the only time when there were 
problems 
with 
the 
Board 
was 
when 
she 
decided, 
unilaterally and without any due process or notification to 
the Directors that she was dissolving the Board, so – and 
once she had done so, I mean, the battle lines were drawn 
there was no time to negotiate, safe now in Court now to 
say what counsel is saying now in the Court papers which 
is what we did.  The other Minister, knows very well as a 
former member of the Portfolio Committee and also having 
20 
worked in government, knew that the Board needed to be 
there for State owned entities and in fact, when you read 
his long letter to me, to the Board, addressed to me, he 
does say that the Board is the Accounting Authority, so he 
knows very well.  So we – Chairperson, I say, this Minister 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 142 of 204 
 
the last one, Maswanganyi, never made time to meet with 
the Board except when I met him alone and in that instance 
I raised the fact that the Board has to go and account in 
Parliament, the financial year is and has just ended and 
we’re finalising the audit we’ve got to go to the Board, 
we’ve got to go and report the annual reports to the Board.  
So that is all I could say and, not interested in that, he 
simply says, ja but your real Board does not have a 
quorum. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he should be playing a critical role 
10 
to make sure that the Board has a quorum because one of 
the nominees – one of the people who must be Board 
members is from his department and another one should 
come from the department of his colleague in Treasury? 
MR MOLEFE:   No, he knew Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SONI SC:   Sir I don’t want to flog the point but this is 
what concerns me, you earlier said that the PRASA Act 
doesn’t make provision for an interim Board. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes Chairperson. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   So, they must have known that what they 
are doing is not in compliance with the law but they’ve 
done so for five and a half years.  I’m just emphasising the 
point that, that’s the extent to which your Board appears to 
have irritated them at the very least. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 143 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes Chairperson, the – ja I don’t know 
because, how they will justify that and I don’t know how 
the Cabinet allows that to happen, I don’t know how the 
President of the country and Deputy President of the 
country would allow for this thing to continue, I don’t know 
how the Minister of Finance, who runs Treasury, would 
allow this to go on because even if the Court might have 
wanted to forgive you, they might have said, maybe well 
you know, government cannot allow for a vacuum to exist 
they needed to find something to run but the fact that when 
10 
they have the time they are not even beginning the process 
of ensuring that a substantive Board has been appointed.  
It’s something that is inexplicable, of course I must say 
that Minister Mbalula has recently come in and I saw that 
he has advertised, maybe PRASA will now have a Board 
after spending five years without a Board of control. 
ADV SONI SC:   Mr Molefe, can we then go on to the issue 
I raised with you about your approach to Parliament.  Now, 
we know you approached the Speaker of Parliament and 
you did so in writing, is that correct? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   That is so Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   And the letter that you wrote to her is 
Annexure PM12 to your affidavit, it appears at Bundle D, 
page 183, is that correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is so Chairperson. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 144 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:   Now, in essence, what did you want Ms 
Mbete to do in her capacity as Chairperson of – I mean as 
Speaker of Parliament? 
MR MOLEFE:   Chairperson we had tried everything in the 
book.  We had discussed with Ministers, we had attempted 
to report in Portfolio Committees, we had been to Courts, 
we had tried the Law Enforcement Agencies to assist, we 
were not getting the help we needed. I thought Parliament, 
as the National Body that represents the whole country 
might be willing to know what is happening in PRASA 
10 
because Parliament is the one, by the way, that approves 
appropriation.  When the Minister of Finance comes and 
presents the budget various department, having been 
allocated certain amounts of money must still have that 
approved by Parliament.  So it was important that the 
Speaker of Parliament takes interest in PRASA and what 
was I asking for, I was asking for a public inquiry because 
you had this many stories that are being told in the 
newspapers and what the Chairperson will read in this 
report that was written by Mr Montana for Mr Radebe, all 
20 
kinds of lies.  Now I needed to have Parliament conduct a 
robust public inquiry and then I was prepared to subject 
myself to that.  That letter went without acknowledgment, 
up to now. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now, I see that letter, if you look at page 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 145 of 204 
 
183, that letter was copied to the Chairperson of SCOPA, 
the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Transport, 
the Chief Whips of SCOPA and the Chief Whips of the 
Portfolio Committee. 
MR MOLEFE:   That’s correct Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now, in support of your request for a 
public inquiry or Parliamentary inquiry you raise a number 
of points in paragraph 5, in essence, what were you saying 
to Ms Mbete? 
MR MOLEFE:   Should I read the paragraph? 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   In light of the fact that not much came out 
but if you could just indicate because we just want to know 
what is it that was brought to her attention? 
MR MOLEFE:   Well I was bringing to her attention, the 
fact that PRASA does not have a group CEO and that it is 
important for PRASA to have the group CEO and therefore 
to investigate, they should get the minutes that would 
account for that in a sense. 
 
And the second one was to deal with a number of 
contracts, informed them about civil proceedings that were 
20 
under way to the tune of R7 billion and the fact that we are 
basically seeking to have them set aside and then, of 
course, the steps that were being taken by way of 
disciplining employees who were found to have conducted 
themselves in a manner unbecoming.   
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 146 of 204 
 
Then, of course, I dealt also with my engagement or 
PRASA’s engagement with the Directorate for Priority 
Crime Investigations, the Hawks, and the NPA and the 
reports that were given them in terms of the requirement of 
the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act.   
 
So really to give a status report and to say these 
are challenges, they require a deeper inquiry by parliament 
and it should be a public one. 
ADV SONI SC:   And then you make mention in paragraph 
6 about comments made by members of the Portfolio 
10 
Committee on the 7 and 8 March that year. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, Chairperson, it is the meeting that I 
could not attend of the Portfolio Committee on Transport 
and that meeting was happening over two days.  The report 
I got from the directors was that they were simply 
subjected to abuse, insults.  The agenda that they were 
given on which the discussion was supposed to be 
conducted was just ignored, everything was just attacked, 
attacked about Swifambo, why are you going to court with 
these people, why are you appointing private investigators 
20 
when you should be using the South African Police 
Services?  But we know South African Police Services was 
crippled by that time, you were not going to get anything 
out of them at the time because systems were broken.   
 
So basically, that is what we were saying and I was 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 147 of 204 
 
indicating that, of course, our term of office is also ending 
soon and that it was important that for those matters be 
dealt with and would like to account on those matters.   
ADV SONI SC:   So based on that you formally asked for a 
parliamentary inquiry into the affairs of PRASA? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct, ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   What was the reaction to this letter? 
MR MOLEFE:   No response, no acknowledgement, up to 
today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is from the Speaker, what about the 
10 
other people that you copied? 
MR MOLEFE:   None of them.  I think SCOPA.  SCOPA was 
in the process of arranging for us to meet and not an 
inquiry per se but we did go to SCOPA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   To report on some of these matters and 
they also came to visit PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:   But save for that there was no response 
and nothing active was done to  - from parliament’s side to 
20 
probe PRASA. 
MR MOLEFE:   There was nothing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you at any stage get to know 
whether particularly the Speaker did receive your letter?  
Did you get to know whether formally or informally? 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 148 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   I asked the company secretary if the letter 
would have been sent by email but it would also have been 
hand delivered.  I did, I did …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   I was assured by the company secretary 
that it was delivered. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It had been sent. 
MR MOLEFE:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV SONI SC:   Then you also on the same day, this is the 
10 
8 March, you wrote to the Chairperson of the Portfolio 
Committee on Transport and that letter is at page 187 and 
it is marked annexure PM13, is that correct? 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now in this letter you mention a number of 
points which are similar to the points that you make to the 
Speaker.  If I could just start off at paragraph 5.  You say: 
“The 
above 
investigations 
have 
revealed 
more 
irregularities and corruption and obliged the board 
to take the following steps.” 
20 
And you indicate that those steps …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   Is that paragraph 5? 
ADV SONI SC:   Sorry, paragraph 5 on page 188, 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, yes, yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   Can you indicate what you said to the 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 149 of 204 
 
Portfolio Committee as to the steps the board had taken?  
If you could just summarise that? 
MR MOLEFE:   Well, the – really, the contents of this letter 
are more or less similar to what – that of the Speaker of 
Parliament.  We were again indicating that the Auditor-
General’s 
report 
of 
2014/2015 
financial 
year, 
which 
identified irregular expenditure to the tune of 550 million 
was – should I not just rather read because, you know, to 
talk, I think it is going to be difficult. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, if you can identify important 
10 
features that you can read, you can read.  I think Mr Soni 
is trying to avoid that …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   No, it is basically to say what we have been 
doing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   There has been the Public Protector ’s 
report, 
Auditor-General’s 
report, 
there 
have 
been 
investigations that we have conducted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   And there are certain steps that we had 
20 
taken. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   To respond to all of those things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   And we indicated that although, for 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 150 of 204 
 
example, in 2014/2015 irregularities amounted to 550.  
Irregularities for 2015/2016 were now going to over R14 
billion and we will show what – that all of these were 
uncovered by the investigations that we had conducted. 
ADV SONI SC:   Mr Molefe, I suppose what I am trying to 
do and can I just make my point.  On that same day you 
wrote to the Speaker and you wrote to the Chairperson of 
the Portfolio Committee.   
To the Speaker you say hold an inquiry into PRASA 
but to the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee it 
10 
appears that the purpose of your report is to say given all 
that I have indicated to you that we have done, you ought 
to treat us with more respect and you say that at paragraph 
9.   
Would that – I am just trying to draw a distinction 
between the two letters where the purpose of – or the 
differences between the purposes of the two letters. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, Chairperson, the essence of my letter 
was that we are doing our job, we are responding to all 
these irregularities that have happened and the results 
20 
show 
what 
effort 
we 
are 
making 
to 
achiever 
good 
governance but your committee has so far not been 
interested in the exercising of its oversight to focus on 
things which are germane to good governance.  
 
On the contrary, you allow the meetings of the 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 151 of 204 
 
committee to be chaotic, you allow members of the 
committee to attach management and directors and attack 
their persons and that really, looking at what we are doing 
to fix this organisation, you should be showing a modicum 
of respect to the board of directors of PRASA and I said 
please, manage your meetings properly now.  
 
You do not send people an agenda that says we 
require you to come and report or account on the following 
issues.  They get there, you have forgotten about that 
agenda, people are all over the place, they are talking 
10 
about personal things, there is nothing about the country, 
about the company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Mr Soni, Mr Molefe earlier on 
asked whether he could just read this letter.  It is not a 
short letter but I think it is very important. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think let us ask him to read it.  Mr 
Molefe, please just read that letter in full, I think it is very 
important. 
MR MOLEFE:   Ja.  Let me try. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   This is the letter addressed by Mr 
Molefe to Ms Dikeledi Magadzi Portfolio Committee on 
Transport.  I think she was the Chair and it appears as 
annexure PM13 at page 187.  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   The subject of the letter, Chairperson, is: 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 152 of 204 
 
“Briefing(?) 12.46 by Passenger Rail Agency of 
South Africa on service delivery at Metrorail.” 
1. As you are aware, I send my apology to the 
Portfolio 
Committee 
on 
Transport, 
PCOT, 
indicating that I was not in a position to travel to 
Cape Town.  I, however, followed the proceedings 
of the PCOT.  I was shocked to learn that the 
entire first day of the PCOT proceeding was 
about a matter that the Board of Control, the 
BOC of PRASA, was not asked to bring to the 
10 
attention of the PCOT.  We were invited to 
appear before the PCOT under the guise that we 
were going to discuss Metrorail operations.  We 
prepared a presentation for the POCT on this 
basis and spent money in ensuring the presence 
of PRASA’s officials critical to operations to 
appear before the POCT.  
2. The leadership of PRASA is aggrieved that the 
BOC and key officials of PRASA were brought 
into the [indistinct] 14.18 Chambers of Parliament 
20 
to discuss a matter that should not occupy the 
time 
and 
attention 
of 
the 
PCOT 
and 
were 
subjected to a barrage of false accusations, 
grossly 
[indistinct] 
14.33 
members 
and 
assassinations of character under your watch.  I 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 153 of 204 
 
request the Chairperson of the PCOT to urge 
members 
to 
desist 
from 
abusing 
the 
parliamentary 
privileges 
and 
immunity 
by 
assailing the characters of leadership of PRASA 
by unfounded and spurious accusations without 
producing any evidence. 
3. As the accounting authority of PRASA the board 
appreciates that parliament in general and your 
committee in particular is one of the most 
important 
stakeholders 
that 
PRASA 
has 
to 
10 
account to.  However, in the interest of proper 
accounting and mutual respect the board cannot 
be ambushed with a topic that does not add value 
to the work of PRASA and be subjected to a 
situation where that topic is treated in a way that 
is grossly unfair and is a distraction from the 
work of the committee. 
The letter of Mr Letsoalo is a very simple one and 
has been dealt with and formalised by the board 
and 
the 
minister. 
 
In 
accordance 
with 
good 
20 
governance 
the 
Minister 
has 
received 
a 
comprehensive report on 3 March 2017.  On 1 
March 2017 the minister terminated the secondment 
of Letsoalo.  Now before you and your committee 
accuse the board of being involved in dispute after 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 154 of 204 
 
dispute, the board has been engaged in a difficult 
process 
of 
restoring 
order, 
good 
corporate 
governance and enforcing controls in an institution 
where 
these 
have 
been 
deliberately 
and 
systematically destroyed over several years. In this 
regard we urge you to familiarise yourselves with  
(a) 
The Auditor-General’s 
report 
of 
2014/2015 
financial 
year 
which 
identified 
irregular 
expenditure 
to 
the 
tune 
of 
550 
million.  
According to the PFMA the board is obliged to 
10 
investigate 
the 
instance 
of 
irregular 
expenditure, and 
(b) 
The Public Protector ’s report entitled Derailed 
which found widespread maladministration and 
breakdown of processes and systems and 
recommended that the board and National 
Treasury investigate every contract above 10 
million and concluded between 2012 and 2015. 
(c) 
The Auditor-General’s 
report 
of 
2015/2016 
financial 
year 
which 
identified 
irregular 
20 
expenditure to the tune of 14 billion.  This 
irregular expenditure was uncovered by the 
investigations that were conducted under the 
purview of the board of PRASA.” 
Now paragraph 5: 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 155 of 204 
 
”The 
above 
investigations 
have 
revealed 
more 
irregularities and corruption and obliged the board 
to take the following steps. 
(a) 
Provided about 69 reports in terms of Section 
23 of the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt 
Activities Act. 
(b) 
Assisted the Hawks in their investigations of 
the alleged corruption and money laundering 
in Swifambo and Siyangena contracts. 
(c) 
Launched a review application in respect of 
10 
the Siyangena and Swifambo contracts.” 
6. 
Operationally 
the 
investigations 
assisted 
PRASA to identify those contracts that were 
awarded to people who had neither the 
capacity nor the ability to carry out the 
contracts that were awarded to them.  These 
contracts are the reasons for the constant 
failure in operations. 
7. 
It is very easy for any person who is 
oblivious to the amount of that corruption 
20 
and incompetence that we discovered in the 
wake of the departure of the former Group 
CEO to assume that all the challenges of 
PRASA were caused by the board.  We, we 
have 
frankly 
and 
honestly 
shared 
our 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 156 of 204 
 
frustrations and challenges with the PCOT. 
 
As 
stated 
above, 
it 
is 
through 
our 
investigations 
that 
we 
have 
uncovered 
almost 14 billion in irregular expenditure.  
This is almost 90 percent of PRASA’s annual 
expenditure.  It is almost impossible to 
ensure quality services where almost all the 
expenditure is irregular. 
8. 
The board has implored management to 
proceed with the quality assurance of the 
10 
draft turnaround strategy and process as per 
the discussion of November 2016.  We 
believe that once this has been adopted 
PRASA would be in a position to show the 
positive and quality fruits of the money that 
is spent by the fiscus to support the work of 
this important cog in our economy.  
9. 
We implore you to ensure that PCOT avoids 
sensational narrow sideshows of individuals 
and focus on constructively interrogating the 
20 
presentation on Metrorail operations as per 
the invitation.  We value any constructive 
engagement that s meant to improve the 
experience of millions of commuters that 
PRASA is mandated to move every day.  We 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 157 of 204 
 
had expected that the PCOT will focus on 
this and not on a matter that concerns a 
tripartite agreement that has lapsed.” 
So that is the letter. I needed to say, by the way, 
Chairperson, when I wrote this letter, one of the directors 
in parliament had implored me to – because after they 
briefed me, they said no, write to the Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   And I did that immediately. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Thank you. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   Mr Chairperson, you are quite correct, it 
is important that this letter is on record.  I was trying to 
short circuit but I think it was led by …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, it is not criticism on your 
part because you do know that we are trying to strike a 
balance between being quick and – but at the same time 
doing justice to the issues. 
ADV SONI SC:   Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it is not criticism on your part, it is 
just that while Mr Molefe was giving evidence I had a look 
20 
at it and I thought it is important.  Actually – ja, okay. 
ADV SONI SC:   No, but with respect, Chairperson, that is 
the balance I should have struck. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   Let him read the letter. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 158 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, that is alright, that is alright. 
ADV SONI SC:   No to this letter did you get any response, 
Mr Molefe? 
MR 
MOLEFE: 
 
 
No 
response, 
Chairperson. 
 
That, 
Chairperson, is now a deputy minister, she is now a deputy 
minister. 
ADV SONI SC:   So the ball …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and did she ever acknowledge 
receipt of this letter? 
MR MOLEFE:   No acknowledgement, nothing. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   You write to the Minister of Transport, 
Minister Maswanganyi after his appointment and as I recall 
you request a meeting for him to meet the board.  There is 
no response, is that right?  There is no response? 
MR MOLEFE:   No response, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There may be other letters you wrote to 
which there was no response but you write to – you also 
write to the Speaker of Parliament raising very important 
issues about PRASA.  You get no response.  You copy a 
number 
of 
people 
in 
parliament 
and 
except 
for 
the 
20 
Chairperson of SCOPA it looks like nobody reacts or even 
acknowledges receipt and you write to the Chairperson of 
the Portfolio Committee on Transport to which PRASA and 
the board accounts, you raise very important issues yet 
again you get no response, not even an acknowledgement 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 159 of 204 
 
of receipt.  Is that right?  That is what happened.   
MR MOLEFE:   That is what happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is what happened, Chairperson.  The 
message in that silence is very clear, we do not want you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, that is what I am …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   You should not be there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what I am …[intervenes] 
MR MOLEFE:   So we are not going to dignify you with an 
answer. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what I am trying to understand 
because the lack of response could be inefficiency, could 
be incompetence but it could be – could also be just a 
refusal to deal with you and can it be incompetence with all 
of these people?  Can it be inefficiency with all of these 
people or is it that all of them were simply not prepared to 
interact with you?  And I think from what you have said, 
you would think that it probably was not incompetence or 
inefficiency, it was an attitude based on not wanting to deal 
with you or – maybe I do not know whether this was a way 
20 
of dealing with you, it was an attitude that we do not want 
to have anything to do with you. 
MR MOLEFE:   Well, I wrote many letters, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   At least I know that Mr Sean Abrahams 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 160 of 204 
 
replied my letters.  He was not going to do what I was 
saying he should do but I at least he replied, you know?  
Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now, Mr Molefe, in your letter to the 
Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee you talk about the 
meeting of the 7 t h and 8 t h of 2017 – 7 t h and 8 t h March 2017.  
But in your affidavit, you then go on to say but that is how 
throughout our tenure as board members we had been 
treated and I would like you to deal with that because you 
10 
deal with it from paragraph 105 of your affidavit.  Or if you 
could just from recollection indicate to the Chairperson 
that what happened at that meeting was not something new 
to us. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes, Chairperson, it was really not 
something new and again, things changed after we agree 
with Mr Montana that he would not get another contract 
and after we insist that as a board we should do what the 
Public Protector is asking us to do, answer the questions 
she is asking and investigate those matters that she 
20 
wanted us to discuss.  So all of that and up to the 
dismissal of Mr Montana. 
 
So we start seeing this behaviour.  I was going to 
say, Chairperson, that if one looks at some of the things 
that I say, the Portfolio Committee was saying to my 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 161 of 204 
 
directors, they are pretty similar to the contents of this 
report that was …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The Turmoil in PRASA report? 
MR MOLEFE:   The PRASA in Turmoil. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The PRASA in Turmoil report. 
MR MOLEFE:   Now it does give one the impression that it 
too was shared with them.  So it is an organised group.  
The basis of that organisation is how to get rid of this 
board, how to stop their investigations into corruption. 
 
Now repeatedly, therefore, when the directors went 
10 
to the Portfolio Committee, it was just a circus.  It was a 
circus, sometimes somebody just stands up and say we 
understand and employee somewhere is being purged 
because he is not wanted, he is not supporter of this board 
or because you believe he is a supporter of Lucky 
Montana.  Now you do not have that nonsense, that’s what 
the Department of Transport should investigate if it thinks 
that the Board is not doing what it is supposed to, but that 
is what they are doing.  We often got the impression that 
there is some kind of rehearsal before we appear before 
20 
the Portfolio Committee.  Our engagements were always 
hostile and acrimonious, and when people asked questions 
it was something akin to people who have gone through 
chorography of some point, you know your party this one 
played, and sometimes you would see that they sat 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 162 of 204 
 
somewhere 
writing 
questions 
and 
they 
distributed 
questions amongst themselves and you literally hear them 
saying having covered that one that question, having 
covered that question, it is not about them listening to the 
reports that is placed before them and then responding to 
that report, it is about what they were told by somebody 
from outside to ask the Directors when they come to 
Parliament. 
 
So that is how that Portfolio Committee was playing 
its role and when you say to them we need to focus on the 
10 
business of the committee they say you are not going to 
tell us how to do our job. 
ADV VAS SONIC SC:   You will look at the Chairperson but 
I want to ask you in relation to what appears to be a 
choreographed presentation on their side did that apply 
only to the ruling party or was it among the opposition 
parties as well? 
MR MOLEFE:   It was mainly the ruling party, it was the 
ruling party, you would have thought that the ruling party 
knowing that it is the government of the day and the SOE’s 
20 
that it is in charge of that they would try to assist those 
SOE’s to do their job properly and protect them.  It wasn’t 
so. 
ADV VAS SONIC SC:   Surely – can I ask you, because it 
is related to this issue; in paragraph 108 on page 27 of 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 163 of 204 
 
your affidavit if you could just read that into the record 
because I want to ask a couple of questions around that 
relating to the role of the different parties in the portfolio 
committee.   
MR MOLEFE:   The paragraph 108 reads as follows 
Chairperson: 
“In my view the Portfolio Committee focused on 
trying to find wrongdoing with the investigations 
commissioned by the BOC, the appointment of 
Werksmans and regulatory of BOC meetings.” 
10 
Now – should I wait – now when you talk about irregularity 
of the Board meetings then I am pleased that I mentioned 
it before.  When you go to the PRASA in Turmoil document 
there is a long complaint there and actually it lists the 
number of meetings that the Board have. 
 
Now that was discussed clearly with this Portfolio 
Committee and the Portfolio Committee has become his 
Master ’s Voice on this issue, that you are meeting too 
much, you hold too many meetings.  You should be meeting 
only four times.   Now there’s nowhere where meetings are 
20 
restricted to four times, the Companies Act requires, and of 
course the Public Finance Management Act would also say 
so, that the Board should meet a minimum of four times per 
annum, but the meetings of a Board are determined by the 
work that has to be done, and for a long time by the way 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 164 of 204 
 
these meetings were taking place and they were not being 
paid for, there was only somewhere it was the end when 
that happened and it turned out that the Minister had not 
approved a policy and I said well if the policy has not been 
approved money must be paid back and I was the first to 
pay it back. 
ADV VAS SONIC SC:   Now you say, and this is my point, 
that in your letter of the 8 t h of March 2017 you say to the 
Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee that we have 
investigated the following matter, the Swifambo matter, the 
10 
Siyangena matter and other matters worth billions of Rands.  
You 
say 
here 
that 
instead 
of 
concentrating 
on 
the 
wrongdoing of possible tenderers and management they 
were concentrating on things that they said the Board was 
doing, notwithstanding that the amounts you were talking 
about were billions of rands. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONIC SC:   What I want to ask in that 
connection is but surely the opposition parties would have 
said no but what are you doing about Siyangena, can you 
20 
give us a report, can you give us a report on Swifambo, we 
understand you have taken them to Court, or was there not 
a voice for them? 
MR MOLEFE:   No there was a voice, I mean they were 
asking about those, there were also those who were 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 165 of 204 
 
genuinely 
concerned 
about 
operations 
of 
Metrorail, 
especially in the Western Cape, so they were asking and 
by the way I can now say so, that when it became clear 
that this committee is not interested in what we are doing I 
invited willing Parliamentarians, even from the opposition, 
to visit and see, meet with the investigators to see the 
work that we were doing, because the Portfolio Committee 
was not allowing that space for a proper report, or if it was 
there it was not allowing for a discussion of that report. 
ADV VAS SONIC SC:   So when you say you called willing 
10 
Parliamentarians are you saying Parliamentarians who 
were not part of the Portfolio Committee but who were 
interested in PRASA’s ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   No, no, no, who were part of the Portfolio 
Committee. 
ADV VAS SONIC SC:   Oh. 
MR MOLEFE:   Some of them of course would have been in 
SCOPA. 
ADV VAS SONIC SC:   And were there also members of the 
ruling party or none of their members? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   No there were not members of the ruling 
party. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But what you are saying is did you give 
an open invitation to individuals who were members of the 
committee 
who 
were 
interested 
in 
coming 
to 
see 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 166 of 204 
 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   No, no, no, I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   It was individuals that you ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   It was individuals who were showing 
interest in what we were doing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
MR MOLEFE:   And who were realising that sitting in those 
sectors of meetings they were not going to get proper 
information. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Were meetings of the committee, 
10 
as far as you know, being mechanically recorded, as far as 
you know? 
MR MOLEFE:   They are supposed to be. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, because it would be good to get the 
transcripts of what was being said, particularly in meetings 
between the Board and this committee over the years that 
you have indicated here, 2015, 2016, 2017. 
MR MOLEFE:   It would certainly be good to do so 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I didn’t hear that. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:    I said it will be good, it will be helpful. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes.   I have been told that – I 
don’t know whether with all portfolio committees, but with 
some 
committees 
or 
all 
committees 
don’t 
record 
in 
Parliament, 
they 
make 
notes 
and 
only 
the 
National 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 167 of 204 
 
Assembly records mechanically, so I don’t know to what 
extent that information is correct, but if there is a 
transcript or transcripts we should try and get. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, and if we don’t get that we 
nevertheless should try and get maybe two or so other 
people, either from the Board, your Board, or from the 
Committee who can tell us some of the things that were 
happening in that Committee during the time of your Board, 
you have said in paragraph 106 of your affidavit the 
10 
meetings of the Portfolio Committees during 2015, 2016 
and 2017 could best be described as chaotic.    
 
So it is very important, you get put in a committee 
in Parliament so that you can exercise a very important 
responsibility of oversight. 
MR MOLEFE:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If now members of a committee instead 
of doing their job they might actually not be doing their job 
properly while an entity such as PRASA was losing billions 
of Rands through corruption, it will really be very important 
20 
to see exactly what was happening.  Were they turning a 
blind eye to massive corruption that you wanted to tell 
them about, resulting in the country losing billions in that 
entity, billions of Rands in that entity, and they were 
interested in other things.   Let us know if that is what was 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 168 of 204 
 
happening so I would like to know if there are transcripts 
so that these things can be put in the open, because I keep 
on saying when we see SOE’s, or a number of them, being 
in the positions in which they are now in 2020 financially 
we have got to go back and say when did it start, but 
Parliament was supposed throughout to be overseeing, to 
be exercising oversight and where was it as the situation in 
each of these SOE’s was deteriorating every year, where 
was Parliament, what was Parliament doing?  Where were 
the Portfolio Committees, what were they doing about it? 
10 
 
So I think Mr Soni you know there should be an 
attempt to try and see if you can get transcripts, if there 
are any transcripts of all of those meetings between the 
Board, this Board and the Portfolio Committee during those 
years. 
ADV VAS SONIC SC:   Yes, okay.  Mr Molefe when the 
Parliamentarians who displayed a genuine interest in fixing 
up PRASA’s problems, if I can put it that way, when they 
met with you and other members of the Board, what was 
their impression of the – sorry – what was their impression 
20 
of what the Board was uncovering?   I mean we have 
heard, because we have seen the court reports like 
Swifambo, Siyangena, what was their reaction? 
MR MOLEFE:   Any normal being would be shocked by the 
level, the extent of this corruption, and they were shocked 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 169 of 204 
 
and they wanted action.  They wanted action.  And when 
the Chairperson says were they not concerned that these 
things were happening.  If they were concerned, they 
would have supported my efforts to compel the Hawks to 
investigate their cases and to explain to us why they are 
not discharging their constitutional duty.  That should have 
been the work done by Parliamentarians, so they were not 
doing it. 
 
But I am saying the opposition was supporting, look 
Swifambo, because they – sometimes they are political 
10 
parties so they will try to score points against one another.  
The articles we were reading this morning, we were looking 
at this morning there is a section where the EFF specifically 
raises concern about the fact that PRASA was spending 
R3.5billion on locomotives that are dysfunctional, that are 
not fit for purpose. 
 
So we want people to be saying these things from all 
kinds of parties because it is about the country now, it is 
not about sectarian interest, it is about all of our people. 
ADV VAS SONIC SC:   I am raising it in the context of how 
20 
a democracy can better function if you have more effective 
public representatives, even if they belong to a minority 
party.  For example could a Parliamentarian not write to 
the Hawks and say but what’s happening to the Swifambo 
matter, what’s happening to the Siyangena matter? 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 170 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:   I suppose if Parliamentarians could do that, 
that is what Dr Helen Suzman used to do, those many 
years when she was the only Parliamentarian of the PFP, 
but if there is a particular agenda that is being pursued, 
and you have the governing party that has got a leader like 
the current President of the United States who is doing 
what he is doing, people are dying of Covid-19 and he 
doesn’t encourage people to be like you Chairperson and 
me wearing masks, he just goes there, he organises indoor 
big meetings and he breaks the system to appoint cronies 
10 
as prosecutors, as judges, so if the Hawks are run by 
cronies, people with a particular agenda, not agenda of 
enforcing the rule or ensuring the rule of law, if they are 
not ensuring the rule of law they can – opposition can 
guide to them, nothing will happen.  Nothing will happen. 
 
As the Honourable Chairperson would have noticed 
in many instances in this country things got right only after 
the courts decided on that, because people don’t want to 
do what they are supposed to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that is such a pity because 
20 
sometimes people, not sometimes, very often people who 
might want to take issues to Court don’t have money to 
take those issues to Court and then – so it is just in certain 
circumstances where somebody is able to assist or some 
organisation is able to assist to bring matters to court but 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 171 of 204 
 
if Parliament were to play its part correctly and if it were to 
play its part correctly it seems that there is a lot of damage 
that could be prevented from happening and a lot of 
financial loss that could be prevented, that the country 
would otherwise suffer. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is true Chairperson.   Just to return to 
the point that was made by Counsel, yes indeed if and 
what the Chairperson is saying now, if indeed people who 
go 
to 
Parliament 
understand 
that 
they 
are 
public 
representatives they might have gotten in there using a 
10 
party ticket, but once they are in Parliament they are not 
representing sectarian interest of a party, they represent 
those ordinary men and women in the villages, in the 
townships, on the farms, who are poor, they have become 
the voice of the people because those people cannot be 
there at Parliament in their millions, so they must make 
sure that what they say there and what they decide 
correctly reflect the experiences of the people that they 
claim to represent, so it is important to do that, and I do 
think that as Counsel says that if we have more and more 
20 
of such people our democracy will function better, because 
it would mean even the most powerful of the parties will 
not take for granted the support of the voters, they would 
know that the voters will learn something further by 
listening to the opposition because the opposition is 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 172 of 204 
 
talking to those things that are touching their souls and 
their hearts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And in the process a lot of money that is 
lost to corruption could be used for the needs of the 
people, because the needs of the people – the people have 
a lot of needs that need government to attend to, and 
those needs need money.  Now if Parliament doesn’t do a 
job properly and corruption levels just keep on going up 
then the money that is lost through corruption goes to a 
few, instead of being able to be used for the majority of 
10 
citizens. 
 
Yes Mr Soni I see we are – we have gone past four 
o’clock but I would like if possible that we finish with Mr 
Molefe because I am sure he would like to be able to go 
and do other things. Can we continue Mr Molefe, is that 
alright with you? 
MR MOLEFE:   Now? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, straight ja. 
MR MOLEFE:   I am happy to continue until we finish Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes okay, okay. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   I will talk less going forward. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that ...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:   No, that you cannot do because this is 
going to be an important part of your evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, all of the things that you have been 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 173 of 204 
 
saying are important. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, now you then say that at paragraph 
111 that you were concerned and you used some strong 
language, could you read that into the record what you say 
at paragraph 111? 
MR MOLEFI:   It reads as follows Chairperson. 
“I found the conduct of the members of the Portfolio 
Committee to be disgraceful and it appeared from 
their line of questioning that they appeared to have 
been lobbied to compel the BOC to stop the 
10 
investigations.  The looting of the public purse and 
holding 
those 
responsible 
for 
such 
looting 
accountable appears not to be important to them at 
all.” 
Now the pattern Chairperson here is the same, I mean you 
go to – you look at the conduct of Minister Maswanganyi, 
you look at the conduct of Minister Dipuo Peters much later, 
now in 2017, and you look at the conduct of the President 
and Minister Radebe that evening in a meeting, it is all 
about how do we frustrate this drive to end corruption. 
20 
 
Now I don’t know what it is that all of these people 
have in common, what is it that draws them so close to one 
another that they would not disagree on issues that are so 
obvious. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now you mentioned that they even asked 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 174 of 204 
 
for the investigators, namely Werksmans Attorneys, to be 
subjected to an SAA vetting. 
MR MOLEFI:   That is so.  That is so Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   And you say that that is the first time that 
any investigator had been subjected to that requirement. 
MR MOLEFI:   Investigator or investigation, I don’t mind if 
an 
investigator 
who 
is 
investigating 
a 
government 
department, because government departments deal a lot 
with classified information, if the State Security says we 
have got to make sure that these people are going to have 
10 
access to classified documents are vetted, are people who 
can be trusted, it is understandable, but you cannot go out 
there in the general public of South Africa and say every 
company must be vetted by State Security Agency, they 
have got far more work to do to protect the country than to 
worry about vetting people who are investigating corrupt 
individuals.  
ADV SONI SC:   Then the last line of paragraph 112 you 
say you link it, this requirement to certain regulations where 
you tell the Chairperson what those regulations are. 
20 
MR MOLEFI:   Well I think it is difficult to remember 
specifically now but we had ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes you can read it if you – if that will 
make it easier for you.  Paragraph 112. 
MR MOLEFI:   No, no it won’t. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 175 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh it won’t, okay. 
MR MOLEFI:   There had been revelations that people who 
were in intelligence you know got involved in corrupt 
activities there had been report about their offices being 
broken into, information disappearing.  There are instances 
actually also of monies disappearing from those offices.   
 
Now we are being asked, and some of them of 
course have been implicated in some of the contracts in 
these companies, including PRASA, now have been asked 
that they should be the ones who vet the investigators.  The 
10 
investigators are going to investigate and they have to 
investigate their conduct as well as service providers to 
PRASA, so it did not make sense to me to ask for that to be 
done except where you are looking for an elegant way of 
frustrating the investigations without appearing to be doing 
so. 
ADV SONI SC:   Then could you read from the last line of 
paragraph 112 on page 27, the word starting moreover this 
requirement of the SSA investigation.  
MR MOLEFI:   Should I read it? 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes please, just from the last line onto the 
next page. 
MR MOLEFI:    
“It was also strange to me that such SSA vetting was 
only required for Werksmans and not for any other 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 176 of 204 
 
service 
provider 
conducting 
investigations 
at 
PRASA.  Moreover, this requirement only emerged 
as more and more corruption was exposed.” 
ADV SONI SC:    Sorry the sentence continues on the next 
page. 
MR MOLEFE:   Oh, okay sorry.  Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:    Perhaps you should read that sentence 
again, it is quite key Mr Molefe. 
MR MOLEFE:   “It was strange to me ... ...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:    No, no, no starting with “moreover”. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:   Oh. 
“Moreover, this requirement only emerged as more 
and more corruption was exposed, particularly Mr 
Osler Mashaba revealed that 18million had been 
paid to individuals who claimed to be collecting the 
funds on behalf of the government party. 
ADV SONI SC:    Now can I ask you where did you get that 
information from that Mr Mashaba, Mashaba had collected 
R18million for the governing party?  Mr – also Mashaba well 
of course the investigation was reported in the media and 
20 
everywhere but he began to worry.  He apparently became 
suspicious that he – he was being investigated.  He knew it 
had to be because he was part of Swifambo, he was the 
Chairman of Swifambo that is a company that got that big 
contract for the locomotives.  He sent someone to approach 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 177 of 204 
 
a certain Mr Philemon Mamabolo who worked for PRASA in 
the security division mainly in the business investigations 
unit.  I think that is what that DIU stands for.  And he said 
he wanted to meet with the Chairman of the Board of 
PRASA – oh this individual who was unknown advised 
Mamabolo that Mashaba wants to meet with him.  So they 
met with Mamabolo somewhere in Pretoria in an Italian 
restaurant.  At that meeting he told him that he believed 
that he was being investigated and he was worried that he 
might lose all the assets that he had accumulated working 
10 
hard for.  And he did not want to lose what he had as a 
result of the contract of Swifambo.  He was a man who was 
running like filling stations.  He had all kinds of things and 
he had an engineering consulting business AM Engineering.  
So he wanted to meet with me as the Chairman of the Board 
so Mamabolo asked me, I agreed to meet with him.  We met 
in Sandton at the Maslow Hotel.  I had asked one of our 
directors Ms Matlala, Sheila Matlala to accompany me and 
so it was Mr Mamabolo.  Mashaba came and he repeated 
what he had told Mamabolo to say that he is worried that he 
20 
might lose everything that he has and he really is begging 
that we should not take whatever he asks.  He worked hard 
for which had nothing to do with Swifambo and he said that 
he – he actually had not known the founder of Swifambo 
before.  The founder of Swifambo was Makhensa Mabunda 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 178 of 204 
 
or Mabunda Makhensa.  Makhensa had approached him and 
asked him to join him become a director of Swifambo and 
become a Chairman thereof that there was a tender 
opportunity at PRASA for the locomotives.  He wants them 
to bid for that tender.  So – so he goes on and Mashaba of 
course had agreed.  But Mashaba says, I am prepared to 
co-operate provided you guys will not take my assets.  So 
he starts telling us a story about the various people whom 
he paid money to and as he was talking I said, look I do not 
think I want to go around saying you paid money to people 
10 
unless you can demonstrate by way of bank deposits that 
you actually paid money to these people and give us the 
names of those people or their companies and so on.  So he 
said he did not have the documents but he – he could make 
them available.  And when he made the documents that is 
how we got to know about this R80 million.  He did say that 
there were other monies that he paid.  I think he paid 
another R90 000.00 and he paid another R1 050 000.00 but 
those monies he said he did not have proof because he was 
– he was giving cash.  Now who are the individuals he was 
20 
paying money to?  One of them was a person who was born 
in Angola, a lady called Maria Gomez.  She ran a company 
called, I think it was called Similex and then the other one 
was an attorney George Sabelo.  I think at the time Sabelo 
was working for I think Bowmans.  I cannot remember 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 179 of 204 
 
exactly.  So – so these are the monies I cannot remember 
the rest of the monies but they are paying quite a number of 
companies.  I dealt with those details in one of the 
applications in the Swifambo Application when I was still the 
Director of PRASA.   
ADV SONI SC:  Can I just in reference to what you have 
just said your evidence in the Swifambo matter by way of 
affidavit.  May I ask you to look at Bundle D page 259? 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the same bundle in front of you is 
it not? 
10 
ADV SONI SC:    It is the same bundle in the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  The same bundle ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  Oh the same bundle okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Page 259. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  Okay 
ADV SONI SC:  So Mr Molefe have you got it? 
MR MOLEFE:  I got it.  I got it. 
ADV SONI SC:  The title of the document is a replying 
20 
affidavit, do you see that? 
MR MOLEFE:  I see yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now I am just pointing out so that we can 
put it in context.  This is your replying affidavit in the 
Swifambo matter, would that be correct? 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 180 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:  We did not include the whole replying 
affidavit we just included the parts relating to the matters 
you have dealt with now.  But can I ask you in your founding 
affidavit… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you do so. 
ADV SONI SC:  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just for the sake of completeness the 
Swifambo matter is as it appears from the affidavit of Mr 
Molefe at page 259 was case number 2015/42219 in the 
10 
Gauteng Local Division of the High Court.  The matter being 
Passenger Rail agents of South Africa versus Swifambo Rail 
Leasing Pty Limited. 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please. 
MR MOLEFE:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now in – in your replying – in your founding 
affidavit you did not raise this issue about Mr Mashaba’s 
telling you about the payment of funds.  Is that correct? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes.  Yes. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  Because that is a complaint he makes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you might need to explain to him 
that you are referring to the founding affidavit that he filed 
in the Swifambo matter. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Sorry.  You recall the case that was 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 181 of 204 
 
made out in the original – well in the founding affidavit in 
the Swifambo matter Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:  The – the case that we were making was one 
of asking the court to consider and set aside the arbitration 
step in the – in the contract between Swifambo and PRASA.  
And the reason we wanted that set aside and us proceeding 
immediately for the application to set aside the contract on 
the basis that it actually never existed.  It was invalid at the 
initial because certain conditions which should have been 
met were not met.  And it was our view that time that if we 
10 
were to go the – you go the route of arbitration.  If you 
disagree about elements of the contract but you – you do 
not accept that the contract exists but in this instance we 
were saying it does not exist so there should not be a need 
for arbitration but of course you cannot just exclude it 
unless the court set it aside. 
ADV SONI SC:  The – I am making a slightly different point.  
In your original – in your founding affidavit you did… 
MR MOLEFE:  In the Swifambo matter? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes in the Swifambo matter. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  And it is not this one this is a reply. 
ADV SONI SC:  This is your replying affidavit. 
MR MOLEFE:  So why do we not go to the founding one? 
ADV SONI SC:  No, no Mr… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh but I think he might have something… 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 182 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:  It makes it difficult. 
ADV SONI SC:  No, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  Because I will not remember. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Molefe when you first gave evidence. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  We went through the judgment of Justice 
Francis.  We went through the judgment of Justice Lewis. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes, yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  You remember? 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Because they think that this was corrupt.  
Mr Mthimkhulu so called Doctor Mthimkhulu had set aside – 
had tailor made the contract for Swifambo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Do you remember it? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  So this matter that you are raising now was 
not raised in that.  But you do raise it in the replying 
affidavit.  The only reason that is important is – because I 
20 
want to go to Mr Mashaba’s response to what you say which 
is also included in these papers. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  I am just trying to orientate you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 183 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:  So that we can deal with your evidence in a 
systematic way. 
MR MOLEFE:  Let me understand.  In that case the issue 
was the contract is not valid. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  And that is what the court found. 
MR MOLEFE:  Probably then the lawyers would have held 
that to go into the details about Mashaba does not prove 
anything with regard to that. 
ADV SONI SC:  I am not criticising. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  But maybe we can deal with it this 
10 
way.  Mr Soni you obviously have looked at his founding 
affidavit? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you know that he did not say anything 
about this issue.  You can say to him that he can accept 
that you have checked and he did not say – say anything 
about this issue and then put the question that you want to 
put. 
MR MOLEFE:  It is true and the court did not deal with it. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  So you – but in your replying affidavit 
20 
you dealt with this piece of evidence you now linked today 
to say Mr Mashaba had approached you to say, please come 
to my rescue, do not take away all my – all my assets.  
Remember you said that a little earlier? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 184 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  So is it correct that when you look at 
paragraph 9 of your affidavit what you have said today is a 
summary of what is contained in paragraph 9 of your 
affidavit. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  In other words, you have dealt with how the 
– the approach was made to you through Mr Mamabolo and 
Mr Mamabolo and what happened at the Maslow Restaurant. 
MR MOLEFE:  That – that is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  There is just one thing though that I want to 
10 
deal with is the payment schedule that he gave to you and 
you found that at page 283. 
CHAIRPERSON:  2 – on page? 
ADV SONI SC:  283. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I think let us just get that in the 
correct context.  At the meeting that you had with Mr 
Mashaba and Ms Matlala you said that Mr Mashaba said he 
did not have with him on that occasion information about or 
proof of payment – proof of payment into the bank accounts 
of the individuals concerned, is that right? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Did – did – were arrangements made 
for him to later… 
MR MOLEFE:  He did not – he did not – he – that day he 
did not have any documents. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 185 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ja that is what you said ja. 
MR MOLEFE: Any documents…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Were arrangements made for him to 
provide such proof at a later date and more information? 
MR MOLEFE:  It was made for him to provide it to 
Mamabolo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mamabolo. 
MR MOLEFE:  Who duly collected it and brought it to me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I think that is – let us – then we can 
move to the schedule ja. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. Now is the document at page 283 the 
document that he gave to Mr Mamabolo? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:  And… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry do you say 283? 
ADV SONI SC:  283 Chair yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  Is that a schedule of payments made – well 
that he said he had made? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  This is…. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry what I have at 283 is 
something that has got loan payments. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At the top is it – are we on the same 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 186 of 204 
 
page? 
ADV SONI SC:  That is – that is – yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now the Chairperson is raising an important 
issue is he at the meeting had said to you that he will send 
a schedule of payments he had made.  Because you said, 
but look you telling me that you have paid these people but 
where is the proof of payment? 
MR MOLEFE:  Hm that is true, that is what I did.  Because I 
was not going to be able to do anything with what he just 
10 
told me verbally. 
ADV SONI SC:  Ja.  Now he then sent you this document 
but as the Chairperson points out this does not say 
Schedule of Payments it says Loan Payments.  Do you see 
that? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  But that is what the document is headed. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  What did you understand notwithstanding 
what the documents – what the document is headed? 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  Well I understood it to be payment and I 
understood that the recordings of payments and loaned was 
merely for purposes of bookkeeping and auditing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So let us go back one – one step back.  
Subsequent to the meeting that you had with Mr Mashaba 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 187 of 204 
 
and Ms Matlala, Mr Mamabolo was also in the meeting? 
MR MOLEFE:  He was in the meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja subsequent to that meeting when Mr 
Mashaba gave this schedule to Ms Mamabolo did you 
understand from Mr Mamabolo that he said this is the 
schedule of payments that I promised to give or something 
to that effect? 
MR MOLEFE:  No when – Chairperson when in a meeting 
where I was present and my – and Mr Mashaba was present 
and Ms Matlala he said that he paid these monies to these 
10 
people and I say the names Maria Gomez and her company. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And Sabelo Nkosi – Nkosi Sabelo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And Knowles Husain. I think Sabelo was 
working for Knowles Husain when I tried to remember the 
company. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MOLEFE:  And he was with that firm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  So I understood it be payments not loans. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay.  So when you got this – these 
documents your understanding was this document reflects 
the payments that Mashaba had told you about? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 188 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  Then can I ask you to please look at page 
285. 
MR MOLEFE:  285? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  What is that document? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry before you go to 285. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Soni do you not want us to – do you 
not want him to tell us what schedule – this schedule 
reflects? 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At 283? 
ADV SONI SC:  I was trying – but I could do that 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay well if you are… 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  It answers the question whether it was 
a loan. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It answers your questions okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  Or … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay that is fine.  That is fine. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  So if you look at 285 what is that document 
there Mr Molefe on the face of it? 
MR MOLEFE:  Well it appears obviously it is an invoice. 
ADV SONI SC:  From whom? 
MR MOLEFE:  From – from Similex was a company owned 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 189 of 204 
 
by Ms Gomez. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Maria Gomez. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SONI SC:  If you look just under the – the heading of 
that document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think it… 
ADV SONI SC:  It says directors. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry are we looking on the same 
page?  On my document – my bundle the name Similex 
10 
appears at page 286 and on page 285 which I think is the 
page that you referred to Mr Soni unless I have missed 
something. 
ADV SONI SC:  No I.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have got consulting engineers. 
ADV SONI SC:  No you are absolutely right Chairperson.  
Because it is in I guess middle misread the 5 – I misread 
the 6 for the 5. 
CHAIRPERSON: Oh okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  But it is 286 I am sorry. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the idea is you want him to talk about 
page 285? 
ADV SONI SC:  286. 
CHAIRPERSON:  286 ja okay. 
MR MOLEFE:  But there is no 285 here. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 190 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:  No that is the document. 
MR MOLEFE:  Oh is this 286 yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  286 has got… 
MR MOLEFE:  Similex. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Similex ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  Sorry Chairperson. 
MR MOLEFE:  Okay page 285.  Oh 285 is there.  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MOLEFE:  Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  Okay we are dealing with 286.  What is the 
10 
document at 286? 
MR MOLEFE:  So this is an invoice. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  It is an invoice Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  From whom to whom? 
MR MOLEFE:  It is an invoice from Similex to AM 
Consulting Engineers.  Now AM Consulting Engineers is a 
company of Mr Mashaba. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:  That AM stands for Auswell Mashaba. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  And Similex was? 
MR MOLEFE:  Was a company owned by Maria Gomez. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  And you will see that Mr Molefe if you look 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 191 of 204 
 
under Similex the name Similex it tells you who the 
directors are, you see that?  Right at the top. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  And who are the directors? 
MR MOLEFE:  The directors are Maria Cruz Gomez and 
Domingos Gomez.  I think Domingos Gomez is her husband. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then we may as well for the sake of 
completeness indicate that that invoice is dated the 1 
10 
January 2014. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it is invoice number 002/SML/2014 
and it is for a total amount of R100 – is that – what – how 
much is that?  R14 100 000.00 is that correct? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Do you see that Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes I do Chairperson 
ADV SONI SC:  Now I just want to go back now to page 283 
20 
with this… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you do so Mr Soni, Mr Molefe are 
you able to see the description of services in respect of 
which this invoice was being issued?  Are you able to read 
what the nature of the service – services were – was? 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 192 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:  The description of services it says service 
rendered IRPTM planning and planning development. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Development and implementation. 
MR MOLEFE:  And implementation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And in terms of the rate is says 30% 
of the total amount.  You are able to see that? 
MR MOLEFE:  I can see a 30% of the total amount. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay Mr Soni you can then proceed to 
– to 283 I think you said. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  So if you look at the schedule that we 
10 
looked at there at page 283 you will see that amount has 
been reflected in the third line of the payments.  Do you see 
that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before that Mr Soni I think let us – let us 
get him to first tell us what is reflected in this schedule.  
Obviously that will include what you are talking about. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe just to read what is in the schedule 
there. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And dates. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you able to read Mr Molefe the dates, 
the payee and the amount as reflected in this schedule at 
page 283? 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 193 of 204 
 
MR MOLEFE:  Oh 283. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Where 
the 
schedule 
of 
payment 
– 
payments appears. 
MR MOLEFE:  I am going to do so Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is if it is easy otherwise Mr Soni you 
can read it in. 
MR MOLEFE:  The – there is one payee there Similex. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  And 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR MOLEFE:  Appears 5 times and then of course there are 
only the dates written there was on the 6 May 2014, 20 of 
January 2014, 10 January 2014.  The other part does not 
have the dates. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh I am sorry.  I am sorry Mr Molefe.  Let 
me just quickly read it the way we – I think we should.  
According to this schedule on the 6 May 2014 a company 
Similex 
Pty 
Limited 
was 
paid 
an 
amount 
of 
is 
that 
R9 400 000.00 Mr Soni? 
ADV SONI SC:  It is so Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And on the 20 January 2014 Similex Pty 
Ltd was paid an amount of R14 500 000.00, is that right? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And on the 10 January 2014 Similex Pty 
Ltd was paid R14 100 000.00 and no date is given for 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 194 of 204 
 
another payment to Similex Pty Limited which amounts to 
R90 000.00 and Similex was paid also another amount on a 
date that is not given for – it was paid R2 050 000.00, am I 
right? 
ADV SONI SC:  That is so yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and then the last three payments 
relate to Nkosi’s – Nkosi Sabelo Incorporated on the 11 
April 
2013 
Nkosi 
Sabelo 
Incorporated 
was 
paid 
R14 300 000.00.  And on the 22 April 2013 Nkosi Sabelo 
Incorporated was paid R14 200 000.00 and on the 22 May 
10 
2013 another entity or Nkosi Sabelo was paid two times not 
three times.  Then on the 22 May 2013 Knowles Husain 
Links Incorporated trust account – oh it also says in [Nkosi 
Sabelo Incorporated] was paid R10 400 000.00.  And there 
is an amount of R79 040 000.00 given there.  And then 
there is a handling fee of 10% seems to be given as 
R7 904 000.00 and the whole total is R86 944 000.00. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Yes we may continue. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  So comparing the – the payments or the 
invoice against the payment if you look at the invoice at 
page 286 it is dated the 1 s t of January, although it says 1 t h 
instead of saying 1 s t, first, “st” it says 1th, do you see 
that? 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 195 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That’s 1 s t January 2014. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes.  Do you see that Mr Molefe? 
ADV SONI SC:   What page are we looking at? 
ADV SONI SC:   At page 286. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
Oh, 286, okay, it says, okay yes, 
okay, the 1th of January? 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes so the amount that was paid on that 
or the amount of the invoice was R14 100 000, do you see 
that? 
MR MOLEFE:  I can see that. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:   If you compare the payments as they 
appear on page 283 do you see a similar payment made in 
the third line? 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson, it is so, a 
similar amount. 
ADV SONI SC:   And it says that that payment was made 
on the 10 t h of January, on that page, on page 283. 
MR MOLEFE:  It does say on the 10 t h of January. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  But this – well you know this one is an 
20 
invoice.   
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:  Issued on the 1 s t of January, nine days later 
it got paid. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes.  No, I am just trying to compare the 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 196 of 204 
 
fact that there was an invoice for that amount and payment 
for that amount was made? 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   Then if you look at page 287 what is that 
document? 
MR MOLEFE:  287 the document is again an invoice from 
Simulax. 
ADV SONI SC:   And addressed to? 
MR MOLEFE:  It is addressed to A M Consulting Engineers. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes it is from the same company to the 
10 
same company. 
MR MOLEFE:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:   And what is the amount ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Soni, it can’t be from the 
same company to the same company. 
ADV SONI SC:   Sorry, sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I know what you mean.  It is from 
Simulax to A M Consulting and it is dated 5 January 2014, 
it is invoice number 003/SML/N14 and it is for an amount of 
R16 450 000 and the services are described as service 
20 
rendered 
by 
RPGN 
Planning 
Development 
and 
Implementation. 
MR MOLEFE:  Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Some of these things are unlikely to be 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 197 of 204 
 
disputed so you can move faster on them and you can just 
read them to the witness for confirmation.   
ADV SONI SC:   As it pleases. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
ADV SONI SC:   Can I then ask you to look again at page 
283, the amount paid as reflected on the second line is for 
an amount of R14 500 000.  It is on the second line now Mr 
Molefe. 
MR MOLEFE:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV SONI SC:   That is not ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR MOLEFE:  And that was paid on the 20 t h of January. 
ADV SONI SC:   That was paid on the 20 t h of January.  So 
it is not for the same amount of that invoice, because the 
invoice is for R16 450 000, the amount that appears there 
is R14 500 00. 
MR MOLEFE:   That is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:   There is no correlation between those 
two? 
MR MOLEFE:   There is no correlation. 
ADV SONI SC:   Can I ask you then to look at page 290. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   290. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before you go to 290, do you want to 
confirm how you have told – the witness has told us how 
we come to have this schedule of payments. 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 198 of 204 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was given to Mr Mamabolo by Mr 
Mashaba and Mr Mamabolo gave it to Mr Molefe.  What 
about the invoices from Similex, can we know how we 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SONI SC:   I will clarify that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...come to have that. 
ADV VAS SONIC SC:   Mr Molefe you understand the issue 
that’s 
been 
raised, 
where 
the 
invoices 
part 
of 
the 
documents that Mr Mashaba gave to Mr Mamabolo.  You 
see you asked him ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR MOLEFE:   No, my recollection is that Mamabolo did 
not have the invoices, he had the schedule of payments. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, okay.  
ADV SONI SC:   So where did you get these invoices from? 
MR MOLEFE:   I think these invoices came as a result of 
the investigations. 
ADV SONI SC:   Oh so they were affected from the 
...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   Simply from the schedule. 
CHAIRPERSON:   From the Werksmans investigations. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:   And so is the proof of payment in regard 
to all of them those were not given by Mr Mashaba?  So if 
you look at page 285 for example the letter of authority, 
they were not given by Mr Mashaba to Mr Mamabolo 
MR MOLEFE:   285? 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 199 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you think we have a different 285, 
why is this 285 – wasn’t 285 something else?   
ADV SONI SC:   No it is – you will recall Chairperson I 
made a mistake I said 286 was 285. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay, alright.  185 is a letter from 
consulting engineers addressed to Mr Dinapather. 
MR MOLEFE:   It is a letter of Mashaba. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is the letter from Mashaba, and it says 
the subject is letter of authority and it says payment to a 
10 
creditor, okay, so what was the question Mr Soni? 
ADV SONI SC:   I am asking was this document – or sorry 
– what is the source of this document, because as I 
understand it now, and I misunderstood, that this payment 
schedule is the only document that Mr Mashaba gave to Mr 
Mamabolo or am I wrong? 
MR MOLEFE:   Well it could be so, but when we 
investigate, when we investigate the banks are obliged to 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Look this side please. 
20 
MR MOLEFE:   So when this letter of authority comes from 
Mr Mashaba and he is telling his banker to pay, to pay Mr 
Husain ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, how did he get hold of this letter, 
how does it come to be here?   Did it come through the 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 200 of 204 
 
investigation that Werksmans was ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:    I think it came through the investigation 
Chairperson, it certainly was not in the document that 
Mashaba gave, Mashaba gave me that schedule only. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
MR MOLEFE:   Which I gave to the investigators. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:   Can I just ask you to look at page 264 
which is part of your affidavit.  Okay very quickly Mr Molefe 
at paragraph 9.3 ...[intervenes]  
10 
MR MOLEFE:   264? 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, which is part of your replying 
affidavit, you say on or about the 2 n d of September Mr 
Mamabolo collected the documents from Mr Mashaba and 
this is the whole set of documents that you say he 
collected.   
MR MOLEFE:   The one I took from him personally was the 
schedule, but he would have been working with the 
investigator since we have so some of those documents 
could have been given directly to the investigators. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us deal with it this way, okay 
Mr Molefe in this – in your affidavit in this matter page 264 
of the bundle before you, you say at page – at paragraph 
9, point 13 that: 
“On or about 2 September 2015 Mr Mamabolo 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 201 of 204 
 
collected the documents from Mr Mashaba at his 
office which is situated in Block G, Central Park 
400, 16 t h Road, Midrand.   Mr Mashaba handed over 
an envelope containing the following document ...” 
Meaning Mr Mashaba handed over to Mr Mamabolo an 
envelope containing a number of documents which you 
then list there.  Do you recall that to be what happened, 
because that’s what you appear to have told the High 
Court? 
MR MOLEFE:   I honestly don’t have a recollection of 
10 
seeing every invoice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You don’t have a recollection of this? 
MR MOLEFE:   The envelope would have been given to my 
lawyers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   And I remember seeing the statement, 
because I discussed again after that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think what may be necessary is that 
afterwards Mr Molefe can be given his entire affidavit in 
this matter, the replying affidavit, so that he can go 
20 
through it properly and refresh his memory on the context, 
then he could in due course maybe send a supplementary 
affidavit to say after having had – gone back to that 
affidavit has his memory been refreshed to say this was – 
this is correct or has he found that it was not correct. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 202 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:   Yes, no that is so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would that be fine Mr Molefe? 
MR MOLEFE:   That will be fine Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay, alright. 
ADV SONI SC:   Now the documents I am just putting to 
you generally Mr Molefe, except for the difference between 
– you sort of seem to be worried about ...[intervenes]  
MR MOLEFE:   No I am worried about the figures, you see 
at page ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well one second, maybe we – it might be 
10 
convenient to take a comfort break and you could have a 
look and then we come back, is that fine, but we are at 
nearly quarter past five, I am still fine about continuing, if 
you are still fine I am sure everybody would be fine.   
Would that be fine, would that help if we have a comfort 
break? 
MR MOLEFE:   It will be fine Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay let’s take a comfort break and 
then we can come back, we can come back at twenty five 
past so about ten minutes break. 
20 
 
We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS   
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Your mic.   
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson it seems it has been a long 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 203 of 204 
 
day for the witness and I proposed to him that it may be 
better if he slept over this issue and we dealt with it first 
thing in the morning, which would allow us to deal with it 
quicker and let him be more at ease.  Mr Molefe is more 
than happy to do that as I understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, is that fine Mr Molefe?   Is that 
fine, yes. 
MR MOLEFE:   Thanks Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes no that is fine, that will just give you 
also time to refresh your memory on the document.  I was 
10 
going to say we will start earlier than ten o’clock but we 
cannot because of other commitments on my part, so let us 
start at ten o’clock as normal tomorrow.  I guess that we 
shouldn’t be long and I don’t want to say we shouldn’t be 
long because I thought we would not take the whole day 
but I think everything that we had to deal with was 
important so I am not regretting that we have taken the 
whole day, but tomorrow how much time do you think we 
might need? 
ADV 
SONI 
SC: 
 
I 
don’t 
think 
more 
than 
an 
hour 
20 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, okay, no that is alright. 
ADV SONI SC:   We will just go factor in the issue that Mr 
Molefe raised right at the end ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, the connecting of the dots ja. 
29 JUNE 2020 – DAY 226 
 
Page 204 of 204 
 
ADV SONI SC:  But this part won’t take much, much 
longer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, okay then we are going to adjourn 
and resume tomorrow at ten.  
 
We adjourn. 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 30 JUNE 2020 
