 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
PARKTOWN, JOHANNESBURG 
 
 
 
10 
 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 
 
 
 
DAY 33 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 1 of 131 
 
PROCEEDINGS HELD ON 29 NOVEMBER 2018  
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Pretorius, good morning everybody.  
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Morning Chair.  Chair may we commence with the 
application for condonation which will be presented to you by Advocate Gcabashe?   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Then Ms Hofmeyr will lead Ms Carolus.     
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.  
ADV LEAH GCABASHE SC:  Good morning again Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Morning Ms Gcabashe. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE SC:  My task Chair is simply to move an application for 
10 
condonation in respect to the failure by the Commission's legal team, which really is the 
Commission to comply with Rule 3.3 of the Commission's rules governing the 
proceedings of this Commission. 
 
There are two applications Chairman that I am moving this morning.  One; in 
respect of Advocate Ramathlodi's statement and the Rule 3.3 that was eventually 
issued in terms of that statement.  Then also one in relation to Advocate Moufhe.  I will 
start with the one relating to Advocate Ramathlodi.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE SC:  Which starts off the notice of motion is on page 5 of your 
bundle Chairman. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE SC:  Chairman this essentially is a condonation application in 
relation to timeframes that are prescribed in our rules.  What is envisaged in Rule 3.3 is 
that implicated persons will be given 14 day's notice.  The rule speaks to reasonable 
time.  But the convention has been that they will receive 14 day's notice, to enable them 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 2 of 131 
 
to respond, or elect to respond in whichever manner they would want to respond. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE SC:  Chairman the notice of motion, therefore, that I speak to 
seeks relief in terms of Prayers 1, 2 and 3 thereof, because the Commission failed to 
serve that Rule 3.3 notice on former President Jacob Zuma within the prescribed 
timeframes.   
 
I just want to point out Chair that that notice of motion does notify any 
implicated person of the terms of Rule 3.5, which Chairman you know allows an 
implicated party to approach you for the relief envisaged there.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE SC:  It also Chairman is brought in terms of the rules, which 
means that the condonation application was served on the implicated person Chairman.  
That can be found on page 27.  If you would like to verify that the condonation 
application itself was served, page 27 of your papers and the Rule 3.3 itself the proof of 
service is on page 22.  All is in order Chairman.   
 
I would like to point out that all the other parties who are implicated persons in 
this matter were served with timeous notices. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE SC:  They were also served with the condonation application.  
I have got the dates here Chairman. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE SC:  The only small little error we have made is not including 
the proof of service on Mr Manyi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but he was served? 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE SC:  But I am assured that he was served with that.  
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 3 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE SC:  Yes Chairman.  Chairman just very briefly, the 
reasonable explanation that accompanies the affidavit of our attorney of record is that 
when the legal team had a look at these papers in preparing for the hearing, we 
realised that though President Zuma was not directly implicated, because his name was 
mentioned, out of an abundance of caution, it was better to actually serve him with the 
notice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE SC:  Just in case what came out of the mouth of the witness, 
dug a bit of a hole and showed that he is directly and substantially affected, or 
10 
implicated.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE SC:  That is the long and short of it Chairman.  You know that 
we have set out in the affidavit those reasons.  Prejudice Chairman is very limited.  He 
has had 7 day's notice, he does have an attorney who has placed himself on record.  
We believe there is no prejudice to him at all.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE SC:  In the circumstances Chairman, I move for an order in 
terms of Prayers 1, 2 and 3 of the notice of motion in respect of Ramathlodi matter.  
O R D E R 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I grant Prayers 1, 2 and 3 being the notice of motion. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE SC:  Thank you Chairman.  Chairman similarly with 
Advocate Moufhe's statement, the facts are slightly different.  The parties were given 
7 day's notice instead of the 14 day's notice that we have followed as a convention, all 
of them in this instance, all the implicated persons had not being served with their 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 4 of 131 
 
3.3 notices.  So they have been given those 3.3 notices Chairman and it is apparent 
from the papers where the proof of service is.   
 
I do not know if you would like me to go through – but with all of them 
Chairman, the 3.3s were served on the 21st November and then the condonation 
application was served on the 23rd November in respect of all of them.   
 
In this instance Mr Zwane is added to these implicated persons, whereas he 
was not added to the ones who Advocate Ramathlodi's statement is referred to.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE SC:  Chairman again in terms of the facts, the facts really 
relate to Advocate Moufhe and Mr Mabunda trying to find each other, just to start 
10 
preparing the initial statements.  When they eventually came to the legal team there 
were a couple of grumblings which we thought might create confusion and we decided 
we would rather clean those up and put out a statement that would cause consternation 
for implicated parties.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE SC:  That is essentially what we have set out in the affidavit 
Chairman.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE SC:  Other than that Chair, I would like to point out that the 
legal representatives of Doctor Ncubane and those of Mr Duduzane Zuma have 
20 
indicated in letters, I have copies here if you would like to have copies Chairman, that 
they reserve their rights to approach you in terms of Rule 3.5 to pursue whatever rights 
they think they might wish to pursue.  Once they have read the transcripts and 
consulted with their clients. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 5 of 131 
 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE SC:  In the circumstances Chair, if you are satisfied, I move 
for an order in terms of Prayers 1, 2 and 3 of the notice of motion attached to this 
application. 
O R D E R 
CHAIRPERSON:  I grant Prayers 1, 2 and 3 of the notice of motion. 
ADV LEAH GCABASHE SC:  Thank you Chairman.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Chair today we have the evidence of Ms Cheryl Carolus.  
10 
Before we have the witness sworn in, there is one or two aspects of housekeeping and 
then a general submission I propose to make in relation to the relevance of the 
evidence to the Terms of Reference of this Commission.  If I may deal with those two 
matters initially? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Chair in relation to housekeeping matters, I can inform you 
that the relevant Rule 3.3 notices arising from Ms Carolus' statement were issued 
timeously.  In respect of those three notices that were issued, there have been no 
applications for cross-examination. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  In terms of sketching the relevance of the evidence today.  
Chair as the legal team has it, there are four broad aspects of relevance in Ms Carolus' 
evidence today.   
 
The first of those relates to setting the scene of the state of South African 
Airways at the time that Ms Carolus took over as Chairperson in 2009 and the state in 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 6 of 131 
 
which she and her Board left the airline in 2012.   
 
We submit that story is of critical relevance to the work of this Commission.  
Because what Ms Carolus' evidence will show, is the extent to which, in that period of 
3 years that Board made substantial strides in turning around SAA in getting an 
effective management team in place and in the course of those 3 years, resisting 
external pressure and undue influence in relation to the management of the entity.   
 
It is critical to set that story, because the evidence that will be led in due 
course, when the details of the SAA position after this Board's resignation in 2012 is 
presented, will show how this Board's plan to rescue the airline, to take it forward, to 
ensure good governance and appropriate management systems being in place, then 
10 
came to naught.   
 
So the first important aspect is the setting the scene for the evidence that will 
come. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  The second important aspect is what Ms Carolus can tell 
us about the Mumbai route.  She is both a corroborative witness therein in relation to 
the evidence that is previously being presented by witnesses and she takes that story 
further. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  The third aspect are the indications of the pressure that 
20 
was placed on SAA, to place its advertising spend with the New Age and the extent to 
which that was resisted by her Board and the management that were in place.   
 
Then finally, to deal with the events surrounding the mass resignation of 
8 members of the Board which Ms Carolus chaired at the end of their term.  That event 
itself shows, in the words of Ms Carolus in her statement, what seem to amount to 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 7 of 131 
 
events of a constructive dismissal type, which would pave the way from a more 
compliant Board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  So Chair it is against the background of those four areas 
of relevance that we present the evidence of Ms Carolus today.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  I may request that she be sworn in? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you.   
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  My name is Cheryl Ann Carolus. 
10 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection with making a prescribed affirmation? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  No I do not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly affirm that the evidence you give will be the truth, the 
whole truth and nothing but the truth, if so, please say, I truly affirm. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I truly affirm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you Ms Carolus.  
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Thank you Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Chair for the purposes of the record, I propose that we 
number Ms Carolus' evidence Bundle R, that as I have it is the next in the sequence.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Do we not already have "R"? 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Do you already have "R"? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I seem to think we do have "R", I may be mistaken. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  As I have it, we concluded on "Q" yesterday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh is that so? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  So "R" would be the next. 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 8 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh it is "P" that we – we have "P". 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Yes indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe "P" looked like an "R" to me. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  "P" snug its way in, today we have "R".  So if I may 
propose the ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  So this will be the bundle that has got Ms Carolus' statement will be 
marked EXHIBIT R thank you.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  And then just to orientate you Ms Carolus in terms of what 
is in front of you, you have a copy of "R" and there is also a copy of another evidence 
number bundle N2, to which I will make reference in the course of your evidence. 
10 
 
Ms Carolus I understand from our discussions previously that there are one or 
two aspects of your statement which commences at page 1 of Bundle "R" in respect of 
which you would like to make corrections.   
 
My proposal Chair is to deal with those corrections as we reach them in the 
evidence, because it is useful to place them in context. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Whichever, that is fine.  If it is convenient to point them out at the 
beginning that can be done, if it is more convenient to deal with them as we reach the 
particular aspect of her evidence that is fine, so it is fine. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you Chair.  My proposal is that we do it as we reach 
them in the evidence.  Ms Carolus if I could take you to page 1 of your – well of 
20 
Exhibit R which is the first page of your statement and if we go in that bundle to 
page 29.  Can you confirm that that is your signature on page 29? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I confirm so. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  And that this is the statement that you have prepared from 
pages 1 to 29 for your evidence today? 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 9 of 131 
 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I can confirm that too.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you.  But for the two corrections we will come to, do 
you confirm the contents of that statement as true and correct? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I do. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you.  Ms Carolus if we can commence your 
evidence today with the background that you brought with you when you commenced 
as Chair of South African Airways in 2009, can you sketch for us where you came from 
and what you did before you entered SAA? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes thank you and good morning properly Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And good morning Ms Carolus. 
10 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  And to the house.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I want to just start off by saying that I think – I believe I 
am part of a very lucky generation of people in South Africa.  I am old enough to have 
lived through all the horrors of – not only institutionalised, but legalised racism, sexism 
and other forms of bigotry.  I grew up under a system of apartheid that I think was 
neo-fascist and that really thrived on hatred and division.  I am being old enough to 
have lived through the full horrors of that and still seen the consequences.  I am very 
determined that I will never allow history to repeat itself on my watch.  I am also old 
enough to carry the scars of having being an active participant in this struggle to end 
20 
apartheid.  I carry those scars as a badge of honour, the scars of detentions, or torture, 
of banning orders, of numerous forms of restriction.  
 
But I am also very proud to be part of a generation as young enough to build a 
very different future for my country.  I was born to poor parents on the Cape Flats with 
the first generation of families who were forcibly removed under the Group Areas Act 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 10 of 131 
 
and I saw the consequences of that and much of that is still prevalent in my community 
and indeed in our society. 
 
I joined my first political organisation at the age of 13 and it was really the only 
way that young black angry girl child could counter a system that seeked to make me 
complicit in my own oppression.  I spent my entire teenage years, and indeed my adult 
life consumed by militant participation and defines of apartheid through protests and 
through building organisations, democratic organisations.  Much of which remains still 
today.  I have held leadership positions in student organisations and in the woman's 
movement during the years of apartheid and like many South Africans I was inspired 
and drawn and given hope by the politics of the ANC of building a South Africa that was 
10 
non-racial, non-sexist and democratic.   
 
I served in the leadership of the United Democratic Front, which was an 
alliance of anti-apartment civil society organisations during the years the ANC was 
banned, and at the unbanning of the ANC, I was elected onto an interim leadership of 
both the ANC and the SACP when these organisations were unbanned.   
 
An element of huge pride for me today still is I was elected to be part of the 
ANC's first delegation that met with the then President de Klerk and his team to discuss 
how we would go into the talks, about holding talks in South Africa.   
 
I should say Chairperson, the enormous pride I felt at the time of being part of 
a delegation that was so diverse and so much – represented so much of the vision for 
20 
the future.  On our side of the table and it was literally a table led by the then – by 
Nelson Mandela was a group of black people, white people, young people, older 
people, women, men, Christians, atheists, Muslims, Jews.  On the other side of the 
table was a group of very aged white men from very similar backgrounds.  It is a 
moment of great pride for me, because it represented where we wanted to take our 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 11 of 131 
 
country. 
 
I was also part of that processes of the team who did the negotiations.  I 
remember so much and often when I feel disturbed about what is going on our country.  
I get very angry with people still who say, our country is worse than it was under 
apartheid, because it is not, even at the moment with some of our concerns. 
 
Because I remember the time when we struggling negotiations and where tens 
of people were killed just routinely everyday in our townships as we were negotiating.  I 
remember the murder of Chris Hani, someone I was very close to and respected deeply 
and his family.  I remember how we had to pickup body parts of people who was 
slaughtered on trains everyday.  I remember Boy pathogen how I was part of the ANC 
10 
leadership who had to get go in there after that massacre and rapes of women in 
households that those soldiers moved through.   
 
So it was with enormous pride and achievement that Nelson Mandela was 
sworn in and that we were associated with his example of enormous integrity and 
humility with which he served our country. 
 
I was one of a small group, in fact I was the only member of the National 
Executive Committee of the ANC who decided to not make myself available for any 
Parliamentary positions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry just repeat that, I did not hear? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I think I was the only National Executive Committee 
20 
member of the ANC who actively decided to not stand for any Parliamentary positions.  
But I am at great pains to say, I then and still remain very, very concerned about who 
runs our country in Parliament, because it is such an important role of trust that people 
are entitled to, or given.   
 
So whilst not in formal Parliamentary service, I over a number of years served 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 12 of 131 
 
in a number of functions to help Government and most unpaid functions.  I served on a 
Commission with the first Minister of Education to look at what happens with the higher 
institutions.  I have served in a number of capacities in chairing South African National 
Park's Board and I can go on and on at both national and provincial level of various 
ways in which I have supported our government, our newly elected governments to 
navigate that space.   
 
I have also served in a number of non-governmental organisations, particularly 
in the areas of young people at risk, such as Soul City, Love Life.  I have served in 
organisations of by diversity, I have served at the internal Boards of WWF and WWF 
South Africa and feel quite proud of how we have transformed those spaces.  I also 
10 
serve on international body dealing with international conflict prevention and I can say 
that I feel honoured to have served in organisations associated with the fights around 
HIV and Aids in our country when people did not have access to those.  I also served in 
organisations that deals with gender violence and I have being a strong voice around 
rape, including that of our former President when many people were scared to do so, or 
felt we would be compromising the ANC. 
 
I must say Chairperson, I am deeply disturbed by the events of the past 
10 years or so in our country and initially we think we were quite – and I used an 
analogy once when I wrote an open letter to the then President Jacob Zuma of the 
"Toad in the Pot" syndrome where there is a candle burning under it, where you just 
20 
adapt and you adapt your levels of tolerance until you finally realised you have reached 
boiling point. 
 
But also I must say Chairperson that I do think that there was a very strong 
view amongst us ANC members of, we would harm the organisation and by implication 
the country if we spoke out.  So I was part of a very august group of people that I am 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 13 of 131 
 
very junior in, calling themselves the "Stalwarts and Veterans of the ANC" who made 
presentations over a period of about 2 years to the leadership of the ANC, to in fact say 
that we – to express our concern.  It fell largely on deaf ears by the then leadership of 
the ANC.   
 
But I was also proud to have been part of a handful of ANC leaders who – at 
the ruling of – the court ruling, the Constitutional Court ruling on Nkandla felt we had to 
speak out on the steps of the Constitutional Court.  Many people were quite critical of 
us doing that, because they felt we would harm our organisation that we loved so 
dearly. 
 
I hold a very different view, I believe that I am in the ANC because I believe I 
10 
want an ANC that can serve my country and not serve itself.  Because the freedom that 
we have today to vote and to have a Constitutional Court and a Constitution came at a 
huge cost and that is a matter of luck that we are here. 
 
So I believe that we are perilously close to an abyss and that there is much 
work still to be done and which is why I am here today Chairperson, to in fact 
participate and share my learning's and experiences in the hope that as a nation, we 
can just realise how much work there is to be done and how perilously we actually took 
our country back to the brink of the abyss.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well thank you very much for what may be called an "opening 
remarks", but basically what you were doing is, you were telling us more about what 
20 
you have done as a South African over the years in your life to make a contribution to 
the country and what you have said is quite important.  So I must thank you once again 
for coming forward to give evidence, we really appreciate it. 
 
You have touched on an issue that is important, namely that when certain 
events were happening in the country there would be a view within the ruling party held 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 14 of 131 
 
by some that maybe speaking out on certain issues would harm the party and that 
some might feel that they should not speak out publically and that you hold a different 
view. 
 
Now it may well be that that issue is still there in relation to certain people 
coming forward to assist this Commission.  It may be that there are past and present 
Cabinet Ministers, Directors General and other Government officials who have 
knowledge of information that would be very useful for the work of this Commission, but 
who are not coming forward to Commission and assist the country, because they feel 
that they may be harming, or would be harming the party.   
 
I would have thought that an organisation such as the ANC was established in 
10 
order to bring about a certain type of South Africa and that therefore the country would 
come first and that if you are going to speak out in order to make sure that you 
contribute to ensuring that the country is on the right path to where it should go, you 
should not have a problem and that nobody should have a problem with that from the 
ruling party, you know. 
 
So what you have touched on is very important, but I just hope that more and 
more people who may be staying away from coming forward to assist the Commission, 
you know, look at this and reflect on whether the party was not established in order to 
help the country to take a certain direction in order to create a certain acceptable 
society and that if the country – if things happen in the country which seems to have the 
20 
result that the country deviates from the right path, they should come forward and 
contribute to bringing the country back to the right path.  So thank you very much.   
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Carolus if we can go to page 1 of 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 15 of 131 
 
Exhibit "R" at paragraph 2.  You talk there about your initial appointment to the Board of 
SAA as Chairperson on the 28th September 2009.  You were appointed together with a 
number of members of the Board and you traverse who they are over the page, at 
page 2.  What I would like you to give the Chair a sense of is the levels of skills, 
expertise and experience amongst the Board members who were appointed with you in 
the course of 2009? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Thank you ma'am.  As I said I think there was a lot of 
thought that went into it and I discovered subsequently a lot of people who served on 
the Board with me, all felt equally strongly as I did at the time when approached by 
Minister Hogan that we would only do this because of our love for our country.  We 
10 
understood SAA was on very shaky grounds, but we would also only do that if we felt 
there were the right people, with the right reputations and the right levels of skill.   
 
Maybe if I can just go through ourselves, as I said in my own background is, I 
have had the privilege to be able to speak for myself a bit.  I can also just say that I had 
served in other capacities.  I had served the South Africa's High Commissioner to the 
United Kingdom which is one of our most important missions.  I do think that I can say, 
at the risk of sounding immoderate that I think I did a reasonably good job in raising 
South Africa's profile in building our trade, in building our people to be [lowering voice]. 
 
Upon my return I chaired – I was the CEO of South African Tourism and I am 
very proud of the fact that we turned it around quite significantly and particularly to turn 
20 
it into a proper sector.  That meant working with all the stakeholders, including of 
course South African Airways and the aligning the work of tourism, with that of trade 
and industry, with that of our foreign relations and indeed the role of financial carrier 
played a very important role.                   
 
So I got to understand that quite a bit.  I will just go through the list just so that 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 16 of 131 
 
I do not skip over anyone.  Ms Hogan put together this.  A person Mr Abel Bouchon, 
who subsequently resigned in midterm for no other reason he lived in Chile and it just 
became a bit of a nightmare, but he stayed with us while we were in the formative 
period. 
 
Mr Bouchon had been a CEO of the Chilean National Carrier.  He was at that 
stage the chief executive of Coca Cola in Chile and had served on a number of big 
companies.  Mr Teddy Dakar and you are right these people's resumes are far too 
small.  He is in fact an accomplished businessman who owns businesses that are 
global and in fact one of his businesses deals with the defence industry and 
manufacturing parts for components for the aircraft use in that, in defence industries.  
10 
Today his company has one of the largest black ones listed on the Johannesburg Stock 
Exchange.  Some of the things he is associated with. 
 
Mr Tukela Jantjies he is in fact today still the, heads up a very successful rural 
dairy farming project out in the Eastern Cape.  He had, what is not in his CV is that he 
was actually a shop steward in his life and in fact was the chairperson of the Boksburg 
Civic during the struggle years, but had gone on and got into management and HR 
functions.  Ms Jacky Kwinana is a chartered accountant and is in fact, had her own 
company Kwinana and Associates which is still existing and she had served on a 
number of government bodies and so on Ms Kwinana as I said was a chartered 
accountant with degrees in computer science as well. 
20 
 
Mr Russel Laubscher at the time was the CEO of the Johannesburg Stock 
Exchange which as we know had I think for eight years running won the best award for 
the best run stock exchange in the world.  Himself a business person and served in a 
number of capacities there. 
 
Mr Bonang Mogale that stage was a member of SA Express which Minister 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 17 of 131 
 
Hogan in particular and those of us who served felt had to create alignment or better 
alignment with SAA.  He was also quite an important person in the whole sphere of 
marketing and communications in South Africa and he was the President of Shell South 
Africa at the time and served on a number of other business capacities. 
 
Ms Duduzile Myeni, Ms Dudu Myeni herself was somebody who was the chair 
of the Jacob Zuma foundation at that stage, had done quite a lot of community 
associations that she was associated with and was in fact somebody who was studying 
in the field of administration and had been a teacher, but had also served on a few state 
owned entities and their Boards. 
 
Mr Jabu Ndlovu was at that stage the executive for Microsoft South Africa and 
10 
was quite a seasoned people and skills development person and had for a few years 
then run, sorry won our Microsoft South Africa the best employer to work for and at that 
stage there was the situation at a staffing level was very fractious and quite bad at 
South African Airways. 
 
Advocate Lindy Thomas who is a practicing advocate in the court and in fact a 
seasoned commercial lawyer and somebody working in the field of litigation. 
 
Mr Louis Rabbets had done quite a lot of work in the field of forensics and 
corporate governance and particularly in the areas of risk.  He had served in a number 
of governments, both government but also big corporates like Sanlam in those 
capacities around risk and he comes with actuarial science qualifications. 
20 
 
Mr Zakele Sithole who is late today also chartered accountant was one of the 
first, I think one of the first eight black chartered accountants that qualified in South 
Africa and had served, done enormous and the most extraordinary civil service right up 
till his death.  He had served, at that stage he was still serving on the audit functions of 
the Treasury, the PIC and in fact universities and so on. 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 18 of 131 
 
 
There was Ms Maggie Whitehouse who was a marketer of note and in fact 
herself had very good qualifications and experience in that work.  Worked for some of 
the top global and South African companies and then there were a few other people 
who joined the Board one of whom was Mr Dave Lewis who is not in the list that we 
have I think.  Mr Lewis had in fact served as a leader in the trade union movement 
throughout the 80's and in fact built the non racial trade union movement, but he had 
just retired at that point as the head of the Competition Commission in South Africa and 
as you know that was one of the areas where there was a lot of problems for SAA. 
 
I think I have covered everyone.  I am not going to cover the executives 
because they were employed for their skills.  Maybe what I can just conclude with 
10 
Chairperson is to say that Minister Hogan appointed initially nine of us and then in 
discussion with myself as the chair and me in discussion with the rest of the Board as 
we realised what the challenges were that was facing us we subsequently, she then 
appointed members like Mr Lewis who was clearly seasoned when we realised the 
quantum of the challenge that we were dealing with hundreds of millions of Rands 
worth of litigation in the areas of competition and some very bad practices in that area. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you. 
COMMISSIONER:  Okay before Ms Hofmeyr continues I am just checking that people 
at the back are hearing everything.  They are not, okay thank you and then Ms Carolus 
I seem to remember that you did not mention it, but I think I seem to remember that at 
20 
some stage you were also the Deputy Secretary General of the ANC, am I right or were 
you the Secretary General? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  No you are correct Chairperson.  I was the first woman 
elected into the top five leadership positions in the ANC and I did indeed serve with 
great pride at the time of Nelson Mandela, Walter Sisulu and Oliver Thambo.  Yes, 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 19 of 131 
 
thank you. 
COMMISSIONER:  Yes.  Which years were those by the way? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  They, now you have actually got me.  I stepped down in 
'98 and I had served for four years before that and I served as the Deputy to Cyril 
Ramaphosa.  He was the Secretary General and I was his Deputy and when he left the 
ANC to pursue business interest I took over up until 1998 as the Secretary General of 
the ANC. 
COMMISSIONER:  Okay, no thank you.  Then just lastly although Ms Hofmeyr will be 
asking you the questions you are telling me your evidence. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes.  My apologies. 
10 
COMMISSIONER:  Look at me. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I shall do that. 
COMMISSIONER:  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Carolus at page 2 paragraph 4 you 
give us some insight into the role as Minister Hogan had it and as you implemented it at 
SAA between the shareholder, the Board and management.  Can you explain to us how 
you saw the distinction between those roles and the emphasis that Minister Hogan 
placed on those different roles? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Thank you Chairperson.  Minister Hogan in fact when 
she approached me to serve as a chair she basically asked me if I am prepared to sign 
20 
up to her understanding of corporate governance and that is the separation of those 
three areas of responsibility in relation to the airline and she saw herself very clearly as 
the shareholder representative who would set a clear set of outcomes and she hold the 
expectations with us and she outlined various processes that we would follow to make 
sure that there was clarity of understanding between herself as the shareholder 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 20 of 131 
 
representative and ourselves as the Board who would then take responsibility for the 
areas of governance and that is we would oversee the development of policy and of 
strategy and of implementation thereof as well as the monitoring of the performance of 
the company and the management in its role in leading the team to achieve the 
objectives that our shareholder had set for us. 
 
She explained to us very clearly that she would hold us accountable in fact to 
those matters.  She then convened a workshop of all the chairpersons of all the state 
owned entities under her jurisdiction at the time and she, one of the important things 
that stood out in my head was the notion of progressing what used to be semi 
government departments of state owned enterprises into state owned companies. 
10 
 
I just remembered it was one of those things that stood out and that she 
expected us to adhere to the letter and the spirit of all the pieces of legislation and 
practices that governed the state owned companies and enterprises in general such as 
the PFMA, but also that she expected us to be familiar with and to execute and to 
legally operate within the framework of the newly adopted Companies Act which had 
come into force in 2008. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you.  If we then turn to page four of your statement 
in bundle R you capture from that page and the following the challenges that SAA was 
facing when your new Board took over.  As I have it you identify five different 
challenges in the course of the next number of pages and I would like to take you 
20 
through each of them.  The first that you identify is a governance failure within SAA.  
Can you explain to the Chair what that was when you found SAA? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Thank you Chairperson.  Well there was quite a bit of 
violation around just straightforward illegal activities.  Violations of the PFMA.  Violation 
of procurement processes, of tender processes and there were in fact also a number of, 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 21 of 131 
 
there was an investigation which our predecessor Board had just done which identified 
a number of those breakdowns and failures and that investigation was conducted by 
KPMG and when we arrived we were informed that we were bound legally to in fact 
review and act on those shortcomings.  So we had a script of events that was already 
detailed for us.  We reviewed it on, the report had just been produced.  Our 
predecessors had not yet had a chance to fully act on it, but they had suspended the 
previous CEO on whose watch these violations and transgressions had taken place.  
So we came there, there was no CEO and there was an acting CEO at the time who 
was a member of the executive and so we then set about doing, acting on that.  I, as a 
consequence we were advised to in fact lay criminal charges and a number of civil 
10 
actions to retrieve the moneys that we believed were misappropriated or negligently 
spent at a management level. 
 
When we received that advice all of this was quite new still and the NPA just 
was also quite new and Mr Menze Simelane was in fact the head at the time and 
because we were not clear how to do this I personally called him and sought his advice 
for how we should go about bringing lawful action.  He then advised us that charges 
should be laid with the criminal, with the Commercial Crimes Unit and there were some, 
I think even he was quite new to the whole procedure and there was questions of 
domicile and so on, but ultimately charges were laid.  I must say when I was compiling 
my presentation it suddenly occurred to me that I do not know what happened to these 
20 
charges and they were pretty serious charges both because of the precedent they set 
and in fact the precedent of having to act lawfully on that.  Mr Simelane has since gone 
and with him seems to have gone the charges.  I do not know what happened to those 
charges.  I said Chairperson that there had been major failures in the procurements 
systems and some, and poor adherence to the PFMA.  We had also very disturbingly 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 22 of 131 
 
the levels of capitalisation of the airline had been very-very poor yet the expectations 
and the opportunities for the airline had grown tremendously, but in a normal company 
the shareholder would, you know, when you have a factory and you want to grow the 
factory you would need new machines, because the market has opened up.  Your 
shareholder would in fact be the person who would put up the money so that you can 
compete better and beat your competitors at their game, but that does not, had not 
happened at SAA and with quite big consequences, it is a big part of how things played 
out at SAA and in fact today there is a similar kind of setup. 
 
There were also a number of criminal and civil claims against the airline for 
price fixing and anti competitive behaviour and some of them were settled only in the 
10 
few, the last few years.  Chairperson you may recall there was a settlement with Kulula 
about a few R100 million actually where SAA had behaved unlawfully and that had just 
somehow not been paid any attention to and we, that was one of the things we took on.  
We also found that the management was quite fragmented and quite disaggregated.  
So I will just say there was a very poor staff morale and with very, we thought very bad 
tones set at the top by some of the ways in which management previously had behaved 
which we thought needed to be corrected in terms of setting the tone at the top there.  
There was a union.  There were pilots.  There were – just between the different levels 
of the workforce there just was no team spirit and we also found that SAA in the 
process had really lost a lot of scale and competitiveness and that it all had to do with 
20 
the fleet that we had. 
 
There was you know a whole lot of modern aircraft that had come onto the 
market that was fuel efficient, much more fuel efficient.  The whole offering on Board as 
the airlines had changed, in flight entertainment, the leg room, all sorts of things and 
SAA had just not held pace with that.  That had not been dealt with. 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 23 of 131 
 
 
But most importantly given the location of South Africa if the airlines flew 
anywhere outside of six hours of a flight there were two implications.  The one was I 
think it is eight hours in the one instance you were what we called an end of 
hemisphere carrier. 
 
Unlike Emirates or Kenya or Ethiopian Air who are in the middle of the world 
you could be much more nimble footed if there was any change in the global setup or in 
your strategy you could very easily fly up or down this way or that way whereas we 
were stuck at the bottom and there were so much dependant on a well functioning 
national airline and it is a matter which I still have a lot of passion about and I think 
there is a lot of disinformation but I will not bore the house with that. 
10 
 
But save to say that the airline was completely not with a fleet that would 
enable it to compete globally.  It had lost market share and scale and in fact we were 
losing all the opportunities.  So we really put forward a very strong request to the 
shareholder to in fact capitalise the airline properly. 
 
We had a very weak balance sheet at the time which just meant that we were 
very bad there and if we wanted to borrow money in the market, in the financial markets 
to grow it would come at an extortionist rate because it is a very simple thing if you 
were bankrupt, virtually bankrupt you would have to – you pay much more than if you 
have a sound one and if you have a shareholder who indicates a willingness to in fact 
step up to the plate to enable you to grow to give you the tools and the money to be 
20 
able to grow and expand you are much more likely to attract favourable terms for that. 
 
We also thought that our fleet as it was were either very small aircraft that 
could only fly domestically or otherwise ones that could only fly to Europe to – to long 
haul whereas in fact at that stage it was very clear but not apparently had not become 
obvious but was very clear the growth for us was into Africa and the idea was to in fact 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 24 of 131 
 
use Johannesburg in particular as a hub that will enable us to do shorter flights into 
Africa. 
 
There was no one who could compete with us on the entire continent in terms 
of the access we had also into Latin America and at that stage we found the emergence 
of what has become BRICS and so our whole strategy was to have a fleet that would 
enable us to fly from the East, bring passengers from China and from India and 
surrounding countries there through South Africa and to connect them onward into 
Africa and into the Americas and that was a sweet spot that no one could beat us at not 
even Ethiopian or Kenya at the time and so but we needed a mix of aircraft that would 
enable us to do that. 
10 
 
Another part of our strategy that we identified as a weakness was in fact the 
fact that we needed to develop a very different approach to only seeing ourselves flying 
as we call it point to point and in fact develop Johannesburg as a hub. 
 
The Mumbai route, Chairperson which is one matter I will just speak to a little 
bit very briefly was particularly important for us in that expansion of what we call the 
East West Corridor bringing passengers from Mumbai and Beijing were our two key 
markets where South Africa as a country was growing its own trade and those same 
people who were trading with our people were also trading into Africa and so it was a 
very important one for us to in fact connect major global flows of trade through 
Johannesburg as a hub and that was the significance for us at the time of building up 
20 
the Mumbai route, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You referred to the CEO of SAA who was there before the time of 
your Board.  I see in paragraph eight of your statement he is referred to as Mr Khaya 
Ngqulu.  I think he was Khaya Ngqula. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Oh. 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 25 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe that should be corrected. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I apologise. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The surname would be spelt as N-g-q-u-l-a. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes.  Sorry.  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not Ngqulu. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  It is a gremlin.  Yes, my apologies, Mr Chair and to Mr 
Ngqula. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you for that, Chair.  Ms Carolus, if I can then move 
you to page six of EXHIBIT R.  One of the challenges that you have mentioned in your 
testimony was the fragmented management team and processes that you found in 
10 
place on your arrival at SAA and at the bottom of that page six you talk about one of 
your first tasks was the recruitment of a permanent CEO. 
 
Tell us about that and who you appointed and why you thought that was one of 
the key first aspects of your duties as a Board. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Thank you, Chairperson.  When we arrived at SAA I 
had a bit of joke as I said.  It feels a bit like we are at a drama school because 
everybody was acting in the executive.  So many people were in acting positions and 
many of the people – with no disrespect but many of the people in those positions were 
just not people who were suitably qualified to in fact take over permanent positions in 
there. 
20 
 
But it really was not for the Board to recruit an entire team.  We had to start at 
the top and the fact that Mr Ngqula was at that point – in fact had been relieved of his 
duties we thought we needed to appoint a leader, a CEO who would be capable of 
assembling a team that would be able to meet the challenges but for us more 
importantly be able to seize the opportunities that we thought offered enormous 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 26 of 131 
 
potential for our country and we then decided to do the process properly and vigorously 
because it was important that we got the best person for the job and we had a huge 
amount of debate amongst ourselves and sometimes even outside of ourselves 
because what kind of a person were we looking for? 
 
We said we were looking for a world class person who had international 
experience and respect and somebody who understood especially the markets where 
we wanted to grow like Africa and we did a global – we appointed Spencer Stuart an 
international head hunting firm because we thought that it had to be a proper process 
that a group who had access to a global pool of skills would be able to give us a set of 
options. 
10 
 
We had some debate and decided we were not going to limit the pool only to 
South Africa or indeed to Africa because the script very much had to be one of the key 
things was for somebody who understood the African aviation market and the airline 
market but not exclusively because Europe was a major trading partner, the Americas 
was under service at the time and so we went and we were quite surprised at the 
calibre of people who applied. 
 
There was a Deputy CEO of a major Western European Airline who applied for 
the job.  There was one CEO of one of our top competitors in Africa who had an 
exceptional track record who applied.  It was a really stellar group of people from all 
over the world who were on the shortlist and at the end of that very vigorous process 
20 
the person who emerged was Ms Zizakile Mzimela who in fact came out head and 
shoulders above the rest actually and she came out because of her background. 
 
She was a banker by training but had spent most of her professional life in fact 
in South African Airways initially in a middle management position and subsequently in 
a few executive positions not only at the corporate level but in fact globally and had in 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 27 of 131 
 
fact headed up a big piece of work around Africa. 
 
She at that stage was the serving CEO of South African Express which in fact 
was a major partner – was in fact owned by the South African government as well and 
so she understood that alignment and the synergy so Ms Mzimela we really thought 
was a very good candidate and we thought that it was important that she goes through 
that process and that she emerges with the confidence knowing that she was the best 
in the world for this job that we had to offer. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you and one of her key tasks you identify at page 
seven of EXHIBIT R at paragraph 18 was to lead the process for the presentation to the 
Board of a strategy to take SAA forward and over the page you start to describe in 
10 
some detail what that strategy was. 
 
Can I ask you first of all to describe for the Chair what the engagement was 
with Minister Hogan around that strategy, the extent to which you engaged with her 
department in its development? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Thank you.  We understood that it was very important 
for us to have our shareholder give us the inputs about what the expectations were and 
for us to be clear that we would be able to deliver against that and our shareholder 
expectations was obviously economic growth, job creation and transformation and to be 
able to do that we needed to work out what our most competitive offerings would be as 
the airline and so we understood that our contribution would not just be to carry people 
20 
in aeroplanes.  
 
It was in fact to contribute very, to the very hard benefits of trade and tourism 
and then in fact our foreign affairs as well but we understood it to be how do we create 
– how do we make ourselves part of the general transport mix for the effective and 
efficient transportation of goods and services and people in an economy in a country 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 28 of 131 
 
that was positioning itself to become globally more competitive and in fact quite 
aggressively grow in that way. 
 
So in terms of our engagement we – Ms Mzimela and her team went through 
all the processes.  There was an aviation unit in the Department of Public Enterprises 
and in fact made sure that we all understood and were aligned on how we would 
contribute to these broader goals of our country and at the end of that Ms Mzimela and 
her team presented to the Board at a strategy session at the end of October 2010 this 
what was to become known as the New Growth Strategy central to which was 
identifying that we sharpen our areas of focus around where our country was going to 
compete globally and our country at that stage as I was saying was placing far more 
10 
emphasis and we saw the opportunities to align ourselves with what was the BRICS 
block. 
 
To trade with India during my time as the CEO of South African Tourism we 
already started to in fact grow with huge success tourism markets in India and in fact in 
China and so on.  We also agreed that given we needed to renew the fleet to be able to 
give us the kind of aircraft that we could actually fly into some of our African 
destinations which were not two hour flights between Johannesburg and Cape Town but 
now six, seven hour flights. 
 
We did not have aircraft.  The ones we used in domestically could not do that 
and the ones we used to London it was just felt completely silly to do that.  So we – in 
20 
that development we all arrived at the same page that SAA is and how we arrive at the 
fleet – the sense of what fleet we were looking for and the levels of capitalisation that 
we needed was allied with Trade and Tourism and our people interaction as a country. 
 
Minister of the Board felt comfortable.  Minister Hogan and her team joined us 
in the last one and a half days I think of that session.  We presented the whole strategy 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 29 of 131 
 
to her but as I said that obviously she would have been consulted. 
 
I do not know what the internal processes were but she was comfortable and 
her team were comfortable. Her experts, her advisors, her specialists in the department 
all signed off on that strategy. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  And Ms Carolus I have it from your statement that it 
occurred in October 2010, is that correct?  ---  Yes that is correct, madam.  It was 
literally the end of the month. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Indeed and then as you conclude on page eight of your 
statement immediately thereafter on 1 November 2010 Minister Hogan was replaced by 
Minister Gigaba, is that correct? 
10 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct, madam. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  And so you go over the page at page nine to talk about the 
steps that you took to ensure continuity after Minister Gigaba took over from Minister 
Hogan.  Can you explain those steps to the Chair? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson, I of course knew Minister Gigaba.  He 
served as the President of the Youth League during my tenure in the leadership as the 
ANC and so I just called him and I congratulated him and said to him I would just like to 
have a courtesy meeting with him to just update him in the work that we had done with 
his predecessor and to enable him to be familiar enough to engage with us because it 
was extremely important for us that there be that understanding. 
20 
 
As far as we were concerned whoever the Minister was you know was a 
representative of government who is the shareholder and but if that Minister was not 
aligned with the vision and the strategy that we had evolved it could create a lot of 
difficulty and it had taken us quite a long time to get the alignment through Minister 
Hogan and the DPE with trade and industry, with tourism to make sure that the airline 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 30 of 131 
 
and where it was going would serve those objectives and so it was important that a 
successor needs to understand some of that.  So, but we did not want to so I explained 
to him that we, what the process had been that literally the day before we had 
concluded and signed off with Minister Hogan and then the very next day she was 
replaced by Minister Gigaba and so I outlined to him that I did not expect him to sign off 
on it, but there was urgency, but he was obviously also becoming the Minister of the 
same teams in the DPE and we assumed that there would be continuity in departmental 
levels where the Ministers came and went, there should be there, because those plans 
which Ministers sign off on obviously are taken in processes in bilateral with their 
colleagues as well as into Cabinet from time to time as is required like when we want to 
10 
open a new route to [indistinct] in Africa it would have to go through a set of processes 
with Department of Transport. 
 
So we assumed that when Minister Gigaba came that there would be the 
same teams would be familiar.  So we explained to him that we understood that he, 
usually Ministers bring advisors with them to help them in that transition with the 
established officials in the relevant departments and I explained to him that we would 
get people to take his advisors.  He had one person, a professor at UJ at the time 
whom he called in and would be one of his policy people afterwards, but it was just an 
introduction and we then said "please take the next few months and work through it, but 
if there is any", I said to him we had just signed this off in October in order, in terms of 
20 
corporate governance we now had to take it to a Board meeting for the SAA Board to 
sign off on it and that was going to happen in November and if there was anything at 
any point as his teams are being briefed that he needed clarification or that he was 
worried about he should just phone me and we will go out of our way to in fact clarify.  
He had indicated all along that nothing came up from him or his team that worried them 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 31 of 131 
 
and as a consequence it was business as usual as far as the shareholder expectations 
at a high level.  We, in all state owned entities we have what we call a corporate plan, 
you have to have a strategy which then becomes a corporate plan that works on a four 
year cycle and of course it is a rolling cycle.  So every year you extend, you work out 
what year four looks like and so no concerns were raised by Minister Gigaba or the 
team under Minister Hogan.  So we in fact went into the full budgeting process the 
following year of 2011 with that same corporate plan, with the vision which we had 
crafted with Minister Hogan's team who was still in Minister Gigaba's team as well.  I do 
not know if that...[intervenes] 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you...[intervenes] 
10 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Answers your question. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Indeed.  One of the things that you did in the course of that 
engagement as I have it is presented a strategy to Minister Gigaba on the 18th of April 
2011.  That appears at the bottom of paragraph 22 on page 9.  I would like to take you 
to one aspect of that strategy, because you attach it to your statement.  Chair for your 
benefit it commences at paginated page 34 of EXHIBIT R but the relevant page I would 
like to take Ms Carolus to is at page 62.  That is one of the slides which formed part of 
that strategy briefing to Minister Gigaba. 
COMMISSIONER:  Did you say 62? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  62 indeed. 
20 
COMMISSIONER:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Ms Carolus on that page you are summarising some of the 
operational challenges, sorry operational changes that you were proposing 
implementing.  I would like to ask you a few questions about the first item on that page 
but just to underscore its relevance in the course, the latter course of your statement 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 32 of 131 
 
and in your evidence today you will be testifying about the Mumbai route and the 
approaches made to SAA from Jet Airways and Minister Gigaba's involvement in those 
engagements.  One of the issues that arises there is the question of the profitability of 
that route and it is in that context that I would like to ask you to speak to paragraph one 
on that page, because one of the things you summarise there as an operational change 
is that there will be routes restructuring in order to operate only profitable international 
routes.  SAA will operate only profitable international routes by the 31st of March 2010 
and network profitability must exceed any loss of an individual international route.  Now 
can we explore that a bit?  You mentioned in your testimony the difference between 
point to point as compared with a network route.  Can you explain that difference for 
10 
us? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Thank you madam.  Chairperson I am glad that in fact 
Advocate Hofmeyr has introduced the airline jargon here and not myself, but it was a 
very important way, fresh way of looking at how SAA must see its own business.  A 
point to point route is simply where you fly, let me use an example, London to Cape 
Town, it was point to point.  So it was London to Cape Town.  Johannesburg 
represented for us the centre of a new approach and that is of a network approach so 
that when you decide how you use your, how you deploy your limited aircraft that you 
have at your disposal because it was quite clear that we would have to shut down some 
routes and we would have to open up new ones and the simple criteria was whether as 
20 
a network it would be profitable.  So when we speak about a network approach the 
Mumbai route was quite critical and it is true we were making losses and we were 
building up that route from Mumbai to Johannesburg.  Although those losses during our 
tenure was greatly curtailed notwithstanding the fact that we were not in an optimal 
position.  We had four flights what we call frequency in the jargon.  We would have liked 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 33 of 131 
 
to have had seven because you make your money out of business people, but where 
we made that money out of the Mumbai route was in fact pushing those, where many of 
those travellers were people who sought to travel into Africa or into Brazil to do 
business in Brazil or in Chile or in Latin America. 
 
Now anyone in this room who has ever flown on the routes to Africa would 
know that we were charging an arm and a leg and the simple hard nose business of 
supply and demand applies.  No one had the connectivity that we had.  So as a 
consequence those same travellers we started to say we must not just look at what 
people, how we can, we must not just stop marketing to people Mumbai to 
Johannesburg we must actually start marketing it as a package that you can move on.  
10 
So that was why it was so important for us to not just measure it and sometimes in 
business people talk about, even about loss leaders.  You know you take a bit of a pain 
here, but you know you make that money many times over.  So the ticket you sell to 
somebody is in fact the ticket to Sao Paulo or a ticket to the Congo.  So I think that was 
quite a big change in how we looked at that.  Perhaps the other side of that coin 
Chairperson with your permission was when we shut down the London to Cape Town 
both then the Premier and the Mayor two women I knew quite well Helen Zille and 
Patricia De Lille were absolutely apoplectic about the fact that we had done that and we 
were making losses on it as well.  So similar loss making route, but the difference there 
was we were not pushing people on from Cape Town anywhere and if we have only X 
20 
number of aeroplanes and suddenly there were opportunities for us – you will see 
somewhere in the paperwork Chairperson that in our tenure in one year we in fact 
opened seven new routes into Africa and it was because of that.  Another, because we 
could take that aircraft that was flying people mainly leisure travellers who travelled in 
the economy class and then that is all you do you put them down there whereas in fact 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 34 of 131 
 
we could use that same aircraft to fly into other destinations that in fact we would push 
them on out of South Africa. 
 
We would also, we did the same thing with, but maybe let me not get too 
caught up.  Another important aspect of the network process Chairperson was it was 
not just about the tickets and the bums on the seats as we call it.  It was also about the 
more people we bring through Johannesburg and therefore South Africa as a hub we 
are growing ACSA with the landing, because every passenger in that ticket there is a 
price that goes towards ACSA our airports company.  Everybody who stops here there 
is in fact food that air chefs provides.  There is in fact the South African Airways 
technical services which is sadly diminished and I make a very cursory comment, but it 
10 
is actually a big problem that it has been so driven into the ground as part of this whole 
goings on at SAA over the past few years, but so using a hub strategy creates benefits 
way beyond the ticketing process and the benefits there, because it creates air chefs 
jobs, it creates supplier demands of people who provide the food.  It provides cleaning 
services for people who transit here.  So when we lose, every flight we lose that lands 
in Johannesburg it has a huge knock on effect of a set of economic benefits for our 
country. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you Chair I note that we have passed the usual time 
for the tea break.  If it would be convenient to take the adjournment now? 
COMMISSIONER:  Yes we will take the tea adjournment now and we will resume at 
20 
11:35.  We adjourn. 
HEARING ADJOURNS 
HEARING RESUMES 
COMMISSIONER:  Yes Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Carolus before the break you were 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 35 of 131 
 
giving us insight into the distinction between a point to point route as opposed to from a 
network perspective.  For those of us who are uninitiated in this jargon would you 
confirm that it is a fair summary to say that a route could be unprofitable on a point to 
point basis, but nonetheless retained because of its link from a network perspective?  Is 
that, is that a fair summary of your evidence? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is absolutely fair and correct, thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you.  If we go to page 10 of EXHIBIT R you start 
there at paragraph 24 to describe the unease as you have it in that paragraph 24 of the 
developing relationship between the Board members and Minister Gigaba.  Can you tell 
us about that strained relationship and how it developed? 
10 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson we, we would just find that the Minister 
would at various public for example at the Cape Town Press Club or in media 
statements would on quite a number of occasions make utterances which were quite 
we thought inappropriate and unfair and annoying about where the Minister would 
question the competence of the Board and then sometimes even misrepresent some 
facts.  Like the Minister at times would say on a few occasions and quoted in the media 
saying SAA has no strategy or no vision and it is impossible for a state owned entity to 
not have a written down strategy, because you have, that has to get signed off every 
year.  It is in fact part of your submissions of your annual report, your financial 
statements which you submit in the first instance to the DPE and then through the DPE 
20 
as part of its composite report to cabinet as a whole.  So in the first place it is incorrect 
to say that SAA did not have a strategy because that was signed off on the basis of 
which our budget is allocated and the basis on which we are audited.  Secondly the 
Minister chose to do this generally in outside fora where we just had no means to 
defend ourselves and it would have been quite an awkward position for us to start 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 36 of 131 
 
taking exception to our Minister, our shareholder representative.  So it was quite an 
awkward position, but we did feel offended and we also thought it undermined the 
airline.  Where we were trying to build up confidence in the market ranging from our 
passengers to the financial institutions from where we would seek money and where 
the competence of a Board is seen as a key indicator in terms of risk and therefore it 
will have an impact on whether how available money would be for you or at what, on 
what terms it would come and if it is perceived as a Board that was incompetent and 
that was just floundering around the place of course you cannot lend money to an 
institution like that because it is not going to – you are never going to see the return on 
your money that you lend to them. 
10 
 
So it really irritated us and then the other thing was also the Minister would 
often accused us of being unpatriotic and not caring in matters that really we had, he 
had ample opportunity to address through the structures that we had.  The question of 
strategy for example there are regular meetings between the department and each 
state owned entity with specialist teams where they interrogate, monitor and evaluate, 
you know, the strategy, the corporate plan on a quarterly basis.  There were actually 
formal meetings and then on all the occasions when we met with the Minister in fact he 
spoke quite highly to us about our own capabilities and his confidence and I think some 
people really were quite concerned about this very early on.  I must say initially I 
shrugged it off coming from my own background in politics that politicians will just 
20 
always be politicians.  They will always populist in their utterances and they will always 
try to blame everybody except themselves for anything under the sun, but we did feel 
quite aggrieved and I say initially it was mild irritation and eventually we felt quite 
aggrieved because it was starting to question the integrity of the group as, in our 
individual capacities as well as that of us as a collective. 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 37 of 131 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you Ms Carolus and still at page 10 paragraph 25 
you talk about one of the incidents around this negativity in relation to the Board and in 
so doing you introduce one of Minister Gigaba's advisors Mr Siyabonga Mhlangu.  Can 
you tell us what role he played in relation to the Ministry? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson Mr Mahlangu was introduced to us in the 
course of events by the Minister as one of his advisors and his legal advisor in 
particular and he was part of the team, but we got particularly concerned and why I 
mention Mr Mahlangu because Mr Mahlangu himself started to adopt a more and more 
prominent role in ways that worried us, because it was not for the Board to have a 
relationship with advisors or indeed even with any of the Minister's staff.  Our 
10 
relationship with the Minister was through myself and the Minister and we relayed to 
our teams and so, but Mr Mahlangu had just displayed the most extraordinary lack of 
understanding of those kinds of boundaries in ways that made us quite uncomfortable.  
He often purported to act with the authority of the Minister in some of these matters and 
there were a number of little ones and I am sure if you ever have an opportunity to 
interview members of management of South African Airways during our tenure and 
afterwards there were some really disquieting things, but as far as the Board was 
concerned as he would just pop up and his behaviour and in fact his roles we thought 
were completely inappropriate and inexplicable. 
 
One such occasion that was extraordinary was one of the directors Mr 
20 
Jabulani Ndlovu was called by an acquaintance and...[intervenes] 
COMMISSIONER:  And Mr Ndlovu was a Board member? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  He was a Board member. 
COMMISSIONER:  Yes. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes Chairperson and he was in fact called by a 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 38 of 131 
 
Mr George Sabelo who is a lawyer to his office and they were acquaintances and I am 
not sure how they became acquainted and was specifically called to his office and at 
this or in their discussion Mr Sabelo pointed out to him that was he aware of the fact 
that the South African Airways, South African Board was clearly an incompetent crowd 
of people.  They were, and he was saying this apparently in a very passionate way that 
we were way too big for our boots, that I in particular had the audacity to consider 
myself to be the Minister's political superior.  This mistaken impression that I was in fact 
the Minister's political superior and that in fact the CEO herself was a particularly 
incompetent person who was only accountable to herself and conducted herself as 
such.  He then concluded this bit of conversation with Mr Ndlovu by saying well the 
10 
Minister was going to sort the whole lot of us out for this sort of inappropriate big for our 
boots and lack of accountability to ourselves.  Mr Ndhlovu was obviously quite shaken 
by the fact that some third party could speak so assuredly and he assured Mr Ndhlovu 
that these were, these views were communicated by him, to him by Mr Siyabonga 
Mahlangu and that Mr Mahlangu was in fact when he was speaking to him, Mr Sabelo, 
these were the views of the Minister and Mr Ndhlovu was understandably very 
disturbed about this and he called me immediately at the conclusion of this matter.  He 
told me about this exchange and he said he had said to Mr Sabelo that he viewed this 
matter so seriously that he felt he was obliged to inform me as the Chairperson of the 
Board of these views that purportedly came right from the Minister through his legal 
20 
advisor to this person whose ties to Mr Mahlangu I am not sure what they were.  Upon 
hearing this I said to Mr Ndhlovu, I asked him if he, I viewed it seriously enough to think 
these should be brought to the Minister's attention and the Minister should have a 
chance to respond to these views which were attributed to him by a third party 
completely outside of both our structures. 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 39 of 131 
 
 
Mr Ndhlovu said no of course he was quite prepared and I said would he be 
prepared to repeat this in front of the Minister and Mr Mahlangu and he confirmed.  I 
called the Minister immediately and the Minister granted us an audience the very next 
evening and I indicated to the Minister beforehand that it was a matter which involved 
Mr Mahlangu and that I thought it would be appropriate to have Mr Mahlangu in that 
conversation.  So I briefed the Minister just on a one on one while Mr Ndhlovu and Mr 
Mahlangu did not join us and because I did not want the Minister, I thought it could be 
awkward for him if we suddenly start that kind of confrontation and I informed him and I 
said to him that that is why I thought it would be appropriate for him to have an 
opportunity to hear what people were saying in his name and for him to say to me now 
10 
without Mr Mahlangu if these were his views.  He assured me they were not and that I 
thought Mr Mahlangu should be confronted for putting out views and speaking in the 
name of the Minister to complete strangers and he agreed that that was how we should 
proceed.  We then called Mr Mahlangu and Mr Ndhlovu into the room and I then 
explained why we were there and asked Mr Ndhlovu to repeat what he had told me and 
then asked through the Minister for Mr Mahlangu to indicate whether he had any 
knowledge of these views and whether these views were views that he had indeed 
communicated to Mr Sabelo and that he had given Mr Sabelo an indication and some 
kind of authority that he felt he could and should call members of the Board to 
communicate these views.  Mr Mahlangu in fact confirmed in the meeting that he did 
20 
have this conversation with Mr Sabelo, but he did say those were his views.  He 
explained that.  The Minister in that gathering, I asked the Minister whether these were 
his views and the Minister indicates that  
MONICA 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  And the Minister indicates most strenuously that those 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 40 of 131 
 
were not his views and in fact he then berated Mr Mahlangu quite severely right there in 
our presence and he went to the extent of saying to Mr Mahlangu that he considered 
me as one of his leaders and that does he know who I am and he never ever wanted a 
repeat where Mr Mahlangu or any member of his staff brought into any question the 
integrity of myself and he went further and in fact said he has absolute confidence in 
our Board, in their competence, in their integrity and he then again said to Mr Mahlangu 
he does not ever want him to repeat this behaviour where in fact he goes outside to a) 
speak on his behalf or communicate negative perceptions about any Board or structure 
that formed part of the Ministry or the Department and the Minister went further and he 
said he felt so strongly he was prepared to write a letter to the Board to in fact 
10 
communicate these views and I said to him no I thought that was quite unnecessary. 
 
I did not think that it was appropriate for a Minister to write to a Board to say 
this and we were happy and we then left it at that. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  And did Mr Mahlangu head the Minister's warning that he 
should not again repeat the conduct of talking to third parties about matters in relation 
to SAA and its shareholder. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  No, Chairperson.  In fact the very next morning after 
the Minister had communicated in no uncertain terms and quite strongly in fact told Mr 
Mahlangu that this was inappropriate to talk outside of any of the government 
structures and particularly to parties who had no accountability or was not part of 
20 
anything to do that and I thought it was quite clear that what the Minister meant. 
 
Well Mr Sabelo phoned Mr Ndhlovu the very next morning and then berated 
him for having repeated what he told me so quite clearly Mr Mahlangu had phoned Mr 
Sabelo and informed him of a confidential meeting between the Minister and his Board 
notwithstanding and I found it quite astounding that an employee of the Minister 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 41 of 131 
 
actually felt that he could go up against the Minister so flagrantly within hours of having 
been instructed specifically not to do so. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Ms Carolus Mr Mahlangu from your statement plays a 
further key role in relation to both the Mumbai and Johannesburg route as well as the 
overtures that were made to SAA by The New Age newspaper. 
 
We will come to those in due course but we are now at page 12 of EXHIBIT R 
and at the bottom of that page you begin to talk about the Mumbai route under Minister 
Hogan's tenure.  Can you tell us about how the issue of the Mumbai route first came to 
SAA's attention and deal first specifically about your interactions on it while Minister 
Hogan was the Minister. 
10 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Thank you, madam.  Fairly shortly into our tenure, 
Chairperson as a Board the then Acting CEO Mr Chris Smythe came to us with a 
proposal that we should drop the Mumbai route.  We were quite open minded about all 
matters at the airline and we – but we did indicate to him that you know you do not just 
change a route overnight and we thought that we obviously must review particularly our 
loss making routes but also opportunities and we thought that that ought to be dealt 
with as part of a broader strategy and not on a case by case basis, a piecemeal basis 
and so we heard him out but we thought it was not appropriate for us to look there and 
we would agree. 
 
We also further thought that you cannot make strategy on the hove and we 
20 
needed to evolve a strategy when we ourselves were further down the line.  This was 
within I think the first quarter of our being there.  
 
I think even in the first month of us being there and so we said we also thought 
that the question of a new strategy had to be developed by a new CEO and team that 
we could not sit in a Board room and start evolving this that we would wait, so we would 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 42 of 131 
 
wait and we did not think there was the kind of urgency that we had to because it was 
no different from any other routes. 
 
So this strategy was eventually developed and as I said Chairperson adopted 
by the Board but so in our conversations with Minister Hogan this was obviously in the 
route there is a structure between the DP, the DP has an Aviation Unit and then the 
other ones who look at just the question of expenditure and reports to Treasury on the 
state owned companies under their watch, tracks the budget and so therefore things 
like loss making routes was routinely reported on in these quarterly meetings that there 
was. 
 
Excuse me, and so the matter of the Mumbai route never was initiated by us 
10 
with Minister Hogan initially.  Excuse me.  I just have got terrible hay fever so I get into 
these sneezing phases where I just start coughing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you fine? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I am just going to pour myself a little bit more water, 
with your permission Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.   
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  As I said, so these – loss making routes were 
discovered routinely at quarterly meetings with the DPE and in fact evaluated.  We also 
in those structures, it is a very clear thing that you know one is open to all kinds of 
options always and collaborations with other airlines and where you, at the end hand 
20 
you compete, but on the other hand you cannot have destructive competition on any of 
the routes.   
 
The Mumbai route particularly, we could only have, what we call "an airline jog 
and four frequencies" but it is a simple thing, four flights a day, four flights that we had a 
week.  Which is not optimal, because you particularly want to fill in anyone in the room 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 43 of 131 
 
who travels business class Chairperson would know.  The difference between a 
business class ticket and an economy class ticket is huge.  So we anecdotally speak 
about the front of the bus cross subsidises the back of the bus.  The back of the bus 
plays other roles in terms of tourism, who then spend their money in country and so, if 
they save on the airline ticket they do that.   
 
So having four flights a week was not optimal, because we wanted business 
travellers and indeed tourists too, but everybody to understand, especially premium 
clients that everyday between Johannesburg and Mumbai there is a flight.  Whether 
you achieve that by collaborating with another airline, but not colluding, but collaborate, 
because we only had enough aircrafts to fly there.  If we could find a way that – if I 
10 
wake up in Mumbai today and my business cannot conclude, I know I can stay another 
day and tomorrow morning I can get that, my voyager miles will, you know, whether I – 
it does not matter what aircraft I sit on and so on.  The service is more or less the same 
and so if we can both build-up that route in the minds of the travellers that the 
Johannesburg/Mumbai route is the most reliable one.   
 
So we do that so you compete, but you cannot compete destructively, but you 
also do not collude.  So the process for how you work on that particularly if you want a 
strategy of building Johannesburg as a hub, was one that we needed to further.   
 
So we continue with Minister Hogan, as I said nothing comes up in the 
process.  But somewhere along the line we find that Jet Airways is proposing that SAA 
20 
should drop the route.   
 
We were – it was obviously not going to, it was not working for us.  It was a 
strange request.  It was not the request of, "can we build this route in the minds of 
travellers as the most reliable route."  Then once we have established it and 
established enough demand, we would be able to then just compete and may the best 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 44 of 131 
 
airline win.   
 
I think what a lot of people do not realise and I must say, it irritates me now 
with the discussion even now with SAA.  The airline margins are very tight and I do not 
know how any businessperson would go into airline business.  It is between one and 
three percent.  I say, as a businessperson myself I will never go into a sector where that 
is your profitability.  If one thing goes wrong, as indeed it does and the biggest thing 
with us – and I will come to that later.  But if one thing goes wrong you are making a 
loss and so you just cannot afford to have silly competition whilst you avoid collusion 
you actually cannot do that.   
 
But we find that we have this conversation in Jet Airways seems to think that 
10 
we should get off the route and we decide we are not going to do it.  We are happy to 
discuss collaborations with them, but they are not wanting to do this.  They then decide 
to go on an aggressive strategy against SAA and they decide to put seven frequencies 
on the route as opposed to our four.  But what they did not have, what we had, was the 
onward connection and it relates to scheduling.  If somebody is flying onto Sao Paulo or 
from our side, we had to make sure the Mumbai route lands at the time that there was 
minimal disruption in the connection over to there.   
 
So in these efforts of Jet Airways, they try various channels, they call my office 
for example, and they say the President of Jet Airways wishes to discuss this.  Now at 
this stage, this was not even a matter that the Board discussed.  So my knowledge of it 
20 
was, what came to the Board meeting and as far as we were concerned this was 
ongoing business, it was a working progress.   
 
So he phoned, and my office just had a very good routine response.  When 
anybody phones they are very open to it and they just said, what is in connection with 
and is there any documents that we can peruse to decide whether we are appropriate.  
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 45 of 131 
 
They said, no the Jet Airways President wanted to discuss the Mumbai route with me.  
The PA said – came to me and I said, but I do not discuss routes, the Chairperson and 
the Board does not.  It is a matter which really should be discussed with management 
and the request should be channelled through the CEO.   
 
Well subsequent to that, we also heard that – and there were a few attempts 
that the President of Jet Airways made.  But I did not think much of it at the time and I 
did not even do it with attitude or anything.  It was just inappropriate, it was not a matter 
that the Board should be discussing.  It was not even a matter that our CEO would raise 
as an issue for the Board to consider the time.   
 
Then at some point it came to my attention that – and I cannot even remember 
10 
how this happened, but somebody said to me, am I aware of this and that the President 
was now going to escalate the matter to the Minister.  Chair it was quite peculiar, but I 
was not too fussed about it.  I just thought, you know you do not want the Minister to be 
embarrassed by something.  So I just picked up the phone and I called Minister Hogan 
and I said to her, look there is this matter of the Mumbai route and Jet Airways and I do 
not know if you are aware of it, but it is an ongoing discussion between our teams on a 
quarterly basis and are you aware of this.  She said, she is aware of it, there have been 
some efforts around this.  So equally like myself had being aware of it, but did not think 
it was appropriate.  She thought, if it reached the level where it now needed her input, it 
would come to her, through her staff and the appropriate channels. 
20 
 
So she also had this – and asked me is there any truth in it.  So I said no, no, 
no it is not a matter, it is obviously a matter for discussion as the loss making route.  
But I explained to her in very brief terms that what our strategy was we were working 
and she was comfortable about it and comfortable with the fact that, if it became an 
issue of closure or anything other than that, we will come to our shareholder and in fact 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 46 of 131 
 
share with her and we left it at that. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Ms Carolus can I just clarify.  When you conveyed to her 
your strategy in relation to the route at that time, was it a strategy that contemplated 
closing the route? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  No it – thank you ma'am.  We in fact made it very clear 
to her that no, in fact we were growing the route and that all that the indicators were.  
But firstly, the whole concept was one that she was perfectly at ease with and we had 
the numbers which were reported into the system through the department that we were 
looking this as a network strategy and not just at – if you look at the ticket that someone 
buys in Mumbai, it is a ticket that goes to Sao Paulo or that goes to Angola or that goes 
10 
to the Congo.  So, and clearly we could demonstrate that not only were we minimising 
the loss making part.  So we were in fact closing that gap.  But we were continuing to in 
fact build the reputation of Johannesburg as a reliable hub through which you could go 
on a reliable, the most awarded airline in Africa to anywhere in Africa with connectivities 
that nobody else, no other airline could offer at that stage. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you Ms Carolus.  At the bottom of page 15 of 
Exhibit "R", you talk about one of the interactions you had with Minister Hogan and at 
the bottom of that page your statement reads:  
"That she called you around August 2010, when she was on a visit to 
India regarding rumours in India that SAA was about to vacate the 
20 
route." 
 
Now Ms Carolus that is one of the aspects of your statement as I have it in 
respect of which you want to make a correction. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  And the correction is a product of having considered the 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 47 of 131 
 
evidence of Minister Hogan in relation to this interaction with you.  Chair, 
Minister Hogan's bundle was Exhibit L1.  I have made copies of the relevant pages of 
the bundle so that we did not have to belabour ourselves with the entire.  If I may just 
beg leave to hand that up? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  And to give a copy to the witness.  Ms Carolus this is an 
extract from Minister Hogan's bundle which was Exhibit L1 and it is paginated page 21.  
There you will see at paragraph 93 on that page, Minister Hogan talks about an event in 
early June 2010, where she was part of an official South African state visit to India.   
 
In the light of that, do you have any correction to that last sentence on the 
10 
page of your statement? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Sorry?   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Your ...[intervenes] 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes, no, no I am prepared to correct it.  I know 
Chairperson it was somewhere in the middle of the year, it is a long time ago, so 
somewhere between June and August.  So I am comfortable to accept Minister Hogan's 
date. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you.  You will see that on that page 21 from her 
exhibit, she talks about the interactions that she had with you and the messages that 
you sent between each of you.  Can you confirm that that is correct? 
20 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes I can confirm that that is correct. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I think she kept the phone and I did it.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Indeed.  Then if we go over the page at page 16 of your 
statement, that is Exhibit R.  You will see there you now move to a discussion of the 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 48 of 131 
 
Mumbai route under Minister Gigaba's tenure.  You talk about an interaction at the end 
of 2010.  That is shortly after Minister Gigaba has replaced Minister Hogan.  If you 
could take the Chair through that interaction? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Thank you ma'am.  Chairperson, Minister Gigaba was 
appointed on the 1st November to his position as Minister and at the – within in 
December, so within weeks of his appointment, other than our general exchanges 
where I had initiated to get the continuity, one thing that he asks us for a meeting for 
specifically, is a meeting to discuss the Mumbai route.  So within weeks of arrival he 
makes this a priority.  He calls for a meeting with myself and the CEO to discuss this 
route.   
10 
 
I unfortunately – it was very short notice, unfortunately I was not able to 
extricate myself out of my difficulties which I explained to the Minister.  Then in my state 
I sent the Chairperson of the Audit Committee, the then – well the late Zakele Sithole to 
in fact the company Ms Mzimela.  Ms Mzimela sent a document ahead, to in fact 
explain, we knew it was going to be the Mumbai route, she sent that ahead to the 
Minister and I think she may even have briefed – spent sometime with the Minister 
before to ask him if he had any questions that he wanted to clarify, to just explain what 
our approach to the route was and our sort of vision around how – why we think it is 
important for us to stay on the route. 
 
They did that.  Something – so subsequent to them having been to the 
20 
meeting, they then came and gave me a report back seeing as they were there 
representing myself and they gave me a report of what transpired at the meeting.   
 
The one thing which struck me and I think them at the time that was quite 
extraordinary, Minister Gigaba tells them that he is expecting some more people.  Not 
an unusual thing they wait.  Minister Gigaba his Deputy is there and then Mr Mahlangu 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 49 of 131 
 
is also in the meeting.   
 
They then proceed to sit and wait for these identified people.  The Minister 
does not share who they are and they wait for 3 hours in the Minister's office they are 
waiting.  The Minister is not sure when they are arriving. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And all along they do not know who the people are that they are 
waiting for? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  They do not know who they are waiting for, but it was 
quite ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes obviously the Minister knew? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Ja the Minister knew. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  But it was quite extraordinary that a whole Minister 
would sit for 3 hours and just wait, no we do not know when they are coming, we are 
just waiting, we are expecting them.   
 
So they arrived, there were two gentlemen apparently, one of whom was the 
President of Jet Airways and another person from Jet Airways.  Then the Minister 
apparently just took a backseat, and the entire discussion was led by the President of 
Jet Airways who is quite discourteous to Ms Mzimela and started to interrogate her 
about why South African Airways was not getting off the route and that they should be 
getting off the route.  This carried on for a while.   
20 
 
Minister 
Gigaba 
did 
nothing, 
said 
nothing 
and 
eventually 
Deputy Minister Ben Martins, he was then the Deputy Minister, he in fact berated this 
gentleman and said to him that he had no business coming into our country telling us 
what to do with our airline.  In fact clearly, not only that, he was speaking from a 
complete position of ignorance and a sense that we were accountable to him for what 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 50 of 131 
 
our strategies were.  
CHAIRPERSON:  So it was the Deputy Minister ...[intervenes] 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Deputy Minister. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who actually intervened? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  He jumped in.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Minister Gigaba did not intervene? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  No he did absolutely nothing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  In fact he just let this exchange and in fact he allowed 
the gentleman from Jet Air to lead the discussion and set the tone and interrogate. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yet the understanding was that this was a meeting wanted by the 
Minister? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes sir, our shareholder.  So we – SAA you know it was 
awkward for Mr Sithole and for Ms Mzimela, but they just felt that they should once 
again recommit to say, we are open to – our presence on the route is not optimal, we 
would say that and there were two parties who were both trying to build the route.  So 
SAA would consider all reasonable proposals that made business sense to us and that 
in fact followed our due processes, so whatever proposals they have they should do 
20 
that and the Minister asked them all to find one another that they should do this.   
 
So I do not know if you want to go onto the airways.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well maybe let me ask you a question.  SAA was running this 
Johannesburg/Mumbai route for itself.  Now you have people outside of Government, 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 51 of 131 
 
actually from another country coming and effectively saying, you people must terminate 
this route, you must stop being involved in this route in effect.  Is that right? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  No that is indeed correct sir.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that not very strange? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  We certainly thought it was most peculiar.  I mean it 
just did not make sense.  Here was our shareholder just – and that is what Deputy 
Minister Ben Martins apparently pointed out to them was that, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I mean this was not – and you must just tell me if I have missed 
something.  This is was not like a case where you – SAA might be having some 
projects that needs to be done and might be looking for people who might offer those 
10 
services and then somebody comes and says, you must give the job to me.  This was 
simply a situation where SAA was running this route and then somebody says, you 
must stop because they want to run – to be involved? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct sir.  And in fact, more than that about 
this, there was some history where SAA had being having some collaborations with 
them and which preceded us.  So I will not speak about it.   
 
But not only were we – were people asking us to get out of what our business 
was and that is to run an airline and to open routes.  But I remember that, and you can 
maybe clarify this more if you see some other members of management.  But Jet 
Airways had done business with SAA and quite frankly just refused to pay at some point 
20 
as well.  So there was a bit of that as well. 
 
But for us it was very clear that if Jet Airlines come up with a proposal that 
would help – that would serve both of our interests, we would be quite happy to discuss 
this and consider, it just had to go to the process.  It had to go into the structures of the 
airline in the first instance and then into the DPE should the need arise, to evaluate 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 52 of 131 
 
whether what they gave us made business sense.  We were actually a company and so 
– but Chairperson if you are puzzled I can assure you I am as puzzled to this day.  It 
was most extraordinary that people could ask you to not – to ja, to close the route. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is like you do not know what you are doing. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So we have to tell you that this is not be doing this, so stop it.   
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes and that is what Deputy Minister Ben Martins 
apparently effectively had to do that this man was just carrying on and on and really 
speaking in the most disrespectful and discordial (?) manner to Ms Mzimela. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Chair just before we continue – and Ms Carolus I will take 
next to paragraph 46 of your statement at page 17.  We would just like to clarify for your 
benefit Chair.  There is every intention to call the members of the management team of 
SAA at the time in due course in the evidence.  So while Ms Carolus is giving the 
version of the story from her perspective, because it was reported to her, there will be 
further evidence which will speak to these issues by the relevant individuals. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No thank you for saying that, because I was going to ask you in due 
course to confirm that people who were at the meeting will come and qualify in what 
she says. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Indeed.  Importantly on that aspect Chair, the analysis of 
20 
the profitability of the route of whether SAA should get off the route or not, whether the 
Jet Airways demand that they relinquish it, should be entertained with the subject of a 
detailed analysis by the management team and that will in due course be presented to 
the Commission.   
 
So at this level Ms Carolus is dealing with it from the Board perspective, but 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 53 of 131 
 
the detail, the profitability, the analysis. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  The failures of Jet Airways to pay in previous interactions 
with SAA will be traversed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Will come from management? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Ms Carolus at paragraph 46 you talk about another 
strange event that occurred on that day of the meeting with Minister Gigaba, where the 
representatives of SAA were required to wait for 3 hours.  Can you please take the 
10 
Chair through that odd interaction that occurred? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Thank you ma'am.  Chairperson whilst – upon a return 
to the office, Ms Mzimela's office informed her of another thing that was quite odd that 
still puzzles to this day.  Whilst Ms Mzimela and Mr Sithole were in the Minister's office, 
a gentleman called Ms Mzimela's office saying that there was an agreement which 
Ms Mzimela had to sign.  The gentleman informed Ms Mzimela's PA that it was an 
agreement with Jet Airways and she – Ms Mzimela's PA informed him that Ms Mzimela 
was not in and he apparently behaved in quite an aggressive way and said, well this is 
quite urgent and he was quite irritated that Ms Mzimela was not available to sign and 
Ms Mzimela's PA ...[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry, I missed out who was being aggressive? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  The person – the caller who purported to be from Jet 
Airways. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  And said he had an agreement from Jet Airways that 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 54 of 131 
 
Ms Mzimela was required to sign.  Then was quite irritated that Ms Mzimela's PA was 
insisting that she is not there.  She eventually – because it was an agreement that this 
man was – this gentleman was referring to, she then put him through to the company 
legal counsel, Advocate Sandra Coetzee.  He explained himself to Advocate Coetzee 
and Advocate Coetzee said she had no knowledge of such an agreement.  Because 
she would know, when by the time it reaches the level where the CEO has to signoff.  
She assured him she would have known and so therefore she did not think this was 
possible. 
 
The gentleman was quite insistent and aggressive and eventually 
Advocate Coetzee urged him to send her the documents, that if there was something 
10 
that she had missed, but she was quite clear that if it reached the level where the CEO 
now had to sign, she would know about it.   
 
So apparently there was some email correspondence between herself and 
him, but I do not know the detail of that.  But nothing came and eventually no 
agreement was signed between Jet Airways and South African Airways. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Just to be clear on the timing.  This approach happened at 
the time that the meeting that have been called by Minister Gigaba was underway, is 
that correct? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct ma'am. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you get to know why the two gentlemen who kept everybody 
waiting for 3 hours at that meeting – when they came to that meeting, did you ever get 
to know what was so special about them that the Minister and the Deputy Minister and 
of course everybody had to wait for them for so long?  You might not know, but I just 
want to know in case you got to know at any stage, what was special about these 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 55 of 131 
 
people? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I did not know Chairperson.  As I said, it was just 
peculiar that a whole Minister will sit for 3 hours and it seemed to be an indefinite wait.  
No one knew, including the Minister when these gentlemen were going to pitch up.  It 
turned out that, as I say, one person was the President of Jet Airways and so it was 
clearly a special treatment for – I do not know, for the individuals of the Jet Airways.  
But no we did not know.   
CHAIRPERSON:  From the report that you were given, the Minister hardly made any 
contribution to the discussion? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  No he made no contribution to the discussion.  He just 
10 
allowed the President of Jet Airways to effectively lead the meeting and the charge and 
he just sat.  The only person who eventually stepped in when it was apparently really 
getting quite undignified and really impugning the dignity of Ms Mzimela, was 
Deputy Minister Ben Martins who rose to her defence and asked the gentlemen to 
desist from this Mr Naresh Goyal who is the President of Jet Airways. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Ms Carolus just to clarify in time again, this is a matter of 
weeks after Minister Gigaba takes over the ministry from Minister Hogan, is that 
correct? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct man. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you.  I then would like to go to page 18 of your 
statement Exhibit R.  Because you there talk about a second interaction that occurs 
over the Mumbai route.  It is a meeting that was called in April 2011.  Can you take us 
through that interaction? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes Chairperson.  So, sometime in 2011, I again 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 56 of 131 
 
received a request that Minister Gigaba wishes to meet with us in Cape Town.  Now 
this, I think anybody who has worked with State Owned Entities or Government at large 
would know one often gets a request at very short notice to present oneself and 
because of the respect for the office and the institution, you go.   
 
 
On this occasion again, I was unfortunately unable to change my prior 
commitments and I communicated this to the Minister, but I instead sent 
Mr Teddy Dakar another Board member to accompany Ms Mzimela to the meeting.   
 
At that stage we were all – we were in quite advanced discussions with the 
Minister.  Because remember I did indicate Chairperson that we started to discuss, to in 
fact immerse the Minister in where we had arrived.  And ultimately the question of the 
10 
recapitalisation so that we could acquire a new fleet and a whole number of things.  So 
we assumed it was that.   
 
So Ms Mzimela and Mr Dakar went off and they reported that – and when they 
came back they reported back to me that upon arrival the Minister indicated that he had 
a few matters that he wish to discuss with them, one of which was the Mumbai route.  
So everybody sort of accepted that.  Then the Minister stopped his interaction. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So this was now the second time? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  This is now the second time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He wanted to discuss the Mumbai route? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes, yes sir.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  But as I say, then the Minister opens the meeting he 
declares he has a few matters he wishes to discuss and it seems almost just peripheral 
you know.  One, let us just start with the first matter I want to discuss with you, is the 
Mumbai route.  Then the Minister keeps and then Mr Siyabonga Mahlangu starts to 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 57 of 131 
 
interrogate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is his legal advisor? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  This is the Minister's legal advisor, the same one who 
called another Board member, whose friend called another Board member to indicate 
the Minister's displeasure and the Board's arrogance and so on.  So Minister Gigaba 
makes no further contribution.   
 
But Mr Mahlangu now proceeds to – or then proceeded to berate Ms Mzimela 
for SAA's refusal to close the Mumbai route.  Amongst other things he says to her that, 
you know we are wasting Government money, you could have been building lots of 
RDP houses with this.  Remarks which are quite inappropriate for a legal advisor. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  This is now in front Mr Gigaba? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  In front of the Minister, the Minister is saying nothing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Mr Mahlangu is now leading the conversation around 
the Mumbai route and in fact taking Ms Mzimela to task for this.  As I say, amongst 
other things saying, this money could have been used for RDP housing, entirely 
inappropriate conversations.  We have got a meeting every quarter where we discuss 
and we motivate why, what we are doing and you know where there are changes are 
necessary and so on. 
 
At this point Ms Mzimela apparently asserted firmly [laughter] I am told by 
20 
Mr Dakar that she took exception to being addressed in that manner.  Mr Dakar also in 
fact appealed to the Minister to please contain Mr Mahlangu and to ask Mr Mahlangu to 
behave himself in an appropriate manner.   
 
In fact, in other words this behaviour by Mr Mahlangu, notwithstanding the 
previous two occasions, one wherein the presence of the Minister, the Minister 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 58 of 131 
 
indicated to him his behaviour was inappropriate.   
 
The next morning he is phoning – his friends are now phoning, so he is 
speaking to his friends, notwithstanding the fact that the Minister had warned him and 
asked him.  Now he stands in front of the Minister and he starts behaving in an 
inappropriately.  At that point ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then what was the Minister's response, Minister Gigaba's response 
to the suggestion that he should rein in Mr Mahlangu or contain him? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I do not know what the detail was.  But the Minister 
then at that point, I do not know whether he said anything.  But at that point he then 
said he has got some people he wants to invite to join the meeting.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  He said he wants? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  He wants to invite some people to join the discussion. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  The Minister now says.  So at that stage the Minister 
then invites two gentlemen joins the meeting, one of whom is again the President of Jet 
Airways.  The SAA team at this stage had not been informed at all by the Minister or 
anybody that in fact these were Jet Airways.  They did not know anybody else was 
joining the meeting in the first instance and secondly; that these were Jet Airways 
people.  So the Minister just brings them into the meeting at that point. 
 
Then the Minister says, he concludes and so there was no further discussion, 
20 
either with the Jet Airways people or whatever.  Because by now both Mr Dakar and 
Ms Mzimela had asserted how – the fact that we are not getting off the route, we are on 
track as discussed.   
 
Then the Minister concludes and says, can South African Airways and Jet 
Airways please fine one another.  Now as far as Ms Mzimela and Mr Dakar were 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 59 of 131 
 
concerned it was not satisfactory that as far as we were concerned, we had discussed 
this matter with the Minister on his own, with the Jet Airways people in December.  We 
had done a presentation to the Minister on the matter.  We were in discussion with the 
department and their officials and in fact why we were on the route and what the 
strategy was around it and the Minister now asking us to find one another.  But they 
nevertheless committed and said, look if – we are really open to any proposals that 
makes business sense to us, that fits in with our strategy and if it goes through due 
process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is basically what they had said in December as well? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes that is basically what they had said in December 
10 
and we were discussing the route in the quarterly meetings, along with all the other 
routes, loss making or profitable with the Minister's officials every quarter.  So the 
Minister then says, okay we will conclude this conversation, can you people please find 
one another.   
 
Now Minister Gigaba then did not raise, despite him having opened the 
meeting to say, I have a few matters to discuss with you.  He then has nothing further to 
discuss with the team.  It was quite clear that Minister Gigaba had requested myself 
and the CEO to fly to Cape Town in order to discuss the Mumbai route at the behest of 
Jet Airways once again.  
 
Chairperson we ...[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  But also not only that, but in circumstances where nothing new would 
transpire compared to what you had discussed at the meeting in December, am I right? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  No absolutely Chairperson and without any indication 
to us that, you know, no indication whatsoever about it.  So in fact we found it quite 
peculiar and puzzling at the time and I can really say this, it is just peculiar that the 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 60 of 131 
 
Minister is our shareholder.  If you own a business, you know he was our shareholder 
and he seemed to be quite persistent to assist Jet Airways and SAA to find one another.  
When you are competing with a competitor you are competing and as a shareholder 
you actually not about to help the other side. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  And it is clear that the Minister is in conversation with 
Jet Airways in a way that he is not with us.  It is clear he wants us to find and support 
Jet Airways. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Talk and ...[intervenes] 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  He was never asking us how he can help us on the 
10 
route. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  And in fact there were a number of issues around the 
route which I am sure the management team can maybe recount more fully.  But you 
know in moving people on and through into Africa, I recall vaguely there was real 
hassles that the Minister could have helped us on, like assisting us with visas, because 
they suddenly started to introduce a barrier that people who were travelling from 
Mumbai would need a transit visa to get to Africa.  We thought this was silly, because 
there was no security risk for somebody who was contained in our airport, but you 
make them pay.  So you are introducing a fresh barrier in fact to advance our strategy 
20 
of the network into Africa.  So specifically for people travelling to Africa.   
 
So that is why I said, we found it most peculiar that the Minister, with no 
briefing of us, like calling me, the Chairperson and the CEO to yet another meeting 
without telling us that it is this.  But even the very thought that he would be so 
persistent to help them out when he never showed the same – he never called us to 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 61 of 131 
 
say, right SAA tell me what can I do to help you on the Mumbai route.  But he was 
clearly talking to Jet Airways how he can help them to us on the Mumbai route. 
CHAIRPERSON:  At that meeting the Jet Airways representatives did not say much at 
the second meeting? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  No they did not, because Chairperson, I think at that 
stage the Minister – it was quite clear to the Minister that the SAA team were not – did 
not have any mandate to discuss anything outside of our discussions with the 
department and they indicated their discomfort to in fact discuss, you know revive the 
discussion that we had had in December.  So I think you will have ask for more detail 
from the team when they get here.  Ja, no so there was no further discussion on the 
10 
matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But what I find ...[intervenes] 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  But Mr Mahlangu was quite clearly interrogating he 
took it upon himself to do the speaking on behalf of whatever. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well what I find strange is that in the first meeting, the Jet Airways 
representatives, apart from arriving 3 hours late, came and basically led the discussion 
instead of the Minister leading the discussion.  Then in the second meeting you are not 
told, that is SAA is not told that Jet Airways would be there and they are not there when 
the meeting starts.  But they are brought in when it is about to end and basically do not 
make any contribution.  So I am wondering whether the problem was simply that this 
20 
time the meeting started without them, whereas the first time the meeting had to wait 
for them and that maybe this second time they were just arriving and the Minister was 
not prepared to continue and just close the meeting – or whether they had been waiting 
in some other room all along, and why they were brought in if they were no longer going 
to make any contribution to the meeting before it closes.   
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 62 of 131 
 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson I think you would need to ask the two 
parties who were there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The people who were there ja. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  But what Mr Dakar – I did not want this to sound like a 
chatty thing.  I took this very seriously, what I put in my statement.  But Mr Dakar ended 
up having to fly with his child to Cape Town and the child was being looked after some 
members of staff in the reception area.  At some point he stopped for the child to – he 
was going to the bathroom, so he just checked that his daughter was okay.   
 
He of course did not know the President of Jet Airways because he was not in 
the previous meeting and he saw this gentleman who was there. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  And he was playing with his daughter outside.  So they 
were clearly there.  They had clearly were now waiting to be called into the meeting.  
Why they did not have a discussion, but it was not because they had not arrived and 
that is why the – the Minister clearly knew they were outside.  But I think it went – the 
conversation went a bit different to what it may have been intended with Mr Dakar and 
Ms Mzimela in fact asserting the fact that we were – we have nothing new to contribute 
and then Mr Mahlangu was in fact setting the tone and leading the conversation in this 
instance with – and his approach to the meeting was quite clearly to communicate to 
Ms Mzimela and for his benefit Mr Dakar too and it would have been me.  I do not know 
20 
if he would have done the same to effectively say, his follow-up was, now why have you 
not gotten off this route.  I think Mr Mzimela and Mr Dakar are quite clearly asserted a) 
that we were not – there was nothing that had changed.   
 
So I do not know, you might have to ask them whether they knew, I also 
cannot say Mr Chair. 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 63 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But as you understand it from the December – oh no, was it 
December.   
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  December yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  From the first meeting. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes December. 
CHAIRPERSON:  From the first meeting if the basis on which the meeting ended, 
contemplated that if Jet Airways wanted SAA to do anything, maybe to stop this route, 
they would have needed to put in some proposal or something that would make 
business sense to SAA and they had never done that between the two meetings? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct sir, in fact it would not have gone – the 
10 
appropriate way in which it happens, like in any business, you know that one business 
approaches the other business.  It would not have gone – it should not have gone to 
the department. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To the shareholder yes. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Because the department is not the trading partner. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  The department, like the Board would get involved 
much further down the road if it was necessary, depending on the nature of that 
agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Carolus you give us some 
perspective on the unusual nature of this interaction with Minister Gigaba in April of 
2011, because you draw a contrast in paragraph 51 of your statement, with the 
approach that had been taken in relation to a requested route that SAA that sought to 
seize and close.  Can you tell us about that, it relates to Botswana? 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 64 of 131 
 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes Chairperson.  We were losing quite a lot of money 
on the route to Botswana.  In fact when you think about it, you can think again even 
people like ourselves.  If we go to Botswana – if I go to Botswana, let me speak for 
myself, I drive.  You know it is just not a route that makes sense that people would do 
and I mean even business people.  So we were making even bigger losses on that 
route. 
 
So we wanted to close the route down and not least for all, because that 
aircraft could be used much more profitably on a different route.  We were now 
reconfiguring what routes we were on.  But we have to get the permission of the 
shareholder in terms of the PFMA to actually – and it is not the shareholder, it is a 
10 
process that has to go through.  But ultimately Government, we have to get 
Government permission to open or close a route in terms of particularly significant 
financial transaction and events.  So we needed Government's permission to close that 
down.  They really dragged their feet on it and in fact we sustained quite heavy losses 
and there was no reason given ever.  It was not because they thought, you know, there 
was no questioning of it.  There was just a total lack of focus and a sense of urgency 
and as a consequence we were just bleeding.  So we really felt it was irrational and we 
were quite miffed about that.  Because he said, why are they carrying on about this 
Mumbai route and they are not doing anything on the thing.  
 
Ja, then not least of all, it is the only route that the Minister ever called us 
20 
specifically to have a discussion about with the Mumbai route. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Chair just to complete this aspect.  You will find at 
page 159 of Exhibit R just an excerpt from the PFMA.  It is Section 59 and the relevant 
section there is (2) which in essence requires public entities who are going to enter into 
a series of transactions to ...[intervenes] 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 65 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Ms Hofmeyr, what page? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  159. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of "R"? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Of "R" yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I have up to 152. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  You should have the updated version.  If I may just beg 
leave to hand a copy to you?  I do have an extra one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I think what you should do is, you know if you have given me a 
bundle earlier, I work on that one. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Indeed. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then when it is updated that one should be updated rather than 
giving me a new one. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So okay let me have those pages. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Here are the pages.  As I understand it, there were efforts 
made to update yesterday, but it may be that there were some error in that regard. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think there may be a file that is updated. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  It is not your original one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I have not been working one.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Indeed. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do I work on the first one you give me?  So the best thing is to 
update that one rather than give me a new one.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Indeed Chair, we will ensure that happens in future. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright thanks. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  If we go to page 159, you will see that that is a copy of 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 66 of 131 
 
Section 59 of the PFMA.  It is just to locate the evidence of Ms Carolus in the relevant 
legislative context.  As I understand Ms Carolus' evidence, there was a need in respect 
of closures of routes to obtain approval from the Executive Authority and in this case 
that would be the Department of Public Enterprises.  That is because, the closure of a 
route qualifies as a 54 (2) (e) event.  It is a transaction which involves the 
commencement or cassation of a significant business activity.  Is that correct 
Ms Carolus? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct ma'am. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  So it is in the context that you were seeking, as I have it, 
approval for the closure of the Botswana route, you were not receiving it however, and 
10 
at the same time you were being pressured to close the Mumbai route.  Is that a fair 
summary? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is a fair summary Chairperson. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  If we then go to the bottom of page 19 to conclude this 
aspect, you conclude at paragraph 54 on the basis that SAA did not receive any proper 
proposals regarding the closure of the Mumbai route.  You go over the page to talk 
about what happened after your term at the Board of SAA.  If you can just take us 
through that.  What then happened to this Mumbai route? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Thank you Chairperson.  Jet Airways then put – we had 
four frequencies so they put seven on and as a consequence, both airlines SAA and Jet 
20 
Airways suffered even bigger losses, because it became quite negative competition.   
 
But SAA, however, managed to survive on the route because of our hub 
strategy, of the fact that we made money by connecting people on with in a way that Jet 
Airlines could not compete with us on it. 
 
So eventually Jet Airways abandoned the route, they could not continue with 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 67 of 131 
 
the route.   
 
Well thereafter Chairperson, Etihad Airways bought a stake in Jet Airways.  
SAA also gave up the route and I cannot remember what preceded what.  I have no 
indication of why SAA gave up the route.  Because as far as I was concerned that in 
fact the route kept on growing, we kept on closing the losses and in fact we – there is 
another technical word that is used in airlines speak, and it is called "load factors" and 
that is basically just what proportion of the plane is full.  We got, I think up to about 
80 percent, you know full of seats, bums on seats.   
 
It does not necessarily translate straight into profits and I am sure if 
Ms Mzimela comes she can speak better to this.  But I think again you do not need to 
10 
be too much of a rocket scientist or a businessperson even.  But when you are building 
a route with four frequencies, your pricing is sensitive to that, but your pricing at the 
back of your head is also, your money is made in that connection thing.   
 
So we were still making losses but our load factors were increasing I think in 
business terms, once you have built that client base, you can increment an increase, 
you know with a longer term vision to it.  But sort of, from a network perspective we 
were still doing well.   
 
So I have got no idea why eventually SAA gives this route up.  SAA does not 
conclude anything with Jet Airways.  Jet Airways then gets into a thing with Etihad and 
then Etihad Airways now hubs everything through their hub of Doha into Africa, so they 
20 
are getting that whole benefit of the onward distribution of the network distribution.   
 
SAA now coaches with Etihad and so in fact all the business that SAA has and 
has built up now goes through Doha and Etihad.  Access lost that business of coming 
through Johannesburg.  The Air chefs' business, the cleaning staff business, the 
suppliers of food, everything that used to come. 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 68 of 131 
 
 
In addition, we now no longer have a direct flight.  So South African business 
travellers and tourists on both sides, what used to be a 6 hour route is now 9 and a half 
hour flight.  So why would anyone even want to catch that SAA flight to Etihad if you 
can just go direct to Doha rather than come through Johannesburg.   
 
We have also lost that onward connection into the Americas that we offered 
the seamless routes.  So it is Africa and in fact that West Corridor that we were paying 
stackingly building up. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you Ms Carolus.  I would now like to move to a 
second topic which is the New Age and that approaches that were made to SAA in that 
regard.  That commences at page 20 of your statement.   
10 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes Chairperson. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  You begin at paragraph 55 to talk about the approach that 
was made to SAA from New Age newspaper and the attitude of the Bid Adjudication 
Committee, to that initial approach.  Can you please tell the Chair what that was? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Thank you Chairperson.  I must say Chairperson that I 
never got involved in all the nitty-gritty's, so I cannot give you the exact detail process.  
But all I can say, one of the things which Ms Mzimela established as part of her 
mandate to restore the governance was in fact the bid adjudication.  So just better 
transparency, more rigger and steps to be followed that was more compliant with the 
PFMA.   
20 
 
So it was not anything extraordinary, it was just making sure that those 
processes with their fairness, transparency and lawfulness.  So this structure called the 
Bid Adjudication Committee, every time there was tenders and stuff that were below a 
certain quantum.  Even the CEO did not see these.  They just went through, according 
to the delegation of authority, they would then go there and be adjudicated. 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 69 of 131 
 
 
All I know there was a process and ultimately the outcome of this was that it 
did not meet the business criteria of SAA and so it was turned down.  The CEO, the 
Board were not cited to this, because there was a clear process that had to be followed. 
 
Somewhere along the line – I did not even know about this.  This I got to know 
with hindsight, because matters like newspapers do not come to the Board and as I say 
they really come to the CEO, because it is an established process and delegations of 
authority. 
 
Then I got a call from the then Director General somewhere out – so my first 
knowledge of this is, I get a call Mr Tshediso Matona to say to me that he requested an 
urgent meeting to discuss this matter.  So I had no knowledge and I said to him, no I 
10 
have no knowledge and I have no interest and no authority.  This was a management 
matter if it concerned a newspaper.  I said to him, was there a complaint.  Because I 
thought sometimes if you know a newspaper is treated badly, it is useful for the Chair to 
know and then just to give the reassurance that look I will raise this matter with 
management and make sure they address it.  Which was what I thought how we would 
deal with this.  He then said, no, no, no it was actually a matter that management had 
not handled satisfactorily and could I come and meet with him.   
 
So I thought I a) know nothing, and b) have no business discussing 
newspapers.  I called the CEO and I said to her, do you know anything.  I eventually 
agreed to meet with Mr Matona, because he was clearly quite agitated and felt it 
20 
necessitated my having to do this.  I then called Ms Mzimela and I said to her, do you 
know anything about this matter.  She then briefed me about her own knowledge of it, 
which was not fulsome.  I think at that stage for the simple matter that she does not 
deal with newspaper matters either and there were processes which were dealing with 
it.   
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 70 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  The Director General at the time was? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Mr Tshediso Matona. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Tshediso Matona? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  So she gave me a briefing.  Because I said to her, can 
you please bring me up to speed to this, because I do not want to walk into a meeting 
to discuss newspapers that I knew nothing about.   
 
So we get to the meeting and there is Mr Mahlangu in the meeting with 
Mr Matona.  Now I mean it was also very strange, because we were not discussing a 
10 
legal matter and even if we were, the Minister's advisor would not be present and the 
Chair of the Board certainly would not be present.  It would be our legal counsel from 
SAA if it was even necessary for somebody at her senior level.  Normally lawyers and 
lawyers in the DPE and SAA would meet.  So what the Minister's legal advisor was 
doing in that meeting was odd.  It was the first thing that struck me was, it was most 
peculiar for him to be there from all angles.  
 
So when Mr Matona explained, I said why am I here, why is Ms Mzimela here 
and I was quite irritated because I actually had to leave something else that I was 
doing.  But I thought if the Director General of the Department calls me, it must be at a 
sufficiently senior level and if he calls me to say, the response from the CEO was 
20 
unsatisfactory.  Because normally the Board Chair would relate to the Minister and the 
Director General would relate to the CEO. 
 
He now clearly felt the matter was of such an order that he had to escalate it 
to me, because he was not getting the satisfaction.  So I honoured it and I was quite 
intrigued and annoyed that I was called out of something else to be told that there was 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 71 of 131 
 
whatever. 
 
Anyway, so when Mr Matona – I said I still do not understand why am I in this 
meeting, or for that matter why the CEO is in this meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry, I may have missed something. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes sorry sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are now at the meeting. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I am now at the meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And somebody has raised an issue of why this meeting was called? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  No I am saying, thank you, can you explain to me why 
am I here. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  And Mr Matona says, it is discuss the matter of this 
New Age Newspaper.  So I said, I still do not understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay, okay. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I know nothing about newspapers it is outside of my 
competence or indeed outside of my area of response.  It is inappropriate for me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  In fact I also think it is inappropriate for the CEO even 
to be here because this is not a matter that is her – she is going over somebody else's 
head to do this.  And then the DG explains that well the New Age is a new entrant in the 
20 
media scene and you know he thought that in accordance, you know that to encourage 
media diversity that they should be supported, the New Age should receive some 
support. 
 
I assured the meeting that certainly from my perspective I am sure it is a 
laudable thing and I am sure that from our developmental mandate, which is part of our 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 72 of 131 
 
mandate as SAA ...[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I just want to say you may or may not have listened to 
Mr Manyi's evidence a few days ago but he told us that he spoke to his fellow DGs from 
other Government departments in whatever forum they had, that there was the New 
Age and that had – was new in the market, and he said to them it should be supported.  
So I am hearing something similar. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  And I assured the meeting that, Chairperson, that 
obviously it had been a matter of concern in South Africa that you know media 
ownership also concentrated and so it is a laudable thing in any democracy, even in 
mature democracies that you know diversity in media is a healthy thing. 
10 
 
What I did question was that whose job that was.  So in principle I am sure that 
you know both the Board and the company would, at the high level say of course media 
diversification is a good thing, the question was whose mandate.  Because what we 
were being asked had a financial implication.  It was around matters, and again 
Chairperson, I wish to just put a disclaimer upfront, the detail of it I was not interested in 
but save to say that SAA spends money when – as far as newspapers are concerned, it 
is in fact to create visibility for the airline, so we sometimes run campaigns or the 
airlines, like any company you know, you publicise and especially when it comes to 
buying space to place an advert, it is to meet a particular economic objective. 
 
So in the case of SAA it is in fact to increase your profitability so you are 
20 
passengers in it, you would – I would know from my days at South African Tourism we 
would like up all the stakeholders, airlines, hotels and everyone to promote low demand 
periods like winter, and that is where things like the Short Left campaign came in where 
it carried south Africans at a hugely discounted rate to do that.  We would never run a 
campaign in December, when everybody was fighting to get a seat on an aeroplane of 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 73 of 131 
 
even at seasonal points like the opening of Parliament, when there is a high demand, 
you would not run a campaign during that time. 
 
Similarly we would pay for advertising space for advertisements.  I think this is 
in the public and the private when you say these jobs.  All those works, whether they 
were campaigns or whether they were adverts, were very specific to reach your target 
market.  For example if you were advertising seats to an expensive destination, you 
would not place those adverts in a newspaper that was - specifically their target 
audience was a segment that was not that group of people, whereas if you ran the 
Short Left campaign it is highly unlikely you would do most of your spend in the 
Financial Times. 
10 
 
And so you had to target very specific segments when you place advertising, 
and talking paid advertising not coverage.  And then you would also spend your money 
where there was a proven track record that that newspaper had the circulation in the 
segment that you were [indistinct].  So you were not just spending money with 
newspapers willy-nilly, there was actually – you had to have a proven track record. 
 
The New Age at that stage was new and whilst one had sympathy for the 
developmental mandate of media diversity for a democracy to have a healthy spread of 
opinions, there were State institutions whose job it was to help new entrants in all 
sectors.  For example the IDC, the PIC, so that if you wanted to build a new company 
against big competitors who were well established, that is where the Development 
20 
Finance Institutions came in.  That it was inappropriate and we considered in fact a 
violation of our mandate as a company, to see our role to effectively do CSI distribution 
of [indistinct].  And this was particularly also applicable for us with an activity, and I am 
not even sure how much, we did not – I did not even think it merited an intense 
discussion in SAA.  We were invited and even people like myself you know, as 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 74 of 131 
 
Chairpersons were invited to pay for seats at breakfasts.  SAA never participated in the 
breakfasts of the New Age because we thought it was a violation of what we were 
authorised to spend our money on, that we could not spend millions on breakfasts of 
that kind. 
 
So Chairperson, that is just where some of our media – and so as a 
consequence, sorry if you will indulge me Chairperson, we then did offer – so it went 
through the whole processes in SAA to my knowledge, and we then offered the New 
Age, during our term, the same terms with a little bit of leeway perhaps to encourage 
them, but on the whole we also felt from a fairness perspective we could not just offer 
them prices or opportunities that was not available to every South African company, that 
10 
we could be taken to court for that matter if we give company X, for no discernible 
reason that we could explain in terms of our mandate, we gave opportunities or a 
pricing structure for whether it is advertising or any business that we conduct with them, 
that was out kilter with the normal transparent opportunities available to every company 
in South Africa, and there are a number of newspapers in South Africa. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the New Age as you understood the position from the CEO when 
she briefed you, had approached the relevant people at SAA in order to get some 
business but the answer had been no, and then there was a request for this meeting is 
that right? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson the answer was that some aspects were 
20 
turned down and some opportunities were offered. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh before this meeting was requested? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Before this meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  So I surmise that clearly the ones that were accepted 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 75 of 131 
 
was not good enough, that the material ones that they were trying to push and promote 
...[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, were not promoted. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Were the ones which were noncompliant. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  In terms of our procurement procedures and in terms of 
our mandate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  So they were offered the same opportunities on the 
same, more or less the same terms. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Because as I said from a fairness perspective and from 
a competition perspective we could not be seen to be favouring one entity over another. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ordinarily if they were not happy with a decision by whoever, 
that not to give them the other aspects, would there have been somebody else within 
SAA that they should have gone to ordinarily or is that something that management 
would know? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I think it is something that management would know 
Chairperson, so I will just use my normal business experience, and that is that there is 
always a way in which things get bumped up. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I think that even the fact that it came – went as far as 
the SAA processes, some of that was because there was questioning and contestation 
of it, but if I go to Woolworths to sell my lettuce leaves, there is always a process of 
appeals.  At that stage it had not even reached the desk of the CEO you know. 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 76 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  So there was not a due process that was followed but 
again Chairperson, I speak under correction, and you should clarify this with 
management. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And am I right to think that effectively what the Director General was 
doing was to plead their case to you? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, and did you regard that as appropriate? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I certainly did not regard it as appropriate.  It was 
inappropriate but I was just [indistinct]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That I was being asked why.  I am pulled out of my 
work to look at things that is really not my business, and in fact I informed, I assured the 
DG that the broad principle of media diversity for sure, entertaining a new entrant into 
our business, giving them some of our business, there were adequate processes and 
they must exhaust those processes, that in fact it was inappropriate.  I had no desire 
nor any legal standing to enter into discussions with them.  So I communicate that.  I 
thought it was inappropriate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you said Mr Mahlangu was there? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes in fact Mr Mahlangu ...[intervenes]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did he play any important role at the meeting? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes, Mr Mahlangu indeed did, and in fact was – I 
cannot even remember the details because as I said I ended the meeting quite soon. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You were upset about being ...[intervenes]. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I was just ...[intervenes]. 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 77 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Made to stop what you are doing. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I kept on thinking why am I here? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Why is the CEO even here, because when the 
Chairperson calls the CEO she had to leave, and I know she was a little bit annoyed but 
she came because the Chairperson of the Board felt that in fact she should [indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you, Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Chair, I do note that we have gone slightly past the time of 
the lunch adjournment, if it is convenient maybe we should take that now.  There is the 
one final topic which I propose to address, which is the events leading up to the 
10 
resignation of the Board in September 2012, when we return. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How long do you think we might take on that one? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  I think probably half an hour to do it properly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  I do need, in that context, to make reference to some of 
the further documents that we obtained from National Treasury. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  In relation to the interactions between DPE and Treasury. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  So the better part of half an hour. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay, maybe let us take the break.  Maybe let us take the break 
and I would have liked us to finish but maybe we must wait and do it properly. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Indeed, thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay we will take the lunch adjournment and we will resume at 
14:05.  Thank you, we adjourn. 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 78 of 131 
 
COMMISSION ADJOURNS 
COMMISSION RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you DCJ.  Ms Carolus I would like to begin at page 
23 of your statement, just to orientate ourselves in the chronology.  At this stage of your 
statement you have entered 2012, so you are in the final year of your term on the Board 
of SAA, and you begin at paragraph 65 on that page, to talk about a presentation that 
was made to the Minister about the capitalisation requirements for SAA and you start to 
speak there about the need for a guarantee for SAA.  Could you please tell the Chair 
about why the guarantee is necessary and what the position, the financial position of 
10 
SAA was at that beginning of 2012. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Thank you Chairperson.  I must say at that stage for 
two preceding years SAA had actually posted a small profit.  Not a big one but it was 
very different from probably about two decades before then when there was 
consistently being paid a bailout, and I think there is a difference.  It is perhaps 
appropriate Chairperson, to indicate the difference between a guarantee and a bailout.  
A bailout is to pay for the fact that you have losses that you have incurred because of 
bad things that you did or happened in the past.  So it is after the fact.  It is historic. 
 
A guarantee is in fact just a request from a shareholder to say that should 
unforeseen circumstances happen that your shareholder backs you to a certain extent.  
20 
The necessity for the guarantee at this stage was twofold.  The one was – and sorry for 
both of those two instances I shall refer to was to in fact enable the airline to give 
comfort so that SAA could go into the regular financial markets to go and borrow money.  
Up until then people were quite shy to put up money for SAA because they all thought it 
was a black hole and that the chances of recovering the money would be quite unlikely.  
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 79 of 131 
 
And so no we were in a much better place and the financial institutions were beginning 
to look at us again. 
 
We had – we wanted this specifically because of the recapitalisation needs for 
the fleet, so that when we go and borrow money in the markets we would be able to 
have that backup by the shareholder to say that should anything go wrong we will back 
them.  But it was also because at that stage when the financial services institutions 
looked at the business plan that SAA had, they saw it was a bankable proposition 
otherwise there would be no appetite because sometimes banks accept the opportunity 
to offer you the financial instruments or sometimes they do not, because they just think 
this is too high risk. 
10 
 
So the fact that there was actually appetite for that but because we had such a 
weak balance sheet at that stage it was quite a difficult situation for SAA, and we 
discussed this with the Minister, and when we made this presentation we actually said 
there were a set of options for what we could do, and obviously the most desirable one 
is if our shareholder, like shareholders normally do, say we will guarantee that in the 
unlikely event of unforeseen circumstances we will back you.  So it is not like saying – I 
just think that is important because people confuse it often when they look at State 
bailouts of State owned entities versus guarantees.  The State is not required to put the 
money upfront, it is just in case. 
 
And in that year in 2012 we had a particularly bad year after these two years of 
20 
small ...[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the guarantee is about the future, the bailing out ...[intervenes]. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  So yes, also the – it is about the – that is correct 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What has happened already. 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 80 of 131 
 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is a very succinct way of putting it, thank you 
Chairperson.  So the reason – so we were looking at having, being able to get overdraft 
facilities.  Now like any one of us, if you are in debt, if you are highly indebted the bank 
will be much more punitive in the rate at which they give you an overdraft facility or a 
bond, anything that you are go into debt for. 
 
So similarly with SAA if we had some injection and backup from the 
shareholder, the interest rate that they would charge for those loans that we would incur 
to purchase a new aircraft would be more favourable, the terms would be more 
favourable.  But in 2012 the whole world was hit by a situation which even in today's 
terms, with the fuel price going up like that it seems – today seems almost laughable.  
10 
The fuel price went up to 122 Dollars a barrel in that year and so for that year SAA's 
expenditure went up by R2 billion.  So there was absolutely nothing.  It was completely 
outside of our control, just the fuel charges.  And fuel is in fact one of our biggest 
expenses, and on top of it SAA was flying very fuel inefficient aircraft which Etihad and 
Air Kenya were not flying it.  So the aircraft SAA was still sitting with was much heavier, 
the weight of them.  So the fuel consumption, they had four engines, sadly many of 
them are still in the fleet because of the way Ms Myeni went into that funny thing with 
BNP, which we can maybe come to later. 
 
But so the – we were then stuck with an extra R2 billion that we had [indistinct] 
everywhere in the world, everyone was - plus we were then – had this ambition that was 
20 
signed off with the new routes and the new mix of aircraft and the retirement of some 
aircraft that would enable us to borrow the money to buy the new fleet. 
 
Ordinarily ordering new aircraft takes four years from when you order.  So it 
had to be treated with some haste and speed, but at that stage we were in a very good 
position on one basis that it was just posted, from the time post 2008 meltdown in the 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 81 of 131 
 
north and the western economies a lot of airlines had ordered aircraft that they were no 
longer able to in fact take up.  So we could get fairly good deals, and in fact we did.  We 
purchased I think four new aircraft, which was available simply because other people 
were in such – were even worse off than we were, airlines, so they were not able to 
honour their commitments.  And so for the manufacturers it made good sense if they 
could get rid of it, it would be a great thing.  So we were able to negotiate fairly 
competitive and fairly good prices in that. 
 
But – so when we actually put our case to the Minister for the guarantee, that 
was the matter, so that we would on the one hand be able to manage our – if we ended 
up with a massive loss we would be able to do that because of the fuel price, and on 
10 
the other hand that we would be able to give the banks the comfort to lend money for us 
for purchases of the new aircraft at a more favourable rate.  And I recall, just 
anecdotally Chairperson, we, in the meeting we had with the Minister, where we put 
these three options, he was more militant than we were, about no, no, no we had to get 
the guarantee.  Because we said to him you know we have actually got three potential 
funders who are willing for the first time in a long time to fund SAA but obviously the 
interest rate.  So he was quite a strong proponent and he always convinced us that he 
would do what it takes to do that. 
 
Then with the question of where we were going to end with this fuel price, we 
said as early as February that we anticipate that we are going to be in a very tough 
20 
situation because of the fuel price increase, and which was all the more reason why the 
guarantee letter needed to be expedited. 
 
So we – I must say that notwithstanding that Chairperson, we still that year, 
notwithstanding R2 billion extra cost that was unbudgeted for, we still managed to come 
out with a small nett profit.  We had a R700 million operational loss but we had a small 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 82 of 131 
 
nett profit, and we think that is quite remarkable with two billion, to be able to clear 1.3 
billion of that just through smart management of your finances, of your fleet and your 
business planning, and the adaptation there was quite an achievement.  So 
Chairperson, that was basically- I do not know if I have answered fully the question 
round the guarantee. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Indeed, thank you Ms Carolus.  The one aspect I just 
wanted to get your comment on is at the bottom of paragraph 65 at page 23 you draw 
the link between the necessity of the guarantee and the nature of the audit that SAA 
would have received.  Could you please explain to the Chair why the guarantee was 
necessary in order to have an unqualified audit position for SAA? 
10 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Thank you Chairperson.  The question of the guarantee 
was about the Board being able to express a view and demonstrate that it was a going 
concern, that it was not bankrupt, and so that is in very crude terms the concept of the 
going concern.  And in terms of the Companies Act you have to demonstrate that you 
are a going concern and that you are not trading recklessly. 
 
We – I must emphasised Chairperson, because this is also a matter that gets 
conflated and that I think Minister Gigaba bandied around you know, a piece of – I think 
the wrong information, was that a going concern status is a very different matter from 
your audited financial statements.  Your going concern matters is going into the future 
you are able to trade responsibly and so on. 
20 
 
At that stage for 2012, as indeed the years before, South African Airways' 
books were audited without any evidence of wrongdoing.  I really want to emphasise 
that point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is during your term? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  During my term.  Yes, during my term. 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 83 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, so throughout? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That term. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes sir, and absolutely, even in 2012 our books were 
audited and submitted on time at the end of our financial year, which is 30 March.  It 
was submitted within the lawful required period we had submitted that, and the auditors 
found that we had met all the governance requirements and there was no evidence of 
wrongdoing.  So – because later on it might become more relevant Chairperson, when 
upon our resignation the Minister was publically going around, and in fact wrote to 
Parliament to say that our financials were not finalised, which was not true.  There is a 
10 
big difference between the financials not being finalised and you not being a going 
concern. 
 
As I said Chairperson, we started to raise this matter since February.  Our 
financial year ends in March.  We, the Minister assures us he wants us to go for the 
guarantee option.  It will be the cheapest for the airline and it makes absolute sense.  
We get more and more worried as time goes by, that we are not having the AGM 
because the audited financial statements is presented to the DPE, submitted there in 
terms of the PFMA, but in terms of the Companies Act we also have to report at our 
Annual General Meeting. 
 
So we say to the Minister let us go to the AGM even if we have a qualified 
20 
audit, because if you cannot prove your going concern's status, which we could not 
without the guarantee letter, the auditors would then say we are satisfied with the state 
of the books and the governance as a whole, and how an account for how the money 
was spent, but going forward it cannot be guaranteed that there is not a risk of 
bankruptcy.  So that there – you are not a going concern. 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 84 of 131 
 
 
So that would be the qualification that would happen if we did not have a 
guarantee letter, but it would not impact on our ability on the lawfulness, on the legal 
standing of how we conduct our affairs. 
 
And so we said to the Minister obviously the most desirable thing is to have 
the going concern and have an unqualified audit, but failing that we think it is actually 
more desirable to remain within the prescripts of the law to be able to present our 
financial statements in time with both the PFMA and the Companies Act, which 
[indistinct] I think Adv Hofmeyr will bring our attention to some matter in relation to these 
dates. 
 
So we submitted our statements by the 31st of August to both the DPE and to 
10 
Finance Department.  So we were in full compliance.  We start really raising concern as 
we go, in fact the 31st of August we just decided to submit it at the risk of not being a 
going concern, but that matter is only pronounced upon when you go to the AGM 
because it is at the AGM that you have to, as a Board, be able to give that assurance of 
a going concern. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Ms Carolus if I may. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Sorry. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Just on that point, no just so that we can orientate 
ourselves in the legislative structure, you are talking now, as I have your testimony, to 
the presentation of your audited financial statements to the DPE, which is a requirement 
20 
under the PFMA, as you have referenced, and Chair just to take you there in the 
bundle, the relevant section of the PFMA is Section 55, and you will find it at page 160.  
What you will see there is Section 55 begins with the accounting authority for a public 
entity, and then if you go down to D says: 
"It must submit within five years of the end of a financial year, to the 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 85 of 131 
 
relevant Treasury, to the Executive Authority responsible for that 
public entity, and if the Auditor General did not perform the audit of 
the financial statements to the Auditor General ..." 
And then there is a list of three, the annual report, the financial statements for that year 
after the statements have been audited, and the report from the auditors on those 
statements.  So the PFMA's requirement under 55(1)(D) is a requirement that that be 
done in five months from the end of the financial year, and Ms Carolus as I have your 
testimony that is the end of August, which is five months after the end of SAA's financial 
year is that correct? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct Chairperson. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  So if we could then go to paragraph 68 on page 24 of your 
statement, because I understand from you that that is the second place where you 
would like to make a correction to your statement. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes madam. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  In the first sentence there you say: 
"In terms of the PFMA, SAA was required to submit its financial 
statements to National Treasury within six months of the financial 
year ending March, i.e. by the end of September." 
What is the correction you would like to make there? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson the correction I wish to make is that it is in 
20 
terms of the Companies Act, because these are the two pieces of legislation that govern 
us, is the PFMA and the Companies Act, and that is a mistake.  I am sorry; it should 
have read Companies Act. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  So just to get the position clear in terms of the PFMA, if 
you keep that sentence referring to the PFMA then my suggestion on the basis of what 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 86 of 131 
 
you have said is all that you would change there is the reference to six months in the 
second sentence, should be five months. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  And we will come later in the evidence to the Companies 
Act requirement. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh so 68 we can keep PFMA? 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then just change only the months is that correct? 
10 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Indeed, so the only change would be to remove the word 
six in the second sentence and replace it with five, is that correct Ms Carolus? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  And then I would like to take you to another document, 
thank you Chair, because your evidence was that you had managed to submit to the 
DPE and the relevant other bodies, your financial statements by the end of August, and 
the confirmation of that you will find at page 156 of your bundle, that is Exhibit R.  We 
can actually start a page earlier which is 155.  Just to orientate ourselves in the bundle, 
20 
these are documents that were added to your original statement and annexures 
because they were documents that were obtained from National Treasury by the 
Commission's legal team after receipt of your statement.  And what they show Chair, is 
the interaction between the Minister Gigaba from Public Enterprises and Minister 
Gordhan as Minister of Finance, in the course of the period where there is engagement 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 87 of 131 
 
between them about the need for the guarantee.  So what you see beginning at page 
155 is a letter from Minister Gigaba at the time, to Minister Gordhan as Minister of 
Finance, updating the Minister of Finance on the position of SAA, and if you go over the 
page to page 156 you will see that Minister Gigaba himself, in this letter, refers to that 
section of the PFMA and he says, on the face of it: 
"In accordance with SAA's obligations under Section 55(1)(D) of the 
PFMA, and the company's commitment to compliance, I have agreed 
with its Board of directors that SAA should proceed to submit its 
annual report and annual financial statements to the Auditor General, 
National Treasury and the Director General of my department today." 
10 
And that you will see is a letter signed on the 31st of August 2012.  Ms Carolus, can you 
confirm that that is in fact what happened? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  And I note that you were copied on that letter at the 
bottom. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct, I did not have a copy of my own 
because obviously I did not retain any documents after I stepped down. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  It is many years later but it is common cause, at least 
insofar as Minister Gigaba is engaging with Minister Gordhan, that there was 
compliance with the PFMA requirements.  You have already indicated in your evidence, 
20 
and we will come to it again, that despite that there were utterances on public platforms 
that Minister Gigaba made about your noncompliance, is that correct? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct Chairperson, and in fact constant 
referral to the fact that SAA had not completed their audit of their financial statements. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Notwithstanding what appears at page ...[intervenes]. 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 88 of 131 
 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Notwithstanding what is clearly acknowledged by him. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you.  I would then like to move to the efforts you 
took, because in your evidence you had concluded with – before I interrupted you and I 
do apologise for that, you were – at the end of August you were telling us that you had 
submitted the audited financial statements and now you were moving into the 
September phase.  Can you please tell us about that phase, that month, in the 
experiences of the Board, in its engagements with Minister Gigaba, and if you refer to 
page 25, paragraph 70 you reference the efforts you took to prepare a handover report, 
can you tell us about that?  Why was a handover report important? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson we were coming to the end of our term and 
10 
I think that it is good practice to do a handover report, but we had also – members of 
the Board were becoming very concerned about some of the Minister's utterances.  The 
Minister had spoken, and I think there may be a, I cannot recall, I think there may be a 
copy of a press coverage where the Minister spoke at the Cape Town Press Club, so all 
the prestigious newspapers, everybody was there, and the Minister made quite 
sweeping statements about the fact that SAA, the Board had no strategy, it had no 
vision and basically they were unpatriotic, and threw out all kinds of things about how 
some levels of remuneration or financial rewards in the system of SAA, it was not clear 
whether it was Board and management, was in fact quite inappropriate.  But specifically 
the fact that SAA has got no strategy, and that was a refrain he started to repeat more 
20 
and more, which also is factually incorrect Chairperson, because in your submission 
every year to – along with your financials, you have to submit every year your business 
plan, your strategy and business plan and then your corporate plan, and your corporate 
plan is a shareholder compact, where you then say in terms of this strategy this is what 
you as shareholder, together with the entity agree will be your key deliverables.  And 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 89 of 131 
 
that gets evaluated on a quarterly basis where there is a chance for the entity to either 
say, let us say in our case where one of our elements of the corporate plan stipulated 
certain financial expectations that the shareholder had and that we could commit to.  
And it enables us on a quarterly basis to raise concerns from both sides if things were 
not going well. 
 
So, but you had to have, legally you had to have a strategy, and I think it is 
outlined in the protocol, I think by Minister Hogan may have shared that, where they 
outline exactly how you are told what to expect and you negotiate that and so on. 
 
So you sign off as the Minister, as your accounting authority and the company 
upfront, on what the strategy is every year.  You have quarterly meetings where you 
10 
monitor to see if that is going to plan and both parties can raise whatever they wish.  
And so we did think it was inappropriate and quite nasty of the Minister to go around 
saying that, but he knew it was not true.  You could not be operating as an entity without 
a strategy. 
 
I must say Chairperson that I had a much more tolerant view on the – not 
tolerant, I rolled my eyes, the other – some of the other Board members felt that – were 
much more angry about it and in fact also concerned because they felt, these were all 
people of senior stature who serve in businesses, who own successful businesses, who 
sit on international bodies including somebody like Russell Laubscher who is the CEO 
of the Stock Exchange, who tells other companies how to run their business and sits in 
20 
judgment thereof.  So people felt that the Minister was becoming quite malicious, and I 
just said to them you know what, the Minister is just being a politician.  You just blame 
everybody except yourself for anything, and especially if you were under attack for one 
piece of work you deflect to somebody else. 
 
So I honestly just at that stage still said that I thought, but we did raise it with 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 90 of 131 
 
the Minister you know, why do you say this, on the odd occasions that we had routine 
interactions.  And then he would say no, I have been quoted out of context, and that is 
when I of course confirmed for me the fact that no, this is just – he is just being a 
politician because that is what you also do.  You say no, I was quoted out of context or I 
never said that, and when they prove it then you say I was quoted out of context. 
 
So we actually, as I said the Board was quite agitated but then more and more 
the Minister became more and more strident about this, about our incompetence as a 
Board, about our deviousness and our lack of patriotism, just fairly random comments 
that he made.  And the thing that worried us particularly was this notion there was no 
strategy and there was no competence, because effectively he was consistently saying 
10 
we did not know what we were doing. 
 
And so we decided to pay particular attention to a fairly detailed handover 
report, where we documented the journey from where we arrived, with relevant 
attachments and so on, and the steps we took to bring the airline to a different place 
that was in compliance with the law and in compliance with the aspirations of the 
shareholder.  And so that is why we decided to do that handover report Chairperson. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  And Ms Carolus, you have attached that report to your 
statement.  I do not propose to go into it in any detail but just to reference that it 
commences at page 92, it runs to page 139, so it is, I think could fairly be described as 
a substantial document, would you agree with that description? 
20 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I would indeed Chairperson. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  And then if you go to page 25 of your statement, you talk 
about what you did with the handover report and you talk about the events of Tuesday 
the 25th of September.  For the next bit of your evidence it is going to be very important 
to know which day of the week we are on because the events were developing quite 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 91 of 131 
 
quickly.  Can you just indicate to the Chair what happened on that Tuesday the 25 th of 
September? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson at this stage we – I cannot recall all the 
interactions but we are getting quite concerned because a big red flag for us was the 
30th of September, which would now be six months after the conclusion of our financial 
year.  And so we had met the PFMA requirement by submitting our financials to our 
accounting authority, but the Companies Act requires you to in fact at your AGM present 
your financial statements. 
 
So – and by now the Minister had not disclosed our financial statements in that 
manner.  We have met the PFMA requirements but the Companies Act requirement still 
10 
remained here.  And as you could see there was an earlier reference, I cannot 
remember where, in the Minister's letter in fact, to say that he had postponed the AGM 
to the 25th of September in order to secure the guarantee letter in the correspondence 
with Minister Gordhan.  Well the 25th came and then we were informed that it was no 
longer taking place on the 25th, we were now five days away from the deadline in terms 
of the Companies Act.  And the importance about the violation, being in violation of the 
Companies Act Chairperson, is that I am the Chairperson of a company that I founded, 
most of the directors on the Board in big and small, from the dairy farming of Mr Jantjies 
to various little things to big things, I am a director of both the London listed and 
Johannesburg listed part of Investec Bank.  I serve on other listed companies, I am a 
20 
shareholder in these, if you are a company that is noncompliant with the Companies 
Act, and you are a director on that company, it has quite serious legal implications for 
you because you are not technically allowed to do that.  We would have to declare, and 
Mr Laubscher, particular as the JSE who is the custodian of the Companies Act and in 
South Africa would have to declare as the CEO of the Johannesburg Stock Exchange, 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 92 of 131 
 
that he is the director of a company that was delinquent effectively, and in 
noncompliance of the Companies Act. 
 
So the legal and the reputational risks for us to not have our financials 
presented at an AGM, with qualification, without qualification was quite high, it was 
about our entire professions and our livelihoods and so on.  So we were now, I cannot 
recall the exact detail of it but we were on the Minister's case about please can we get 
this thing now that we are not having it on the 25th.  The Minister reassured us.  So I 
eventually had met with the Minister on the 25th, it was a Tuesday, I remember very 
clearly, and I said to him there was two things that I wanted to discuss, I did not know if 
he had anything else, and I recall it very clearly in my mind, it was in some restaurant in 
10 
Pretoria, some very fancy restaurant, and we – as he approached me, I was waiting, 
and I anecdotally said to him where is my "pampier", and just before we say anything, 
before we sit down, my "pampier asseblief", and he looked at me completely surprised 
and he said to me [indistinct] Cheryl, did my people not give you the letter, and I said 
what do you mean.  He says you know your people can really let you down sometimes.  
He said it is there, it has been agreed, and he says, he goes further, he says to me I 
come from PG now.  I come from Pravin now, if I knew they did not give you the letter I 
could have just asked them for a copy and he could have signed it.  I am really sorry 
about this.  And I said to him will you make sure it gets to me by tomorrow.  By now 
...[intervenes]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that would be a letter of guarantee? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  And then therefore we could have the AGM.  I mean 
everything was prepared for the AGM and so it is not even like it was – we could have 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 93 of 131 
 
called it at the drop of a hat.  We were just waiting for that so that when we present our 
financials there would be no qualification. 
 
So I said to him I have now reached a point where three of my directors had 
said to me I am – I want to record to you that I want to resign.  One of them had handed 
me a letter of resignation.  I said to them look it is a matter of days before our term 
comes to an end; please let us not harm this airline.  We have managed to bring the 
company to a level where we were now a bankable proposition, where in fact the whole 
profile of the company had been rehabilitated, the company is in good health.  Most of 
us were in fact planning to not make ourselves available and just retire. 
 
And I pleaded with people, I said let us do this elegantly because there will be 
10 
an impact when people like us resign, people will ask why, and let us not harm, let us 
just go.  If we are fed up, because people were quite fed up by then, that weekend 
before I actually had three sets of conversations with directors who all wanted to resign 
and I said I cannot understand why.  We are just sitting here for a few days, you are not 
at risk. 
 
Well by Tuesday people, when the AGM was now according to the Minister it 
was no longer on, people started saying we have got days left in this business week 
and I am – so as I say one member had handed me his letter of resignation, I did not, I 
said I am not tabling it, there is not a Board meeting where I can table your letter of 
resignation anyway so let us just stay here. 
20 
 
So I had communicated this to the Minister on the Tuesday and I said to him 
look people are actually quite concerned and quite agitated so please can you get this 
letter to me by tomorrow.  He said yes.  By the Thursday morning we opened the 
Business Day, and on the front page of the Business Day, with no knowledge of ours, 
the Minister has issued – there is a press statement that says the Minister has written to 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 94 of 131 
 
the speaker of Parliament, Mr Max Sisulu, to indicate that the AGM of SAA had been 
postponed because its financial statements were not in order or something to that effect 
Adv Hofmeyr, which was a complete untruth but also lawfully quite irresponsible to say 
something like that, when he was sitting in receipt of our financials.  He said in order to 
allow SAA to complete their financial audit or something to that effect. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Indeed, you will find the reference to that article at page 
140, the challenge unfortunately is that it is a very bad copy as I have it but the essence 
of it is as you describe as I recall it Chair.  I do not know if your copy of 140 is quite as 
bad as mine but you will ...[intervenes]. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I may have a copy of it.  I may have a copy which the 
10 
Chair ...[intervenes]. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  We might be assisted with a better copy but I can certainly 
see in the penultimate paragraph ...[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I imagine that except for the heading my one is likely to be as 
bad as yours. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Yes. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  But Chairperson as I said it is – the essence of it, and I 
hope you would have a chance, I do not know if we can still get one but basically that is 
what the Minister said, he said he was – he had postponed the AGM in order to enable 
SAA to complete their financial statements, when he was in fact in receipt of it for 
20 
almost a month by then, and in full compliance.  And by then people were hopping mad, 
and quite understandably so, because now if left unchallenged the official record is that 
our financial statements had not been completed, and as I said the lawful 
consequences of us as people, as directors of the Board and in addition to that as 
businesspeople, but even as directors of SAA we were delinquent and noncompliant 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 95 of 131 
 
with the law by going towards that date.  Anyway so I then called the Board members 
and convened a ...[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the Minister did not discuss his intentions with you before writing 
to the speaker? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  No, not at all.  No, not at all Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So this ...[intervenes]. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Because it is not true, the Minister ...[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  This whole thing was or came as a complete surprise to you? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  It was, and as I said somebody called me up and said 
have you seen the front page of the Business Day, and as I said at this stage I am 
10 
keeping everybody calm and controlled and believing that the shareholder will do the 
right thing and then this is what they read, as I said, I mean I was completely thrown 
and that for me was quite shocking. 
 
So I called an emergency Board meeting for 17:00 or 17:30 that evening, that 
those who could make it came in and those who could not were on the phone, and I 
explained to people what had transpired since the Tuesday, because the weekend I 
gave them an undertaking I will meet with the Minister, and at that stage I genuinely 
believed that the Minister had the letter in hand.  And so I had given them an 
undertaking that I would do my best and I was quite convinced there was a 
misunderstanding somewhere and we would have it, because it just was too – I mean I 
20 
could not contemplate that somebody in a senior position like a Minister could not 
understand the consequences of letting something happen by default, that lawfully 
there was no – everything was covered. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And the way, the basis on which – was the basis on which the 
Minister spoke to you about the letter of guarantee when you met, when he was 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 96 of 131 
 
supposed to bring it, when you expected him to bring it, was the basis on which he 
spoke to you that he had already signed it and was expecting you to have it already?  
Was that the basis on which he spoke? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Sorry Chairperson maybe just a slight correction, the 
letter of guarantee is signed by the Minister of Finance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh but it is given to him? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes and then sent to him.  We, as the entity, do not 
engage with Treasury so we do not know if he has done, when it was brought to him, if 
it was brought to him, whether he had satisfied Treasury with everything that they 
require for him. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh he would be ...[intervenes]. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  The interface. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The person to speak to the Minister of Finance or correspond with 
the Minister of Finance and then come back to you, go back to the Minister of Finance 
and so on? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct Minister, so ...[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So if the – so the letter of guarantee which would have to be – would 
have had been signed by the Minister of Finance, if it was there already, would have 
had to come to you via the Minister, via Minister Gigaba? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And on the day that you met were you expecting that he would have 
it or not really? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson, I had in fact expected he – on the basis of 
the conversations we have had since February, March with him, that he would by now 
have done what was necessary and if Treasury or anybody required further information 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 97 of 131 
 
from us he would come back to us and say they are not satisfied.  There was a long 
lead time to actually get this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh basically it was long overdue? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  It was long overdue and I had expected it would come 
through the system. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I did not have – I should not have had to pick up a 
phone even to ask him.  He had agreed with us when we sat down at the beginning of 
the year, that he would secure this letter, he would do what it takes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He was keen about this letter of guarantee? 
10 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  He was in fact the one who was militant about it with 
us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But to go back to my question, the way – what he said to you when 
you said where is my letter of guarantee, what he said to you suggested to you that he 
had given it to somebody to give it to SAA or to you? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes, we had let him down. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In other words he had seen it? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He knew – he expected that somebody from his office had already 
given it to SAA or to you; that was your understanding? 
20 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That was my understanding Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Sorry Chair if I may just follow that up because after 
receipt of Ms Carolus' statement this issue of these number of days over which there 
was interactions about the guarantee, was clearly of importance.  And so the 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 98 of 131 
 
Commission followed up on that aspect and obtained documents from National 
Treasury. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Those are the documents in Exhibit N2 that I said we 
would deal with today.  I understand Chair, that you have a copy of Exhibit N2 with you, 
and I know that Ms Carolus has been provided with one.  N2 is the supplementary 
bundle to Minister Gordhan's evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I have got N2. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  If you go to page 93 of that Exhibit N2. 
CHAIRPERSON:  93? 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  93. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  You will see the document that was produced within 
National Treasury for Minister Gordhan's attention, and it relates, you will see in the 
heading, to the request by South African Airways for a letter of support and a R5 billion 
guarantee for going concern purposes. 
 
Before I go further in relation to these documents I would just like to remind us 
all, and for the benefit of Ms Carolus who might have missed Minister Gordhan's 
evidence, what Minister Gordhan said about this process, because he was asked about 
it in his evidence, and just for your record Chair, the relevant transcript is the transcript 
20 
of 21 November 2018 and the discussion begins at page 41 of that transcript.  Chair, I 
have made copies. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Just to be of assistance so we did not have to have the 
whole transcript here, if I may beg leave to hand that up. 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 99 of 131 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  I will just summarise what is happening in this part of the 
transcript.  Mr Pretorius is asking Minister Gordhan about the circumstances around the 
SAA guarantee, and if you go over the page to page 42 what Minister Gordhan explains 
there in broad outline, because as I have his evidence he did not have a perfect 
recollection of these days and what happened on them, but he says as a general 
proposition, if you go sort of a third way down in the page, he starts talking about the 
FLC.  The FLC is the Fiscal Liability Committee.  He describes a process where when 
there is a request for a guarantee that is received through the relevant State 
department, this Fiscal Liability Committee convenes, it looks at it, it investigates, it 
10 
prepares a report.  That report first goes to the DG, as he says around the middle of the 
page, and then the DG considers it and after the DG it goes to him, the Minister, who is 
the final signatory with the lawful authority to approve the guarantee.  And he concludes 
in the middle of that page to say that they are ordinarily not in the business of saying in 
advance that you will get a guarantee because you have to wait for this entire process 
to be completed. 
 
So that is a background to the pages that begin at 93 of Exhibit N2, because 
what 93 is, is that memo prepared for consideration by the various officials.  It is dated 
21 September, so we are at the end of the preceding week in which you were having 
your engagements with Minister Gigaba. 
20 
 
And what you will see if you go through these documents to page 102, is that 
the recommendation of the Fiscal Liaison Committee is contained there, it is in two 
parts.  The recommendation to the Minister is that he concurs to SAA's request for the 
five billion guarantee for the period, and that he sign the attached letter addressed to 
the Minister of Public Enterprises, should he concur with the contents and support the 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 100 of 131 
 
guarantee request. 
 
If you go over the page to page 103 you will see that his DG, Mr Fuzile signed 
his confirmation that he approved the recommendation on the 26th of September, and 
similarly Minister Gordhan signed his approval on the 26th of September. 
 
I would like to go back to your evidence Ms Carolus because I said I was going 
to place some significance on these days between Tuesday and Wednesday and 
Thursday ultimately, but it is on Tuesday, as I have your evidence, that you met with 
Minister Gigaba and Minister Gigaba said he had the letter and he could not understand 
why you did not have it yet is that correct? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct Chair. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  That was the 25th of September, the Tuesday.  But what we 
have seen from the documents obtained from National Treasury is that 
Minister Gordhan's assent was only recorded the next day, the 26th, and if you go over 
to page 104 you will see that that is the letter that Minister Gordhan signed, informing 
Minister Gigaba about the approval of the guarantee.  And if you go over the page to 
105 you will see that that also bears the date of the 26th of September 2012.  Is that 
consistent with what Minister Gigaba told you on Tuesday the 25th? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  No it is not. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  If you go over one further page to 106 you will see that this 
is a fax confirmation report.  It is sent in the wee hours of 06:30 in the morning on the 
20 
date of the 27th of September.  We are now on Thursday, and what you will see is that is 
a fax confirmation of the letter signed on the 26th by Minister Gordhan, going to a 
number 0214652381.  I do not want to take too long on this but I can assure you Chair 
that is the number of the Ministry of Public Enterprises and is the number for 
communicating with Minister Gigaba, which is clear from the August 31st letter that we 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 101 of 131 
 
went to previously.  So this goes to Minister Gigaba only on the morning of Thursday 
the 27th of September, and despite this, as I have your evidence, you were told on the 
Tuesday he had it already and that you would get it on the Wednesday, is that correct? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct Chairperson. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  And as I understand your evidence from your statement at 
page 25 you got nothing on the Wednesday and then you were confronted on the 
Thursday morning with the Business Day article which recorded the statement that 
Minister Gigaba had made to Parliament about your audit report not having been 
finalised and not ready, is that correct? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is there some – the issuing of the letter of guarantee, does that – is it 
consistent with what Minister Gigaba told the speaker about SAA or is it neutral?  In 
other words ...[intervenes]. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  No Chairperson, in fact they are two very distinct 
matters which only become related when we want the going concern thing.  But the 
financial statements were finalised and in fact signed and certified by the auditing firm 
of SAA to say that looking backwards all things were in good order, there was nothing 
that was picked up that in fact was a matter of emphasis that was worrying.  So the 
good health was signed off.  So the financial statements were complete. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How long before this date when he wrote to the Minister, to the 
20 
speaker, how long before that were the financial statements ready, had been 
completed? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  We submitted it formally on the 31st of August to both 
the DPE and the Ministry of – and the Department of Finance, the Treasury, because 
that is the lawful cut-off point.  We had them, they were prepared even before that but 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 102 of 131 
 
we were hanging onto them because they would then be presented together with an 
AGM to in fact submit to the AGM the annual report and the financial statements of the 
company. 
 
So it was absolutely clear that our statements had been finalised.  It was 
incorrect to say the statements were not finalised.  At an AGM, in addition to your 
submitting your financial statements and your annual report, the Board has to express a 
view to say that it is, this company is a going concern, and that is that the company will 
be able to fulfil its legal obligations and to be able to conduct trade without any risk to 
[indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Had there ever been any discussion between – involving you and Mr 
10 
Gigaba, that related to the financial statements prior to him sending this letter to the 
speaker, in which he would have been told that the statements are ready and this is 
what they say or not really? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  No at the time, Chairperson at the time the Minister 
made that statement on the 27th of September he had been in receipt, and SAA has 
received, and in fact he indicates this in his letter to Minister Gordhan, that he had 
received our financial statements, our completed and audited clean set of results on the 
31st of August as is lawfully required in terms of the PFMA.  So there was absolutely no 
concerns raised by the auditors.  He was aware of it, he received it as such and we 
were just now waiting to present those statements to the formal AGM process which 
20 
would comply with the ...[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And he would not have, even if for one reason or another, although 
the statements may have been received in his departments, even if for one reason or 
another he might not have looked at them he could not write to the speaker and say 
what he said without checking what the statements say or whether they are there or not 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 103 of 131 
 
is it not? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson I would have ...[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am just trying to understand why ...[intervenes]. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  It is quite a serious allegation Chairperson, to accuse a 
State owned company of breaking the law, because at that stage we would have been 
in violation of the PFMA and it is one of the pieces of oversight that Parliament takes 
very seriously, is any State entity, be they a company or a department who is in 
violation of the PFMA, it is firstly unlawful and certainly taken – viewed in a very serious 
light by Parliament in particular.  And so to make that allegation without the facts, even 
if you are ignorant, I would just say for somebody in a position of responsibility to do 
10 
that is just grossly irresponsible. 
 
But secondly Chairperson, Minister Gigaba knew that everything was ready, 
the financial statements included, even the very fact that we only submitted it to his 
department on the 31st of August was because we were holding it back so that it could 
go with the letter of guarantee and the AGM would follow.  And so he knew everything 
was ready for that AGM. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just go back to telling me the basis for you saying he knew because 
if indeed factually he knew but went on to write to the speaker of Parliament and said 
something that was not true, you can understand how serious that can be, but I am just 
wondering that even if you have not seen them, I would have thought that as Minister, 
20 
before you write to the speaker about something like that you would call at least the 
Chairperson of the Board and say what is happening about the statements, and if you 
are not sure, but obviously if you are sure – so I am trying to understand whether you 
are able to say there is a meeting in which I was there and he was there and we talked 
about the statements and I told him they are ready or there is a letter he wrote maybe to 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 104 of 131 
 
the Minister of Finance or to us in which he said that the statements are ready.  
Because if that is there then it shows that he had personal knowledge. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Well Chairperson, in fact I think Adv Hofmeyr can just 
take me back to the document. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Yes. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  He did indeed write on the 21st of September. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  He did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Well he wrote earlier than that, he wrote on the 31st of 
August to the Minister of Finance to say that he was receiving your audited financial 
10 
statements that day.  The reference is at page 155 or your bundle, Exhibit R.  This is not 
anyone other than Minister Gigaba writing, it is Minister Gigaba writing.  He writes on 
the 31st of August. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me just get there. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Of course Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  So this is a letter written, if you see over the page at 156 it 
bears the signature of Minister Gigaba.  It is written on the 31st of August, it is written to 
Minister Gordhan, and it says at the top of page 156: 
"In accordance with SAA's obligations under Section 55(1)(D) of the 
20 
PFMA ..." 
I am skipping a few words: 
"... I have agreed." 
This is Minister Gigaba speaking: 
"I have agreed with its Board of directors that SAA should 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 105 of 131 
 
proceed to submit its annual report and annual financial 
statements to the Auditor General National Treasury and the 
Director General of my department today." 
That is speaking about the 31st of August 2012.  If I may then Chair, just to complete 
this ...[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just to, hang on so today there implies that they are ready. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Indeed, because ...[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is why they could be submitted on that day. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Precisely Chair. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Because he submits it. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the sentence clearly implies that he is aware that they are ready, 
they can be submitted on that day. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Indeed Chair.  We submit there is no other appropriate 
interpretation of what is being said in that letter.  Chair, if I may the, just for the benefit 
of Ms Carolus, give you, because I have kindly been handed by my learned leader an 
electronic copy of that Business Day report, which enables me to read it more clearly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  I am going to – I was supposed to keep the screen alive.  I 
was not able to achieve that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you do not know what to do now? 
20 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  I do not, my learned leader will equip me, thank you so 
much.  What then is reported on the Thursday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You have to make sure you finish reading before it goes off. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Yes I know, I am going to do my best to keep it alive so to 
speak.  So Business Day then reports on Thursday morning, the 27th of September, two 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 106 of 131 
 
days after you have met with Minister Gigaba, that he said the following in a letter to the 
speaker of Parliament: 
"Mr Gigaba said the airline had been unable to finalise its annual 
report due to the need to address its "immediate financial challenges" 
for its auditors to complete the financial statements." 
Ms Carolus that is as I have your evidence, what you say is false. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is patently so Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, that is as you recall the article that you read on that day? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  And that article appears at page 140 of Exhibit R.  
Ms Carolus if you can just assist us because what becomes apparent from the 
documents we have obtained from National Treasury is that Minister Gordhan only 
approved the guarantee on Wednesday the 26th, and it was submitted to the DPE only 
on the morning of the 27th.  But as I understand your evidence you were told in a 
meeting on Tuesday the 25th that Minister Gigaba already had that letter of guarantee, 
can you explain that? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I am afraid I cannot speak for Minister Gigaba.  I took 
him at his word Chairperson.  I have no knowledge. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you.  You then, at page 25, tell us what happened in 
20 
the remainder of Thursday the 27th of September.  It begins with the statement that 
eight of the 12 directors resigned from the Board on the 27th of September.  Can you tell 
us about those events? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson as I said with this article on the front page 
of the Business Day I was quite taken aback and deflated because I had asked the – I 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 107 of 131 
 
had consistently assured the Board members notwithstanding a growing view amongst 
them, that the Minister was at best negligent and at worst in fact hostile to the Board of 
his company, as our shareholder.  And I had, as I said, consistently given them this 
reassurance but also asked that at the minimum that we seek to not harm the company 
and the reputation of our country in fact, with rash actions on our side. 
 
But when this appeared on the font page I really felt the Minister had just 
checkmated me, the fact that he is writing to Parliament, giving an untruth as we can 
see is now corroborated in his own correspondence, that he was lying to the Minister, to 
the speaker of the house, and being quite reckless about the implications.  Because if 
that is a public record that stands I would have had to declare to every company I serve 
10 
on that I am now the director of a delinquent company that has in fact violated the law, 
and that timing of that was going to become true by the 30th of – so it would have been 
Sunday the 30th of September, and we are now Thursday late afternoon. 
 
So I convened a meeting of the Board and I said to them now I have reached 
the end of the road, that I thought this was just an utter betrayal to make that utterance 
to a lawful body like our Parliament, for the record, that the company that we were the 
custodians of had in fact violated the law.  Because whilst we were still in compliance of 
the Companies Act until the Sunday, if what he was saying to the speaker and to 
Parliament was true then we were in violation of the PFMA, because the cut-off date for 
us to submit in terms of the PFMA was the 31st of August.  And that is quite a serious 
20 
thing for anybody to do, and the insensitivity and recklessness and as by then I also – 
many members of the Board concluded the hostility, they did not know what his motives 
were but it was quite clear to them that his man was hostile to this Board and was 
determined to in fact ruin our reputations and I just thought it was the height of 
irresponsibility because I had explained to him what the consequences were just in 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 108 of 131 
 
case he did not understand it.  But I did expect that he would have.  As I said Minister 
Hogan certainly did, she convened a whole workshop with us to say you are going to 
abide by this and I promise you I will abide by this.  And then for the Minister to go on 
public record on the front page of a newspaper, is reported of having gone to 
Parliament to report us as people who have violated the PFMA, was just – I do not 
know, breath-taking. 
 
So I said I informed the rest of the – I informed the Board that I had now 
reached the end of the road and I was going to resign.  That I could not see my way 
clear to take a risk with a man who could distort or lie like that.  That I could trust this 
man between that Thursday and the Sunday close of business, that he would have 
10 
effected all the remedies, whether to call the AGM without a letter and a qualification on 
the audits, not unusual in the companies in the business world that you have a 
qualification of that nature, or indeed that he would get the letter of guarantee for us.  
Because at that stage we still were not in possession of the letter of guarantee or even 
an indication about the letter of guarantee and yet he makes an utterance like that.  I 
just thought that I – even I had now reached the end and it was quite a tough thing for 
me to do because I had really given the Minister a fair chance at being compromised by 
a series of things. 
 
Anyway so I said I was going to resign and then seven other directors felt with 
me, very strongly in fact, that as a matter of protest but also to protect ourselves 
20 
lawfully, and our reputations, but felt we wanted to send a very strong message that we 
were not going to tolerate people playing loose and fast with our reputations and our 
legal standing Chairperson. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Ms Carolus you resigned en mass, all eight of you on 
Thursday the 27th of September, but as I have it, and you have indicated already in your 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 109 of 131 
 
evidence, you went to great lengths to endeavour not to harm SAA as a consequence of 
that resignation.  Can you please explain to us what motivated you in doing so, and I 
would, after you have done that, like to take you to one of the reports about the 
comments you made in relation to Minister Gigaba at the time of your resignation.  But 
first of all why was it important not to harm SAA as a consequence of the resignation? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson there were a few reasons but the most 
important one was here was an entity in quite severe state of disrepair at multiple levels 
when we were appointed to serve and that we had built up not so much as a Board 
even but just as a management team.  They – we had really built up under the 
leadership of Ms Mzimela, a really credible, hardworking honest team where the values 
10 
were readjusted, SAA was a place where people wanted to work again and we 
understood that the consequences of a resignation could be quite dire, and especially if 
we go with a lot of controversy.  We were on the verge of being able to secure, in the 
regular markets, funding for the airline. And if SAA was back in a negative – if there 
were negative perceptions, the ability – the knock-on effect was just too horrendous.  
The question of the fact that we needed that money, regardless of what the cost is but 
just people who would lend us money period, we find ourselves back in a situation now, 
after this procedures of State capture that has been carrying on, where many of our 
State entities are broken and where no one wants to lend the money because they are 
considered such a high risk that it is very unlikely in their current state and with their 
20 
current business plans and leadership, that you would ever be able to recover your 
money.  So it was not even a question, no matter how greedy you might be you are just 
not going to lend the money because they are so bad, and that is where SAA started off 
from. 
 
And so here we were, and so we knew it was a bit of a nuclear option, we had 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 110 of 131 
 
really gone along, we were right up to the Thursday and the Sunday was D Day for us.  
Not only did the Minister – I do not know why it took so long for him to get that decision 
through Treasury, so between him and Treasury they must account for that but we 
started in February to flag this need and we left it in his hands.  We were never told you 
have not given us enough information, you know any serious matters that caused 
concern that delayed, that caused this delay. 
 
So we had given the Minister a lot of slack until the Thursday.  If we did not act 
on that Thursday we would have been in violation of the Companies Act, that is it, in 24 
hours we would have – you know by the Sunday not 24 hours.  But the 24 hours is the 
Friday would be the close of business.  It would not have been possible to conduct 
10 
many things after that day. 
 
But I – so firstly in response to the question Chairperson, we were worried 
about just the financial and economic consequences for SAA, and by implication for our 
country because at the risk of sounding immodest again, I think that the calibre of 
people that we had on that Board, if people like that get up in public and make a meal of 
a behaviour of a senior member of the Cabinet, it would just send a very bad message 
that we thought would have unintended consequences.  And therefore I pleaded with 
people that how we would manage the communications going out of there, but we 
thought we wanted to communicate and we made it our business, but we did not call a 
press conference, we issued a statement.  I was available to respond to the one 
20 
newspaper that we issued the statement, because we just wanted it on the public 
record.  And especially given the track record before, like that Thursday's press 
statement, that morning's press statement he made, but subsequently also if we look at 
the utterances he made, it was a very good move that we firstly compiled that handover 
report as a clear documentation that is backed up by processes that is recorded in his 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 111 of 131 
 
own department and secondly that in fact just the financials that were signed off by his 
department, by independent auditors and all the regulatory authorities disproved that.  
But we nevertheless felt that whilst we wanted to be on the record in our own words 
rather than having to correct him, we still pleaded that let us just be careful.  So nobody 
spoke in fact on the matter.  So there was a general carefulness. 
 
I must say in hindsight Chairperson, maybe I was even more mindful of the 
fact that here was a senior member of my organisation as well you know, but I must say 
that I was not going to protect him when the country, when he was in fact placing the 
country and its institutions like SAA at risk.  I was not going to tolerate that and I could 
not expect other members of the Board to do that, but we wanted to strike that balance. 
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you.  As I have it you describe those events at 
paragraph 79 on page 29 of your statement in the following terms, and if I may just be 
permitted to read what you say in the second part of that paragraph and then ask for 
your comment.  You say from the middle of that paragraph: 
"Both Minister Gigaba and Mr Mahlangu exerted pressure on the 
Board and management in this regard." 
There you are referring to the Jet Airways events and the New Age business.  You say: 
"I have no doubt that the Board at that time was seen as an obstacle 
to these attempts to influence its decisions.  Indeed the mass 
resignation on 27 September 2012 feels more like a constructive 
20 
dismissal in order to pave the way for a more compliant Board." 
Is that an accurate recordal of the view you hold Ms Carolus? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  In fact I feel even more strongly about it having been 
party or being privy to some of the matters which have come here indeed Chairperson. 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR SC:  Thank you, I would then finally like to conclude with the 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 112 of 131 
 
comments you make at page 28 of your statement. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry, before you go there, are you – your last answer to 
Ms Hofmeyr, is it because of – is that view you hold about why thing happened the way 
they did leading to what happened when you were at SAA Board, does that kind of 
explain to you why maybe Mr Gigaba behaved in the manner in which he behaved, 
which you might not have understood at that time? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson ...[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In other words you told me, us earlier on you could not understand 
why he would – he wrote to the speaker and said something that was not true and there 
may have been other instances when you or members of your Board thought he 
10 
seemed to reveal a hostile attitude towards the Board, but sometimes he would say he 
was quoted out of context and so on.  And from what – my understanding of your 
evidence is that at that stage sometimes you were not sure why so I am just asking 
whether your view is that it may or may not have had anything to do with what you say 
in paragraph 79, namely an attempt to remove a Board that might not have been so 
cooperative maybe in his view. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson you are correct in saying that, it seems so 
irrational and inexplicable.  Many of my fellow Board members quite early on in that 
year, they read it as hostility, we have a hostile shareholder.  In fact I think that is what 
the one person who did the letter of resignation said that, they really felt the Minister's 
20 
actions were hostile in the extreme.  I did not believe it but it was so irrational. 
 
I mean here is a grown person who is – one of the things that I always admired 
of Minister Gigaba when he was a young man emerging through the ranks of the ANC 
youth league that really endeared him to me was that he was intellectually very astute, 
and so this just did not add up, this is just madness.  And initially I thought it was just 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 113 of 131 
 
benign because of my healthy sinicism I have about what politicians do and how they 
behave and how I expect them to behave, and later it just became weird.  I just could 
not explain because my fellow Board members kept on asking me well how do you 
explain this, we are telling me this man is hostile, he is a hostile shareholder.  And 
Chairperson, I must say that as I watched the events unfold long before the 
Commission started to sit, before things were officially placed on the record to this 
Commission, it became quite clear what Minister Gigaba had sadly fallen into, from his 
lifestyle.  I mean I do not want to be petty you know, just all manner of things about – I 
got to know him as a young man of exceptional intellect, of absolute moral integrity, 
modest, humble, and in fact I thought he – I projected him in the ANC as the poster kid 
10 
of what an ANC youth league President should look like into the future, where we were 
not at war but where we were building a country, that he was that kind of person.  So he 
is not stupid.  So that is what was irrational for me.  But I must say I have been quite 
sad at what he has degenerated into because it is quite clear that he has been quite 
central to a lot of wrongdoing in many of the State owned enterprises. 
 
If I look at SAA just you know, the fact that within a very short period of time of 
him arriving there he seeks to virtually get us to hand over a part of our business that 
was showing promise, to some outside entity.  You know he was our shareholder, and 
just listening to some of the evidence here, but also some of the Parliamentary hearings 
that happened around Eskom over the last few years it just raised a huge amount of 
20 
disquiet and disappointment in a man who had so much going for him but he does not 
have the excuse of stupidity.  He certainly did not.  It was quite calculated what he did. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As I understand your evidence at the time when – around end of 
September the terms of the Board members, or at least some of them were about to 
come to an end am I right? 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 114 of 131 
 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would that have been – they were not – it would have been only for 
all the members of the Board or not, or most? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I think it would have been for some of the initial people 
who did, because you are appointed for a term of three years. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I cannot remember that detail Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, and I guess some would remain behind for continuity terms of 
...[intervenes]. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  We had urged, in our handover report very strongly 
10 
because we found ourselves with just one person, and so in the handover report we 
make two points, we say (1) we do think that there should be – at least one-third should 
be retained always for continuity is best practice, and secondly we thought the term 
should maybe be a bit longer because you make decisions over a very long cycle, your 
corporate plan is four years. 
 
But – so as I said the reason why it was not too material was that most people 
will desperately want him to leave, and eventually agreed, you know a natural process 
for you to be relieved of this high risk space that you believe you are in here, is to just 
wait for the AGM, and it was supposed to take place anytime from May.  And so, and 
where traditionally the Minister appoints, the shareholder appoints, reappoints, renews, 
20 
refreshes and those whose terms have expired he applies his mind to.  And we spoke 
about it a little bit.  I just said to him you know most people would want to move on, did 
not go into detail about why but certainly at least the eight and some of the other people 
also who subsequently resigned also wanted to leave. 
 
Ms Mzimela and them were also at the point where – in fact Ms Mzimela in 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 115 of 131 
 
particular was wanting to resign when we resigned because she has been at the front of 
the full frontal attack of these people and their efforts, much more so than even the 
Board.  She was subjected to far worse undignified treatment.  And we in fact implored 
on her to stay because we thought that if she leaves with us it would just destabilise the 
entire team.  And she – subsequently she could not stay for another two weeks, they 
were clearly wanting to get rid of her too. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the problem with the suggestion, at least as at September, that 
maybe he did all of these things because he wanted the Board to leave so that he could 
put in a more compliant Board is since the terms of these Board members were going to 
be coming to an end, would he not have better just wait for the terms to end and then, 
10 
so that he would not have to resort to any of these things?   
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson, I think he also sought to ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  In other words what I am saying, I am looking at all angles 
...[intervenes] 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes, no I, I understand ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I am saying he could, he could say why would I want to push 
you out when you are going to go anyway shortly?   
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson, if you, if there was a healthy relationship 
between a shareholder and directors of a board, particularly as I say again at the risk of 
something immodest, the calibre of people he had on his board.  And I do not want to 
20 
diminish from subsequent boards and their own standing, but you would have imagined 
that it ought to have ended on a healthy basis.   But we had, unwittingly, it was not a 
conscience act, but we had thought at a number of things.  So this had carried on over 
a period of a year.  Him diminishing our, seeking, I believe he seek to, not only get rid of 
us, but he seek to diminish our stature and our standing so that if we challenge him on 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 116 of 131 
 
anything he would have successfully created a bit of a cloud over the names of the 
people on that board which was quite a difficult thing to do.  
 
I think he would have wanted us to sign off on things like the Jet Airways and 
the New Age things and we just  [indistinct] him every step of the way.  And that why for 
me it was irrational why he would not, was, he, as I said that discrepancy between the 
signatures of him and Minister Gordhan is something that I still find puzzling.  I mean I 
only learnt it in the course of the proceedings here.   
 
But what was quite clear was that he was, had no intention of getting any of 
the people who were in - I, I must say, Chairperson that subsequently to other members 
of that board who were reappointed also resigned, and virtually the only person who 
10 
remained standing was in fact Ms Myeni.  And from what I could recall from public 
utterances, even those two members were citing lack of governance that was 
completely out of hand at South African Airways that through the executive authority 
whether it was Cabinet, whether it was the Minister, whether it was the President 
himself who was directly implicated along the line about who gave Ms Myeni the 
comfort to be able to do that.  
 
I think it is common cause that Minister Gigaba for a long time had enjoyed 
quite a lot of confidence of the President, and at the time, I do not know how will that 
added up.  It is beyond my, but that is why it was so puzzling, Chairperson that we 
could, because he knew that, you know, that he could, we could just, or we could do 
20 
was just go to the AGM and that in fact most people had indicated that that is what their 
desire was.  But it seems as if he wanted to really tarnish people’s images as well in the 
process.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you, Chair.  Ms Carolus, I may just ask one or two 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 117 of 131 
 
questions as a follow-up from the Chair’s latest engagement with you.  There would be 
no bar to reappointment of board members should they wish to stand, would there? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  No, there would not be.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So notwithstanding the fact that your term was coming to an 
end at September, if there had been a good relationship and continuity was important 
those members could have stood again to be members of the Board.  Is that correct? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  That is correct.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  And of the eight who resigned with you, did anyone make 
themselves available again to serve on SAA’s board? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  No, no, ma’am.   
10 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Thank you, Mr Chair.  If I may then proceed to page 28 which 
is really your concluding remarks of your statement.  As I read paragraph 77 and 78 on 
that page, what you do is you, you make some comments about what happened to SAA 
after that mass resignation on the 27th of September.  If I could ask you to take the 
Chair through the concerns that you express there about what had happened to SAA 
after your departure.   
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson, I start off by saying I am sad to note 
certain developments in SAA.  I must say that I am, I, I still fly SAA as my airline of 
choice, I am a lifetime platinum member because of how much I fly.   
CHAIRPERSON:  [Laughs].   
20 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  On the airline.  I chair a board and many of the boards I 
sit on I could fly first class, I choose not to, I choose to fly SAA.  And so, and every time 
I get on the airline, I spoke with one of the former board members who came today, 
who landed from New York and just said how three out of four of the audio-visual sets 
on the aircraft – and I am sure it is a story all of us are familiar with – just was not 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 118 of 131 
 
working.  I know how I get onto an aeroplane, it has happened to me thrice that I can 
recollect where a passenger in the business class section is apoplectic because the 
bed does not work, their screen does not work.  And we know that SAA, the prices of 
SAA is, it is not able to be as competitive because it is flying with this ancient aircraft 
that weighs way more than the modern aircraft that Air Kenya, Air Ethiopia, that they 
are flying.  
 
So the fuel cost associated with that is enormous, and that immediately means 
that SAA’s ticketing pricing is not always the most competitive.  Their, price is not one of 
the strong points they can take for granted.   
 
But as I said, Chairperson three times I have found myself in the business 
10 
class section, and a passenger would be apoplectic because they paid for a lie flat bed 
and they do not have a bed.  Their system is not working.   
 
Just recently again, it is almost by exception that you do not get an 
announcement to say we have a problem with our entertainment system, we have to 
reboot the whole system, it is going to take 20 minutes. And it happens a few time in 
each flight.  I think those of us who, who have flown in the business class over the past 
while will know that.  
 
So that ancient fleet which was already too ancient when we, when our term 
started in 2009 are still the aircraft, the majority of the aircrafts that SAA is operating 
with.  So that is the first thing.  That fleet has been allowed to degenerate, and we are 
20 
still stuck with it.   
 
There are far more modern versions as I said that is around that means your 
fuel cost is greatly reduced.  We ...[intervenes] 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Ms Carolus, if I may, sorry, interject there.  
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes.  
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 119 of 131 
 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  One of the proposals as I have it that you made in the 
handover report was for a renewal of the fleet.  
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes.   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Is that correct? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Yes, that is, that is correct indeed.  It was, it was in fact 
one of the most critical things that we thought had to happen, and that related to fixing 
the balance sheet. So not only getting a cash injection from the shareholder, but we 
had demonstrate when people do a due diligence on your book to, to, when you apply 
for a loan to a bank and it is usually in billions, they look at your books and they see 
how you run your business.  And if they pick up just that there was inefficiencies that 
10 
was so large.  
 
So fixing that balance sheet and getting the efficiencies going was a crustal part 
to get SA toe a point where we were able to borrow in the capital markets with comfort.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Can you explain why that was not taken forward? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson, I ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would she now? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  No, no, no.  I think there was some, I can only refer to 
matters that came, and in fact I think Parliament made some references yesterday.  I 
did not watch the whole proceedings, but I caught a snippet in the news when this 
chairperson of the committee, Portfolio Committee there in fact said they were now 
20 
handing over Ms Myeni amongst other people for some action because they did what I 
think is unlawful.  You cannot refuse to come to Parliament when Parliament calls you.  
But there were a few people, Ms Myeni was one of them.   
 
In the newspapers, and Ms Myeni was asked to come to Parliament amongst 
other things to account on this matter, that we had, together with, first of a board of 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 120 of 131 
 
which she was a part, we had developed a strategy, we had costed that strategy, and 
we had looked at options for funding that strategy.   
 
Central to this was fleet renewal, both because of the age of the fleet, as well 
as getting a better mix of aircrafts that was not just the too extreme short-haul or very 
long-haul, but that would particularly enable us to get the ones that can fly to Africa or 
the six and a half hours into Latin American destinations which, or India for that matter.  
So fleet renewal was absolutely essential for us to be competitive.  
 
The second part of that was that we, our competitors in terms of try eye, the 
people who were eying the African route aggressively, and that east-west corridor from 
Asia into Africa and onward into Latin America, the Brix axis, the east-west axis that we 
10 
call it.   
 
To be able to do that you needed to in fact get a whole, you needed to get a 
shareholder injection.  Because as I said, Chairperson it is like any factory.  If you have 
old machine and there is newer ones, and you are competition.  So sometimes the 
shareholder puts money in there, not to pay for mismanagement in the past, but in fact 
to enable you to keep your edge.   
 
SAA at that stage still had an edge on a number of fronts against particularly.  
I think with Emirates it is a different ballgame there altogether, because the level of 
support they enjoy from their government. But all three these airlines, Emirates, Kenya 
and Ethiopia.  But Kenya and Ethiopia is similar to us, but countries that had, that have 
20 
much smaller GDP’s, they understood the importance of capitalising their airline 
adequately, and it became very easy for them to in fact overtake SAA.   
 
SAA has lost an enormous amount of market share even against smaller, what 
started out as smaller airlines from smaller countries with much less money, but who 
understood the importance of capitalising.   So we have now officially been overtaken 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 121 of 131 
 
by Air Kenya and Air Ethiopia.   
 
In other ways we have, they have  [indistinct] our market share into some 
markets.  Another example is, we look at, with this aging fleet we have - we used to 
have up to four frequencies a date, flights to London. Today we have one. The 
implication of that  - again I alluded to this earlier, Chairperson – we have lost 75 
percent not only of passengers. We have lost the jobs on those flights, 75 percent of 
them we have lost.  We have lost 75 percent of the jobs of air chefs. We have lost 75 
percent of the people who used to supply from toilet paper to salads. And then perhaps 
more, even in addition, I should not say more  [indistinct].  In addition we have totally 
eroded the capacity of what used to be a world-class facility called South African 
10 
Airways Technical, SAA Technical.   
 
A few weekends ago I just read in the newspapers that Lufthansa was going 
into partnership with Comair - that is a privately owned airline – to in fact set up an 
alternative to SAA Technical because the capacity  [indistinct] . That same Lufthansa 
used to bring the aircraft from Europe and incur the cost of bringing them here to South 
Africa, to Airways Park for servicing.   
 
It is like our pilots.  Everywhere you walked in, in the world, you mention SAA 
Technical, it was a write-up there amongst the best.  That capacity is gone.   And so, 
and those came because of Ms Myeni’s bizarre intervention, completely unorthodox 
from what the newspaper said and what has been submitted to Parliament, that Mr 
20 
Myeni took the extraordinary step to place the whole fleet acquisition on hold.  She took 
issue with members of her board.  Members of her board actually wrote of, well there 
were two boards.  I think it was another board down the line.  So not our immediate 
successor board, there was another board that came in, and those people took the step 
of reporting the Minister to the authorities, to the executive authority, a substantial 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 122 of 131 
 
chunk of those people.  
 
And then subsequently Minister Gigaba was removed and Ms Myeni 
remained.  And Ms Myeni decided to also place on hold the financing, and in fact came 
in the name of transformation with something that she argued was a black owned 
financial house.  
 
To fund a fleet you do not go to a start-up entity.  I mean it was, it is just the 
most bizarre things, and that is why, as I said it is very hard.  Ordinarily one cannot pin 
things on an individual, but here was a person who acted in total flagrant disregard for 
Parliament, and her accountability as a citizen and as a director, but also justified her 
board, and in fact the lawful agreements that we had with the accounting authority and 
10 
Cabinet for our business plan, our growth strategy and the funding strategy.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Chair, just to clarify for the future evidence that will be led in 
the course of the Commission.  All of these aspects that Ms Carolus has touched on in 
the period after her time at the board will be traversed in detail.  She simply, as I have  
[indistinct] setting the scene for the further evidence that will be presented.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no that will be necessary.  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  Indeed.  Chair, those are the questions that I have.  Thank 
you.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, thank you.  Just one or two.  Can I go back to the New Age?  
20 
After the meeting that you had with the Director-General of the Department of Public 
Enterprises and Mr Mahlangu, and the CEO of SAA - I think it was the meeting which 
the DG called and you went to where the discussion was on the New Age.  Is there any 
decision that SAA changed after that meeting in regard to the New Age that it had made 
before?   
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 123 of 131 
 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I cannot speak on that, Chairperson because again as I 
said it is matters that ordinarily is far out of sight of the board.   
CHAIRPERSON:  But in terms of ...[intervenes] 
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  So I cannot.  I think you will have to ask management about 
that, Chairperson.  
CHAIRPERSON:  But in terms of the discussions at that meeting which you did attend, 
the basis on which the meeting ended, did it not entail that there would be anything, 
any decision changed, or any new decision, or that the New Age would be, something 
would be given to them that they had asked for but had not been given before?  
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson, I have seen the New Age distributed, but, 
10 
so there is a presence of the New Age as with all other newspapers who ask.  One of 
the considerations there always is weight. So how many newspapers get put on.   
 
So my limited understanding, I think they are sort of divided up equally and 
fairly, you know between the different newspapers. I cannot speak about numbers, you 
know?  I cannot speak about advertising in the New Age, the costings of you know 
whether more was paid to New Age versus other newspapers.  I, I do not have any 
knowledge of that, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:  What would you, what would you say where the main difference is in 
approach between on the one hand former Minister Barbara Hogan and former Minister 
Gigaba as ministers of Public Enterprises in relation to dealing with SAA issues or the 
20 
Board?  What would you say the main differences appeared to be if there were any? 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  No, there, it was chalk and cheese, Chairperson that, I 
think and the centrality of it all is about the fact that here were two ministers, one of 
whom understood in very simple terms the difference in the roles between shareholder, 
board and management.   
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 124 of 131 
 
 
Minister Hogan would never ask the Board to do something that is a 
management matter.  She would never seek to discuss matters with us that had not 
been processed through our management teams.  They were the people running the 
business.   
 
So that is a fundamental difference that Minister Hogan was absolutely 
...[indistinct] and quite simple. When you dealt with her and she raised her displeasure 
– and she did on occasions and was not shy to be firm and tough about her 
expectations – you could understand immediately that it was that she was concerned 
about you exercising your roles properly, delivering on the expectations.  All of that was 
transparent and upfront.  
10 
 
So from a governance point of view a huge difference.  It was shocking where 
SAA ended up under Minister Gigaba.  Whereas I said, we even, the culture, you know 
where you pass it down in the system to your members of staff, and to your, because 
you set the tone at the top.  And when you set the tone, where the lines are so blurred 
and non-existent and everybody, it is a free for all, your legal advisor can jump in, in a 
discussion that ought to be with junior people around newspaper distribution, you 
actually significantly erode the question of governance right down the valley chain, 
because there is no longer clarity of roles at all levels in the organisation.   
 
And also where your members feel that it is actually okay for them to, to start 
telling a state owned entity how they must conduct their business when in fact the state 
20 
owned entity were people who were professionals in that particular field.  People at 
Eskom were people in the energy field who knew to run a public utility on that.   
 
So for somebody to sit in a, it might be a very good professional in a 
government department is just inappropriate, and that is why those roles are so clearly 
demarcated in the various legal pieces.  
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 125 of 131 
 
 
But those things are also unlawful.  That in fact effectively what Minister 
Gigaba and his team often expecting us to do was in direct violation of those legal 
parameters of what sits within the remit of shareholder, the Board and of management.  
So that was a fundamentally big one.  
 
And the second one, Chairperson I would say quite frankly was a [indistinct] 
thing that drew on the foundations of what this brave democracy of ours were seeking 
to build.   
 
We were trying to build a different world order where we served, and I, I 
cannot remember who it was, it might have been Minister Hogan, but it is something 
that I, I firmly align myself with.  It is a very dangerous slippery slope when you see 
10 
yourself as ruling people as oppose to serving people, or even governing.  Because 
governing implies that you mediate a set of interest that you have to weigh up and treat 
fairly as oppose to ruling.  
 
And I think that Minister Gigaba imbued that Department of Public Enterprises 
with a sense of ruling and issuing instructions which of course is very dangerous for 
accountability of elected people and the people who are in their teams.  Because 
ministers are, and Cabinet are people who are entrusted with one of the most sacred 
things in our democracy, and that is people’s vote.   
 
People trust you, it is the highest trust that anyone in a country can give.  And 
for you to actually take that and do with it what they did I am not surprised that people 
20 
have lost faith in those whom they elected.  Both formally through the number of votes 
they cast, and in fact the number of votes the ruling party got.  But maybe I am 
becoming, I am [indistinct] into too much politics.  
 
But, so I would say the two differences is governance, and the question of 
embedding and building on a value system that seeks to serve, and a value system that 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 126 of 131 
 
seeks to grow an economy that will eradicate poverty.  Because you cannot eradicate 
poverty and inequality without them.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And of course while Minister Barbara Hogan was minister there was 
an approach who was not there to her, and maybe to the Board - I am not sure – to say 
SAA should terminate the Mumbai route. And during Minister Gigaba’s term there was 
that approach.  Do you know what Minister Barbara Hogan’s attitude was to that 
approach, to when she was minister?   
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Minister Hogan was quite clear that there was a 
process around routes, and the only basis on which you make it is where it make 
economic sense for us to run that route.   
10 
 
We have often, SAA still finds itself sometimes where people say why do you 
not fly between London and Durban?  And then my comrades in KZN really believe that 
there is gross injustice if we do not fly.  
 
We can only fly – I see you are smiling, Chairperson.   I mean, nothing 
personal here.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I am from Durban. 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  [Laughs].  I know, I know that is why I am saying 
nothing personal.   
CHAIRPERSON:  [Laughs].  
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:   But ...[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I have asked that question.  [Laughs].  
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  [Laughs].  I hope that, when, when the management 
team comes ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  But not to you.  [Laughs].  
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  [Laughs].  I hope that when the management team 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 127 of 131 
 
comes they can enhance your understanding of the economics of, of airlines and 
national carriers in particular.   
 
But, Chairperson so I think that, on that question of Mumbai ...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you are saying ...[intervenes] 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  The Mumbai route.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Minister Barbara Hogan’s approach was there are processes, they 
must be followed ...[intervenes] 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  And she did not single it out.  But also, Chairperson she 
did not just focus on one route.  I would, I think that Minister Gigaba’s motives are 
questionable, because why is it that as we say there was Botswana, there was London.  
10 
There was a whole lot of routes, and within weeks of his appointment he starts to, try to 
get us to find common cause with Jet Airways who explicitly state that their idea is we 
must get off the route.    That is the common cause that Jet Airways identifies.   He 
does nothing to in fact support us.   And as I say he actually is clearly talking to these 
people all the time, and then brings them and presents them in front of us to do that.  
 
So Minister Hogan certainly was not obsessing about any one route. She was 
very focussed on all the routes, but she was also focused on a strategy within which 
she understood and signed off on the notion of being a network carrier.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.   Nothing arising?   
ADV KATE HOFMEYR:  No thank you, Chair.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Thank you very much, Ms Carolus for your evidence, thank 
you for having come to assist the Commission.  You may or may not be asked later on 
to come back.  We do not know whether in due course there might persons who might 
want to apply for leave to cross-examine you.  But I have no doubt that you will make 
yourself available if proper arrangements are made.   
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 128 of 131 
 
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  Chairperson, I can just say in support of your 
assumption that I would, I will do whatever it takes to cooperate with the Commission, 
and I want to circle back to your request after my opening remarks that I wish the 
Commission well.  I do want to make a very strong appeal, and one of the reasons why 
I felt I wanted to come was because there is a lot of fear that people still have about 
whether they should come forward.  And I must say I was appalled at the vitriol levelled 
at some of the people who did appear here such as Minister Gordhan in particular 
...[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  But perhaps even more frighteningly was the level of 
10 
vitriol against the Commission itself, and the fact that I do not understand why people 
who have such, who claim to have such serious information are not challenged more 
seriously and even legally, lawfully to make themselves available to put these facts 
here to the case.   
CHAIRPERSON:  [Affirms].  
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  I am pleased that Minister Gordhan has actually 
decided to take legal action, because I do think there is good reason to be quite fearful 
of people  [indistinct] levels of violence, a fairly, thinly veiled.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
MS CHERYL ANN CAROLUS:  And that is why I really want to say this is a great 
20 
country of ours.  It came at a huge price.  We have the most amazing nation of people, 
but we are poorly led.  But for us to be able to build we need to lance the boil, and I 
think that the work of this Commission is so crucial.  I want my country back.  They 
have, some people have made a good attempt at stealing our present, they tried to 
distort our future, but I am not going to allow them.  They distorted our past, I am not 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 129 of 131 
 
going to allow them to steal our future.  And I think that we are beginning to see some 
new hope and optimism, but the impact of state capture sits there.   
 
I think, for example, Chairperson with your indulgence – our President has 
successfully managed to create some new excitement about the opportunities South 
Africa offers.   Then we hear that Eskom is now running out of power because of the 
Tegeta contract where Glencore was effectively shut down, and the contract given to 
Tegeta with no proven track record and we now were told this morning again there is 
going to be load shedding.   
 
And so no matter how much support the President drums up, if we cannot give 
people the energy to expand their business we cannot grow this economy and SAA is a 
10 
microcosm of that.   
 
And so to that extent, Chairperson you have my full support.  Whatever I can 
do to help to, to lance the boil, the sickness of corruption and, and abuse that has be  
[indistinct] democracy you have my unconditional support.  Thank you.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.  Thank you very much.  Thank you very much, 
and you are excused.  Thank you.  Mr Pretorius, you want to say something?   
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  No, Chair, except that the  [indistinct] of Tuesday is still a 
matter of cooperation between the legal team and the intended witness.  We are not 
sitting tomorrow as you know.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
20 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Nor are we sitting on Monday.   
CHAIRPERSON:  And you say ...[intervenes] 
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And the reason for that delay has been arrangements 
with the next witness, Ms Mento.   
CHAIRPERSON:  And you say with regards to Tuesday we probably will be able to 
29 NOVEMBER 2018 – DAY 33 
 
Page 130 of 131 
 
issue to media statement on Monday as to what is going to happen?  
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And the events of Tuesday will largely depend on a 
discussion we need to have.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And Wednesday?  You do not know yet?   
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:   Wednesday and Thursday had been reserved for 
witness or a witness from Eskom.  We are told that there is an attempt to secure that, 
but we cannot be hundred percent sure at this stage.  It depends on the level of 
cooperation which we believe is forthcoming, but it does not result in any certainty at 
10 
this stage.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  We are going to adjourn.  There will be no hearing 
tomorrow. There was going to be a witness. Was it going to be Ms Mento tomorrow?  
Was it going to be Ms Mento tomorrow?   
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  It was going to be tomorrow.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  And then Monday, and now Tuesday because certain 
arrangements have been made for Monday.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  
ADV PAUL PRETORIUS SC:  Which really will be spoken about on Tuesday.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  We will not have a sitting tomorrow, and we will not 
have a sitting on Monday and as to what, whether we will have a sitting on Tuesday, we 
will be able to advise the public by way of a media statement on Monday.  We adjourn.   
COMMISSION ADJOURNS 
 
 
