 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
04 AUGUST 2020 
 
 
DAY 244 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757   
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 141 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
04 AUGUST 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 3 of 141 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 04 AUGUST 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning everybody.  I thought I 
would do without a jersey this morning because I thought it 
is beginning to be warm but I remembered that this venue is 
very cold so I put it on.  So I see you also do not seem to 
have a jersey on.  But you might not feel the cold here the 
way I do.  Yes are we ready? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair.  The evidence to be led 
10 
this week or for most of this week Chair involves the Free 
State and a particular project that took place in the Free 
State, the Asbestos Project it has come to be known as.   
 
Evidence was led by Mr Dukwana last year in relation 
to the conduct of that project and since then there has been 
an extensive investigation on the part of the commission and 
the fruits of that investigation are contained in the bundles 
now before you Chair. 
 
There are a number of bundles that you have. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just one second Mr Pretorius.  The lighting 
20 
could be better than it is I think.  I can see – I can obviously 
see Mr Pretorius but it is rather dark.  So I think the 
technical people will do what needs to be done.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Okay we will look at that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 4 of 141 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  A number of bundles before you I 
trust that two years down the line we have got the numbering 
and marking of the bundles ready. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry again Mr Pretorius.  It may be – 
I do not know if it is that light that is behind you. I do not 
know whether they normally put it there and it is – ja okay.  I 
am sorry Mr Pretorius please continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In any event Chair you have a 
number of bundles before you which contain both the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  I am trying to get them to help 
10 
me with the lighting.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright I will wait until all that is in 
order Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if I am wrong about thinking it is 
normally 
somewhere there then – then maybe I just 
misunderstand – ja that is much better.  Yes.  You may 
continue Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  The bundles in 
front of you contain the statements or records of interviews 
with a number of witnesses that have been the subject of 
20 
investigation some of whom you will hear from this week. 
 
They also contain the report of the present Public 
Protector who made several findings in relation to the 
project.  There are court papers I will refer to those in the 
course of an opening. There are transcripts of the interviews 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 5 of 141 
 
which may become relevant in questioning.  There is certain 
additional documents but what we have done because this 
investigation involves a range of issues both broad and some 
of fine detail the investigation team has with the assistance 
of the legal team prepared a comprehensive investigators 
report in which all the fruits of the investigation have been 
put and analysed so that you have in Exhibit TT18 which is 
in 
Bundles 
8, 
9 
and 
10 
a 
complete 
record 
of 
the 
investigations and an analysis of the interviews of witnesses. 
 
That investigation report has been signed by the 
10 
investigators and will be referred to in the end.  But it does 
at the end of the day comprise an analysis of both 
documentation produced during the course of investigations 
as well as the transcripts and statements relating to 
individual witnesses and it is a comprehensive document. 
 
The witnesses for today Chair are two.  Firstly, a Mr 
Roets who is an expert in relation to asbestos.  The reason 
he has been called is that this is more than an issue of 
procurement and state expenditure as well as the distribution 
of the benefits of state expenditure. 
20 
 
It is also an issue as to whether the Free State 
Provincial 
Government 
has 
carried 
out 
its 
duties, 
constitutional duties in fact in relation to the preservation of 
health and welfare of its inhabitants particularly in relation to 
the prevalence of asbestos and low cost housing.  And that 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 6 of 141 
 
is another aspect of the evidence that you will hear this 
week.   
 
In 
order 
to 
assist 
Chair 
in 
presenting 
a 
comprehensive record of what actually occurred in relation to 
the Asbestos Project I have taken the trouble to prepare a 
rather lengthy opening which will record the story from 
beginning to end so that when one gets to aspects of the 
evidence in due course it will all fit into an overall picture 
and be understood by the commission and by the public 
hopefully in its proper context. 
10 
 
So if I may just address you in regard to that Chair?  
The evidence in relation to the substance asbestos will be 
given by the expert.  The substance asbestos in its various 
forms was in the past particularly pre-1994 Chair because of 
its various qualities used extensively in housing and industry 
and elsewhere.  But particularly in low cost housing.  And 
what is so sad about this series of events they – it is still 
there.  It is a risk to life.  It is highly dangerous.  Causes a 
number of serious health conditions and commendably at 
least initially the present executive took a number of 
20 
decisions to eradicate asbestos. 
 
What happened however is that hundreds of millions 
of Rands have been spent on this project but the asbestos is 
still there?  People are still exposed to the danger of 
asbestos with few minor exceptions but they do not affect 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 7 of 141 
 
that principle.  That evidence will be given by the expert. 
 
Then Chair a number of persons have been involved 
in this project and it is well to name them so that their role 
can be understood when reference is made to them in due 
course.  Mr Dukwana a former member of the Executive 
Council and MEC in various portfolios in the Free State 
government has already given his evidence. 
 
That evidence has been contested by amongst others 
witnesses who will come forward this week.  Mr Mokhesi is 
the Head of Department – Free State Department of Human 
10 
Settlements.  It is that department under the rubric of which 
this project was carried out. 
 
Mr Matlakala who agreed to give evidence today and 
will address you in relation to his evidence in due course is 
the Head of Procurement Free State Department of Human 
Settlements.   
 
Mr Makepe is the Chief Engineer in the Project 
Management Unit the PMU of the Free State Department of 
Human Settlements.  He did some verification the extent and 
quality of which will be addressed in evidence. 
20 
 
There is a Mr Ignatius Mpambani often referred to as 
Ego.  He was a member of the Joint Venture which obtained 
the contract through the procurement processes which will 
be the subject of extensive evidence.  He was unfortunately 
recently murdered and is therefore not available to assist the 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 8 of 141 
 
commission obviously.   
 
Then there is a Mr Sodi who is the CEO of an entity 
called Blackhead Consulting PTY Ltd.  He was the other 
member of the Joint Venture. 
 
In evidence Chair you will hear reference to Mr 
Mpanbani or Mr Sodi but it was always in their capacity 
mostly in their capacity as members of the entities which 
form part of the Joint Venture which is at the centre of the 
evidence. 
 
There is a Mr Sydney Radebe he is the Director of a 
10 
sub-contractor. 
 
A Mr Manyeke a Director of a sub-contractor to the 
sub-contractor and those details are informative.   
 
There is a Ms Diedericks who is not going to be 
called this week.  She is the former acting Head of 
Department Gauteng Department of Human Settlements and 
the involvement of Mr Sodi and Blackhead Consulting in the 
Gauteng project is relevant for issues which will become 
clearer later. 
 
Mr Thabani Zulu will appear this week.  He is the – 
20 
was the Director General at the National Department of 
Housing.  He is now Director General at the Department of 
Energy. 
 
Mr Magashule a former Premier of the Free State. 
 
Ms Cholata who has given evidence. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 9 of 141 
 
 
Ms Morake who has also given evidence who worked 
in the office of the Premier. 
 
Mr Martin Zwane is another sub-contractor but sub-
contractor to the Joint Venture. 
 
Mr Matow [?] an engineer who was appointed to work 
on the asbestos audit and Mr Jimmy Tow [?] a beneficiary of 
monies emanating from Blackhead Consulting. 
 
All those persons feature in the story that is about to 
be told this week.   
 
The story begins Chair in Gauteng.  In Gauteng a 
10 
panel of service providers was appointed.  There were two 
panels that were appointed ultimately. 
 
The first panel was a general panel to do work of a 
general nature in the area of housing. 
 
The 
second 
panel 
a 
much 
smaller 
panel 
was 
appointed to do work on the eradication of asbestos. 
 
I may say at this stage that you will hear of various 
phases of asbestos eradication.  The contracts one is deal 
with here are merely for the assessment of the prevalence 
and existence of asbestos in low cost housing.  The idea was 
20 
to identify the extent of asbestos in low cost housing to meet 
the needs – constitutional rights in fact of people who could 
not afford housing of their own and were as it were stuck 
with housing containing asbestos and could nothing about it. 
 
There is no evidence of any competitive bidding that 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 10 of 141 
 
occurred in relation to the appointment of either panel.  That 
was because of the procurement processes which followed.  
But we know that a panel of eight contractors was appointed 
to do an asbestos audit in Gauteng and they so on the basis 
of instructions to perform work within the rubric of the panel 
appointment. 
 
The price that Blackhead charged or the assessment 
not the eradication, the assessment of the existence of 
asbestos was R650.00 per unit and that documentation is 
contained in the bundle. 
10 
 
That procurement was declared at a stage irregular 
by the Auditor General.  Importantly Chair there was no 
individual contract in existence between Blackhead and the 
Gauteng Department relevant to this evidence.  At the time 
that contract was – and I use the word loosely transferred to 
the Free State.  Nor is there any evidence that a fair tender 
process 
preceded 
the 
conclusion 
of 
any 
contractual 
arrangement between Blackhead and the Department of 
Human Settlements in Gauteng. 
 
You will hear the detail or more detail of the precise 
20 
timelines involved but at a stage a procurement process was 
entered into which I will describe in a moment which allowed 
Blackhead and I stress Blackhead for the moment and 
allowed the Free State Department of Human Settlements to 
participate in the contract in Gauteng. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 11 of 141 
 
 
That process was entirely flawed for a number of 
reasons and we will deal with it in detail in a moment.   
 
The other aspect of the Gauteng evidence Chair is 
that the evidence of Mr Sodi shows that the profits were 
massive.  Sodi is clear that he paid – he was paid for his 
investigation assessment of the prevalence of Gauteng and 
the areas that he was asked to do.  He was paid almost 
R230 million or in the region of R230 million and his profit on 
his own version was in the region of R100 million. 
 
He says that all the others involved in the same 
10 
project but in other areas in Gauteng their profits ranged 
between 50 and 60 percent.  That evidence you will hear in 
due course.   
 
But I stress two things.  No contract was in existence 
at the time the contract in Free State was signed.  Secondly 
the Gauteng contracts do not appear to have involved any 
competitive bidding whatsoever.  And this all a background 
to the fact that the contracts in the Free State did not involve 
any competitive bidding whatsoever.  And that casts a 
shadow over the Free State procurement processes. 
20 
 
There are two aspects to procurement in the Free 
State.  The one is what is called the participation process 
the other is the unsolicited bid process.  Both were entirely 
flawed. 
 
Treasury Regulation 16A6.6 is the one relevant to the 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 12 of 141 
 
participation process.  It reads Chair: 
“The accounting officer or accounting authority may on 
behalf of the department constitutional institution or public 
entity for the purposes of this matter the accounting officer 
of the department may participate in any contract arranged 
by means of a competitive bidding process by any other 
organ of state subject to the written approval of such organ 
state and the relevant contractors.” 
 
The idea behind that provision is that if there is a 
competitive bidding process say in one department that 
10 
produces a contract binding on those two parties.  The 
second organ of state or second department may participate 
in that contract.  It is not anything that allows the formation 
of a new contractual relationship.  There must be an existing 
contract entered into by mean of a competitive bidding 
process and the participation is in that contract not a new 
contract. 
 
There will be detailed submissions to you in that 
regard.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Just to make sure I follow.  If the contract 
20 
in which Free State department may participate I a contract 
relating to the Gauteng province/government does the 
Treasury or does the regulation of instruction mean that 
simply an expansion of the scope of the Gauteng contract 
include Free State but otherwise everything else is the same 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 13 of 141 
 
contract?  At a practical level if one says, it is not creating a 
new contract how would that work practically? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  We have consulted with a 
person in Treasury who may well have to come and explain it 
to you but we have his views recorded.  Those will either be 
presented in the form of submissions but insofar as a 
practice has developed under the rubric of the provisions 
and the regulations it may be necessary for him to explain 
those things in more detail. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But for the present to answer your 
question Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Where there is a contract for sale of 
goods for example. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Free State – well Gauteng would 
enter into a contract with a supplier for a 100 widgets. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Only 80 would be provided and so 
20 
another entity could engage or participate in that contract to 
obtain the other 20.  That is the principle with goods. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Of course, with services it is 
different. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 14 of 141 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Because services inevitably are as 
you would point out and as underlies your question Chair 
services are inevitably confined within a particular personal 
relationship or relationship between contractor and entity. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So we understand that it is miscible 
for the services to be extended, the practice is that it should 
be done by way of an addendum to the original contract.  But 
other than that all the terms and conditions must be the 
10 
same. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The parties must be the same. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The services must be the same. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The price must be the same.  There 
can be no adjustment to suit particular conditions because 
then it is a new contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then the competitive bidding 
which was the origin of the first contract becomes anility – 
becomes superfluous because there is a new set of terms of 
conditions which happened here Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So would it as you understand it would it 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 15 of 141 
 
amount to saying in the context of Free State and Gauteng in 
effect would it amount to Gauteng saying to the party with 
whom it has a contract you go to the Free State and provide 
the same services and then that is what happens.  The 
addendum would effectively say that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  The steps would be the 
following Chair.  There would be a competitive bidding 
process in Gauteng. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It would produce a contract with a 
10 
party on certain terms and conditions including price. The 
nature of the service is what is important here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The price is what is important and the 
party that was party to that Gauteng contract is also 
important.  What happens then is with the permission of the 
Head 
of 
Department 
in 
the 
receiving 
entity 
and 
the 
contractor agree that Gauteng contract stands it is still in 
existence but the Free State may participate in that existing 
contract. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja not a new contract. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Not a new contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Although the services inevitably will 
be in a different region. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 16 of 141 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And that would require an addendum 
to the existing contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So it is an existing contract entered 
into by means of a partici – fair bidding process competitive 
bidding process with a particular party under certain terms 
and conditions of the contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  None of those requirements were met 
10 
in this case. But I will deal with it in details. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The first point Chair is that different 
parties were involved.  In Gauteng it was Blackhead 
Consulting PTY Ltd.  Sometimes it was described by another 
name but for present purposes we can accept Blackhead 
Consulting PTY Ltd in Gauteng.   
 
In the Free State it was a different party.  It was a 
joint venture between Blackhead Consulting and Diamond 
Hill Investment.  That was a rarely be entity to which Mr 
20 
Mpanbani operated. 
 
Now one may say that this is really a minor 
distinction what is the difference between Blackhead and the 
joint venture.  But the significance is this Chair.  Mr 
Mpanbani according to Mr Sodi had no knowledge or 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 17 of 141 
 
experience or capacity to deal with asbestos eradication.  He 
contributed nothing to the contract at all save to unlock the 
opportunity in the Free State through his contacts with 
officials in the Free State.  For that he got 50% of the 
income.   
 
Now anyone who fairly and responsible examined this 
contract before signing it in the Free State would say, well 
why must we pay double the price charged by Blackhead for 
doing all the work?  Well they did not do all the work and 
that is part of the developing story Chair but let me not 
10 
distract you.  Why would we pay double the price charged by 
Blackhead which is the entity with the experience and 
capacity supposedly to a joint venture?  This does not make 
sense in ordinary and legitimate circumstances. 
 
So the participation contract going to a joint venture 
is significant and it is more than just a heading or a title of a 
party. 
 
The second thing that should be noted is that it is 
apparent from the correspondence between the officials who 
enabled this participation process both on the Gauteng side 
20 
and the Free State side but what was transferred was not a 
particular contract with Blackhead.  What was transferred 
was the panel participation and the panel – the panel 
arrangement was transferred.  So in other words, either 50 
or 60 in the general panel arrangement or 8 contractors in 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 18 of 141 
 
the asbestos removal arrangement that was transferred. 
 
But what resulted on the Gauteng side and what was 
accepted was one contract with one entity the Joint Venture. 
 
So there is a huge question mark – in fact it is not 
even a question mark – there is a huge problem and 
irregularity in relation to what was transferred from the one 
side and what emerged on the other side. 
 
A panel arrangement on the one side.  A particular 
contract with a particular party on the other.  And that 
correspondence will be dealt with in the evidence to show 
10 
that. 
 
But the other point is that the Gauteng contract had 
expired.  Both the panel contract and the original – well the 
original panel contract the narrower panel contract particular 
– particularly aimed at the eradication of asbestos and any 
arrangements that might have existed with Blackhead they 
had all expired.  So at the time of the participation there was 
nothing in existence to participate in and new contractual 
arrangements had to be made on the Free State side.  Of 
course, the joint venture on the Free State side, not 
20 
Blackhead, and I have explained that Chair, was appointed 
not as a participant in a joint... in a panel arrangement, 
which the officials purported to allow participation in, but 
was appointed in its own right with its own price. 
 
It was now no longer R 650,00 per unit but R 850,00 per 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 19 of 141 
 
unit.  Different price, different terms of conditions, different 
parties, no contract on the other side. 
 
On every count it must have been, and we will submit in 
due course, apparent to the officials who were dealing with 
this process that there was no lawful justification as 
participation and the relevant Treasury Regulation for the 
contract in the Free State. 
 
What is important is that the participation process 
allowed the contractual arrangement to be entered into the 
Free State... in the Free State without any competitive 
10 
bidding process. 
 
The fact that there was no competitive bidding process 
and that it was not transparent, just two of the requirements 
of the Constitution, Section 217 means that one could enter 
into a contract that is entirely inflatable. 
 
And it seems not unreasonable Chair to draw the 
conclusion at the end of the evidence, which we will submit 
to you, that the participation process was really quite a 
clumsy sham to cloak the Free State Department contract 
with the joint venture with veneer of legality and successfully 
20 
on examination. 
 
So in the event Chair, what happened in the Free State 
was an entirely new contract, an arrangement was entered 
into with a new party on new terms and conditions including 
a higher price without any transparent competitive bidding 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 20 of 141 
 
process having been entered into. 
 
And as a result, the third requirement of Section 217, an 
entirely non-cost effective arrangement was entered into.   
 
Now several state officials participated in that process 
Chair.   The initials of some of them appear in a document 
presented to the Commission by Mr Dukwana entitled “Cost 
of Business”. 
 
And against initials of people whose initials happened to 
coincide for the moment Chair because we have got to go 
through the evidential process, with officials involved in this 
10 
participation process, where are sums of money allegedly 
disbursed in whole or in part to them. 
 
That “Cost of Business Schedule” has been the subject 
matter of extensive investigation and the evidence in relation 
to that will be presented to you in due course but I will deal 
with it in more detail later on. 
 
And then it is perhaps important to emphasise because 
we are coming now to the participation of Mr Mpambani in 
this whole venture and project. 
 
We emphasise that the appointment of the JV entitling 
20 
Mr Mpambani and his entity in the joint venture with 50% of 
the income of the project, effectively doubling its price to 
R 255 million. 
 
All... he had no expertise, no capacity, no ability to 
contribute to the work, except he had to unlock the 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 21 of 141 
 
opportunity 
through 
engagement 
with 
Free 
State 
...[indistinct] 
 
For that, he was... he became entitled to half of 
R 255 million but that was the value of his engagement and I 
will come to more of that in due course. 
 
Then there was another process ...[indistinct] would say 
it can be Chair.  The origins of the contract that was 
ultimately entered into, arguable had a different procurement 
source, one equally deficient in law, we might add and we 
will make those submissions in due course, and it happened 
10 
as follows and these were the facts of significance. 
 
On 
his 
own 
admission, 
Mr 
Sodi 
and 
his 
entity, 
Blackhead, 
made 
significant 
profits 
in 
Gauteng, 
R 100 million.  And he, therefore, saw that there was a 
similar opportunity in the Free State. 
 
So Mr Sodi and Mr Mpambani meet at a function in 
Welkom and they meet again later to discuss a possible 
Asbestos Project in the Free State. 
 
The initiative, therefore, for this project does not come 
from any entity in the Free State which is anxious to protect 
20 
the lives and health of its inhabitants, rather it comes from 
Mr Sodi and Mr Mpambani. 
 
By all accounts, it appears that Mr Mpambani was well-
connected and influential politically in the Free State.  It is 
apparent from the evidence of Mr Sodi, and this will be put 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 22 of 141 
 
to him when he comes on Friday, that Mr Mpambani had no 
knowledge or experience of the asbestos removal. 
 
In Mr Sodi’s own words and in the words of the partner, 
his task was to “unlock the opportunity”.  For this he would 
get a 50% share in the income of the newly, the formed 
venture, what we referred to as the joint venture. 
 
Mr Sodi is explicit.  It was his job to engage with the 
officials that would allow this project to continue in order to 
ensure that the contract was granted to the joint venture. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I just wonder... I know I am interrupting 
10 
you.  I just wonder what unlocking of opportunities there 
should be in the public service with government work? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well, exactly.  Well, we have a 
system in place.  It is clear.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Where there is a need for work to be 
done. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  There is an opportunity for all to 
participate. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now one must... the opportunity here 
was not for a contract to be given generally to contractors 
out there for a fair bidding process.  The opportunity was for 
the joint venture to do the work.  That was the opportunity 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 23 of 141 
 
that had to be unlocked. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m-h’m-h’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What had to be achieved through 
engagements with the officials was a particular contract with 
a particular party.  For that, the idea was, at least in the 
beginning, that Mr Mpambani and his entity would get 
R 127 million for unlocking. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That is all.  That is all he could do 
but he could do it and that is all did do and he did do.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, I guess there may be an argument 
that says it is not very different from the Commission, not for 
doing work but for unlocking because you do not do any work 
at all.   
 
You speak to the relevant people and then a contract 
gets achieved.  And then I guess you say to Blackhead:  “I 
am responsible for getting this.  You can... you will do the 
work.  Maybe you would not have gotten the work without 
me”. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, one can label it in various ways 
20 
Chair but what happens here is that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  A facilitation fee. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  [laughs] Or “Cost of Business” is the 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] Or “Cost of Business”. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 24 of 141 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Or “Business Development”.  
We have heard the term throughout. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, development, “Business Development 
Fees”. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  But if one takes away the label 
and looks at what happened, two persons with an interest in 
state contract get together.   
 
The one says, “I will do the work or I will ensure the 
work is done and there is more to come on that score.  For 
that, I will get my R 127 million.   
10 
 
All you do is, you go and speak to certain officials to 
make sure I get the contract but please make sure I get the 
contract.   
 
I do not want any nonsense with competition and an 
open bidding because I am going to charge a lot of money.  
But that is all you have to do.  Go and speak.  And for that 
you can get have R 125 million, round it off to R 127 million 
commission”. 
 
It is the facts that reveal... the task of Mr Mpambani was 
not simple to do what was lawful and proper by the way of 
20 
“Business Development”.   
 
It was to ensure that the procurement process was so 
arranged, and one could go to so far as to say manipulated, 
to ensure that the contract at that price was obtained without 
a competitive bidding process by the joint venture. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 25 of 141 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And of course, it seems quite logical that 
in that kind of scenario the party that has the ability, the 
skills, expertise to do the work, will not do this work, will not 
accept this contract if what it will get in terms of the fee or 
the price, would be lower than what it would be entitled to 
generally for doing that kind of work and that amount of 
work. 
 
Therefore, if what that party got... if one looks at what 
that party got, one is likely to say that can be lower or much 
lower than what it would normally be entitled to. 
10 
 
Therefore, to the extent that the price for the whole job 
included the other party’s 50%, then the whole price must be 
highly inflated in order to make sure that there is this 50% 
for the other party. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Precisely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because if I normally do this job for 
R 1000,00 I am not going to agree to do this job for R 500,00 
just because you must get the 50%. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So the price will have to be inflated 
20 
...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...to R 2000,00 or whatever.  So I still get, 
at least, what I would normally get if not more.  So but then 
you get your own but in the process the one who pays, pays 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 26 of 141 
 
an exorbitant amount. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Chair, that is exactly right.  
That analyses is exactly what happened here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What is interesting is the corollary to 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The person investigating the value 
for money in that contract before signing on behalf of the 
department would look at it and say, “But you are doing all 
10 
the work for R 1000,00.  Why must we pay taxpayers money 
for “Business Development” and unlocking opportunities for 
your JV partner?” 
 
It 
does 
not 
make 
sense. 
 And 
so 
that 
is 
also 
...[indistinct] but of course, the person who is examining the 
contract, arguable were the persons unlocked.  But we will 
come to that during the course of the ...[indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Subsequent to the engagement 
between Messrs Sodi and Mpambani Chair, they did make an 
20 
approach for Mr Mpambani for his R 127 million commission 
or “Business Development Fee”, went to see the HOD of 
Human Settlements in the Free State and they said, “Give us 
a proposal”.  Alright. 
 
An unsolicited proposal was prepared and presented and 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 27 of 141 
 
it resulted in a Service Level Agreement being entered into.  
Now this Service Level Agreement, as you will learn in due 
course, was deficient in a number of respects. 
 
It did not contain any information as to the overall price.  
That is the price per unit.  So there was no mention of 
R 255 million in the service. 
 
It had a different price per unit to what happened out 
there.  It had a number of provisions regarding an interim 
what had to be done to earn the payment, which apparently, 
were ignored in the execution of the contract. 
10 
 
But what is interesting about this.  There was no budget 
for this project.  One must recall, this initiative did not come 
from the Free State department.  It came from Messrs Sodi 
and Mpambani. 
 
They went and said, “Look, let us do this work and enter 
into an SLA”.  So the money had to be found somewhere.  So 
what the SLA, the Service Level Agreement said, quite oddly, 
is that the joint venture would see to the funding of the 
project.  Now that is an extraordinary clause. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is very strange.  I saw that and I 
20 
wondered what it meant. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Well, clearly it cannot have 
meant Chair that the joint venture would pay for the project 
itself.  It was not, as will be apparent and has been apparent 
in the Gauteng in the business of charitable work. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 28 of 141 
 
 
And clearly, it was not its intention to go out and as it 
were a crowd fund, the project, by way of public donation.  
What it meant, clearly, in the context Chair was that the joint 
venture and in particular Mr Mpambani would continue to 
complete 
the 
unlocking 
of 
the 
alternative 
process 
by 
ensuring that sufficient budget re-arrangements were made 
to allow the Free State to pay for the project. 
 
In other words, there had to be some “environment”, it is 
the word that is used, or any other arrangement, a 
reallocation of priorities for another arrangement to make 
10 
sure that the budgetary provisions were changed or altered 
in such a way as to allow the Free State to fund the project. 
 
So all this unlocking of the opportunity was happening 
without a budget provision.  What happened was that matters 
were so arranged that the budget was... became available 
and that is where Mr Zulu will testify. 
 
What ultimately happened, of course, is that the funding 
came via the national department from another province and 
that was done after the approach, not before the approach. 
 
But once again importantly, for the conclusion of the 
20 
Service Level Agreement, no competitive bidding process 
was entered into. 
 
Now where one has an unsolicited bidding process 
Chair, there is a requirement in order to safeguard the fiscus 
that all the arrangements inherent in the unsolicited bidding 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 29 of 141 
 
process must be published by a request for a quotation. 
 
So that is where transparency comes in so that there is 
publication and any bidder, any organisation can say, “Oh, 
the joint venture is going to do this work for R 255 million.  I 
can do it for R 50 million.  I want to put in a competing bid”. 
 
There was no transparency.  No request for quotations 
was issued in this case.  It was entirely secretive.   
 
So there was no ability for the department to test the 
market, assuming, as we must when we start Chair, that all 
the officials in the Free State were acting in good faith and 
10 
properly. 
 
They would receive this proposal.  They would look at it.  
They would see that they were paying half of R 255 million 
for the “Commission Business Development”, whatever you 
want to call it sonically. 
 
Or in Mr Sodi’s own words “unlocking the opportunity 
and engaging the officials who facilitate the project”.  They 
would say, “But why are we paying for that?  That is your 
costs.  That must come out of your amount”. 
 
But they would say, “Look, we are not experts in this.  
20 
Let us test the market.  Let us see whether your price can 
stand 
open 
and 
fair 
competition 
as 
required 
by 
the 
Constitution.  Transparent, fair, equitable, cost-effective, 
says Section 217 of the Constitution. “ 
 
They did not do that.  No request for qualification was 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 30 of 141 
 
entered into at all and that should have been done in terms 
of Treasury Regulations and Practice Note. 
 
Nor was there any due diligence exercise conducted in 
respect of the joint venture.  Had that been done, the 
contract would have been examined and it would have been 
discovered that at least half the joint venture at that stage 
had no qualifications to do any of the work. 
 
But in any event, if one goes... that is the factual 
position Chair.  If one goes to the law, none or very few of 
the requirements for the consideration of an unsolicited bid 
10 
were met.  In order for an unsolicited proposal that does 
not go to an open bidding and tender process to even be 
considered certain prerequisites are laid down by Treasury.   
There 
must 
have 
been 
a 
comprehensive 
and 
relevant project feasibility study to establish a clear case. 
The product or service must involve and innovative design.  
No innovative design here, you had eight contractors in the 
Free State and the expert will tell you that there are many 
that can do what was done.   
It must involve and innovative approach to project 
20 
development and management, no evidence of that and it 
must present a new and cost-effective method of service 
delivery.   
Clearly, as the facts will show here, none of those 
provisions were here and so it is difficult not to draw the 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 31 of 141 
 
conclusion in this case that insofar as this contract was 
sought to be justified by reference to the unsolicited bid 
process this was again nearly a sham to cloak an entirely 
improper and irregular procurement process. 
 
Chair, let me deal briefly with the budget issue.  I 
have stated that there was no provision in the provincial 
budget at the time the contract was entered into for the 
R255 million cost of the project.  To cater for the non-
existence in the budget of a budgetary provision for this 
project, for this R255 million, that clause that I referred to 
10 
earlier, was put into the contract but the costs – the joint 
venture takes all responsibility for dealing with the costs of 
the project.   
 
So you have here a department entering into a 
contract 
with 
a 
contractor 
who 
says 
do 
not 
worry, 
department, I will see to the costs and that had to be 
achieved and that was achieved …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I wonder - when I was looking at that in 
the agreement, I wondered to what extent – I mean, the 
impression I got, I do not know about you, when I saw it, it 
20 
was like the department was not going to have to pay 
anything and that, of course, that sounds strange but that 
is my first impression of what it meant but you say that it 
was understood by those concerned that the joint venture 
would see what it needed to do to make sure that the 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 32 of 141 
 
department had the budget. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   There can be no other explanation 
for those facts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Because 
the 
service 
level 
agreement is now entered into.  The joint venture does not 
say do not worry about the costs we are going to pay 
everything, it says we are going to charge R850 per unit 
but we will find the money to pay us.  Not that we do it for 
free or that we will raise the money but not charge.   
10 
And the only reasonable explanation for that clause 
was that the money did not exist in the budget and 
budgetary provision had to be made because that is what 
happened because what happened then, Chair, is that Mr 
Mokhesi and Mr Zulu were engaged and a process was 
then carried out whereby the budgetary – the absence of a 
budgetary provision was cured by the rectification of the 
budgetary provisions to allow payment of R250 000.   
 
So there can be little doubt that what the parties 
meant when they said you will see to the provision of the 
20 
funds was that you would unlock any obstacle that existed 
into the budget.   
It was at all times to contemplated that the joint 
venture would receive income for the project.  And it said 
so in the SLA.  It said in the SLA you will be paid and you 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 33 of 141 
 
will be paid on presentation of an invoice and you will be 
paid R850 per unit but where the funds comes from, it is 
your problem and that problem, on the probabilities, can 
only have been finding the money from official sources 
which was actually then carried out.  So what happened, 
gives an indication, looking back on the contractors what 
that contract meant. 
 
What had to be done, of course, was that the 
provincial department then had to present a revised 
business plan.  So Mr Mokhesi says we need money in the 
10 
budget and he speaks to the Director General National, Mr 
Zulu, 
and 
they 
then 
– 
and 
this 
is 
all 
on 
the 
correspondence, Chair, they – and we got it in the 
investigator ’s report, Mr Zulu says but you must give me a 
new budget plan and a new provincial business plan 
because 
the 
province 
has 
a 
business 
plan 
for 
the 
expenditure of its money, it now needs a new business plan 
to justify the introduction of R255 million for the asbestos 
project.  There was no intention to do it originally in the 
budget, now there is for a particular project, the business 
20 
plan must reflect that project.   
So a business plan was prepared and presented to 
national and that unlocked the funds.  But what is 
important, in fairness to Mr Zulu, a gross misrepresentation 
was made to him in the business plan.  You will recall, 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 34 of 141 
 
Chair, 
that 
there 
were 
two 
phases 
to 
the 
asbestos 
eradication project.   
Firstly, inspection of houses, and the assessment to 
show that in the Free State there are 36 000 houses 
approximately 
that 
contained 
asbestos 
that 
must 
be 
removed.  That is the project that was the subject of the 
charge of R255 million.  It was entirely an audit and 
assessment project.  Once that has been done, of course, 
all that information and in this case the expert will tell you 
it was insufficient information, but all that information is 
10 
used by a certified asbestos remover, a joint venture 
Blackhead was not certified, to take that asbestos out of 
the house, replace the roof, if it is an asbestos roof, take it 
to an official dumping site and dispose of it in a manner 
which does not cause a problem to the health of the 
community.  That is the eradication phase.  So you have 
the assessment phase and the eradication phase. 
What Mr Zulu was told in the revised business plan 
is that the weight will be to conduct door to door 
assessment at R850 per house excluding VAT, all asbestos 
20 
will be removed and disposed of as laid out in the 
Occupational Health and Safety Act and Regulations of 
1993 and that is followed by the following: 
The above unit rate, R850 in the revised business 
plan, includes the following.  Submitting a works plan, 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 35 of 141 
 
notifying the Department of Labour of our intention to 
remove 
and 
dispose 
contamination, 
rubble 
asbestos, 
contract 
for 
the 
services 
of 
an 
approved 
inspection 
authority 
for 
purposes 
of 
air 
monitoring, 
supply 
experienced medically fit staff and supervision for the 
purposes of removal, the supply of all safety equipment 
and relevant PPE, cordon off the area to be stripped and 
replace relevant signage.  So when you go to the house 
you are destroying asbestos, the fibres are then airborne 
and you have got to take stringent statutorily controlled 
10 
precautions to protect the community within in which this 
activity is taking place.  Transport of the asbestos to a 
registered disposal site, disposal cost of the asbestos, all 
relevant 
paperwork 
pertaining 
to 
health 
and 
safety 
legislation.  
So what Mr Zulu was told, at the rate of R850 per 
unit not only would the assessment take place but the 
removal 
and 
disposal 
would 
take 
place. 
 
A 
gross 
misrepresentation because neither Mr Mokhesi in the 
department nor any representative of the joint venture 
20 
remotely 
contemplated 
the 
removal 
and 
disposable 
asbestos as being included in the unit cost of R850, it was 
complete misrepresentation.   
If I may just then deal with certain clauses in the 
service level agreement.  The service level agreement is 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 36 of 141 
 
also, as I have said, sparse and confusing as to what work 
was contracted for but it appeared that although the price 
of R850 was for the assessment and audit part of the 
whole project it seems that the service level agreement 
appointed the joint venture, actually appointed the joint 
venture to do the removal as well.   
I am not going to go through the particular onerous 
provisions of the SLA which were disregarded in the 
execution of the contract but every claim for payment had 
to be accompanied by a report and had to be accompanied 
10 
by a detailed verification of the reason why the amounts 
were particularly charged.  It does not seem that that was 
done at all. 
The 
project 
for 
which 
the 
joint 
venture 
was 
appointed was described in the SLA as the appointment of 
the service provider to assess, audit houses roofed using 
asbestos material, handling and disposal of asbestos 
sheets to an approved designated disposal site, phase one 
and phase two.  That was the appointment.  Quite improper 
to appoint JV for either for that particularly and especially 
20 
for the latter task.  That requires accreditation, statutory 
accreditation and the expert will tell you about that in due 
course. 
Chair, what is also important is the lack of attention 
given to detail.  One is not simply buying pen and paper for 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 37 of 141 
 
a stationery department within a government department, 
one is dealing here with life, the livelihood and the health 
of inhabitants of dangerous materials in houses, life 
threatening at the relevant houses.  If one looks at the 
description of the project, it is all about roofs but the 
expert will tell you that asbestos in these houses may exist 
in water pipes, it may exist in fascia boards, it may exist in 
ceiling boards, it is not enough to look, as happened here, 
at a desktop image, Google Maps, for example, of houses 
and say that is an asbestos house, we had better go and 
10 
look because its roof is made of asbestos, it is entirely 
superficial and unprofessional approach to the problem but 
that will come out in the detail, Chair. 
As a result of the SLA an instruction to perform 
work was issued which said what amounts making up the 
R255 million would be paid at what stage and here is 
another interesting fact, Chair, there was a prepayment of 
R51 million and you will learn that the cost of the whole 
project would not have exceeded in the amount in the 
region of 51 million.  So upfront, before any work is done, 
20 
all the costs of the project are seen by way of prepayment 
but we will deal with that in more detail in due course. 
Then, Chair, subcontracts, the intrigue in relation to 
this joint venture project does not stop there because what 
the 
joint 
venture 
does, 
it 
appoints 
a 
subcontractor, 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 38 of 141 
 
MasterTrade.  To do, subject to a minor qualification – and 
I stress minor qualification, to do all the work, the JV says 
to MasterTrade - and MasterTrade will come and talk to 
you here – the JV says to MasterTrade, here is what we 
have to do, you do it and we will pay you R54 million.  All 
the work, Chair, bar a minor qualification.  
Now it is one thing for a contractor to go to a 
government 
department 
and 
without 
qualifying 
or 
minimising what happened in this case on the part of the 
contractors, you have a person in the department who 
10 
allows this to happen without properly interrogating a 
competitive bid, a ranging thing so that there need be no 
competitive bid, without interrogating the costs in any way, 
to allow a R255 million contract to be done at R55 million.   
Now the evidence will be, Chair, that it was done at 
far less than 54 million, so even that R54 million was an 
inflated price.  On the evidence of MasterTrade the profit 
made by them was 19 million.   
In any event, the SLA or service level agreement 
and the unsolicited proposal which preceded the SLA made 
20 
no mention of the fact that virtually all – in fact all of the 
work to be done on the project would be done by an 
appointed subcontractor.  And at what price?  Of course 
that was not mentioned. 
The 
truth 
is, 
that 
they 
did 
the 
work, 
the 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 39 of 141 
 
subcontractors did the work at a fraction of the total cost.  
In fact, what MasterTrade did, was it subcontracted once 
more to another entity, ORI, and ORI did all the work for 
R21 million. 
Chair, perhaps before I go into the detail would this 
be a convenient time? 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes, 
okay, 
let 
us 
take 
the 
tea 
adjournment.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, continue, Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you, before we adjourned, you were 
making the point that Blackhead or the joint venture 
subcontracted the work to MasterTrade and MasterTrade 
subcontracted the work to another company. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that latter company did most if 
not all of the work on its version at a fee of R21 million on 
20 
the version of MasterTrade for a consulting fee of R5 
million with MasterTrade paying the expenses.  But, Chair, 
I will – perhaps it is appropriate to deal with it now.   
 
The details of the subcontracting arrangements and 
the prices attached to these are a matter of intense dispute 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 40 of 141 
 
between all involved so the joint venture is suing the 
department for 30 million unpaid.  Blackhead is suing the 
estate of the deceased partner in the joint venture.   
 
One subcontractor is suing the main subcontractor.  
So there is a flurry of litigation between all these parties, 
each alleging something else but what is manifest in all 
this is that there is no legitimate or reasonable comparison 
between the cost of the work actually done in the region of 
R50 million, probably much less with its built-in profit and 
the R255 million grant. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is the point for present 
purposes.  The details we have, the various versions we 
have, they are all in the investigator ’s report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja because the effect of all of this must 
be that the entity that did all the work, if it could do the 
work or the price that it charged it must mean that a 
reasonable price for the work cannot be too – much higher 
than more or less what the entity charges. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  The final subcontractor in the 
20 
line bid to do the work at R21 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And on its version made a 
substantial profit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 41 of 141 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   On that score and has not been 
paid. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But that detail will come out in the 
wash, as it were.  But what it does show is that the value 
of competitive bidding because any one of these entities 
could have bid in its own right for the contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If the contract had been properly 
advertised 
and 
properly 
opened 
to 
a 
competitive 
10 
transparent bidding process.   
CHAIRPERSON:   And I guess ultimately one of the 
questions 
or 
the 
government 
– 
relevant 
government 
officials is on what basis did they believe that the price 
that they agreed to pay was reasonable when there were, 
as a matter of fact, entities who could do the job for far 
lower. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In terms of the price. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, that is the purpose of a 
20 
proper bidding process, a transparent bidding process so 
that all parties who can do the work and wish to do the 
work can put in their bids on a fair competitive transparent 
basis and have those fairly and properly assessed.  Of 
course, in order to justify a contract for this work at R255 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 42 of 141 
 
million one could not have a fair competitive bidding 
process.  It had to be avoided at all costs and was 
successfully avoided in this case. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And, of course, if it is shown that the job 
could have been done at R50 million, R40 million, R20 
something million but the department paid over 200 million 
then if that is shown then there must be a way of getting 
back from the people who did not do their job or who 
decided to conduct themselves in a certain way to the 
prejudice of the taxpayers. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To get as much from them as possible. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Exactly.  You will see further on in 
the narrative that the matter was investigated by the Public 
Protector, the current Public Protector and a report – I will 
summarise the main findings in the report and is in fact 
being investigated by law enforcement agencies at the 
moment.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, so to summarise in relation 
20 
to the subcontractors the joint venture, or 50% of the joint 
venture 
because 
the 
other 
50% 
is 
busy 
unlocking 
opportunity, the 50% of the joint venture arranges for 
subcontractor one, MasterTrade.  MasterTrade’s quote for 
all the work are a small and not monetarily significant part 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 43 of 141 
 
of the work, R44 million.  MasterTrade then says to ORI, 
you do the work, I will keep an eye on you, 21 million.   
The expenses, according to ORI, for the work and 
the contract of the second subcontractor, approximate R9 
million, so these details are important but it is all relative 
because this is a squabble in a confined space, as it were, 
whether it is 5, 21 or 44 million.  The truth is that all those 
figures pale in comparison to the overall price of R255 
million and it is not I think the task of this Commission, 
Chair, to work out which of the subcontractors in their 
10 
various disputes is correct, the point is clear, in relation to 
the overall cost to the fiscus of this project, and the expert 
will tell you a little more about the quality of the product 
for R255 million was paid and you will hear in a moment, 
Chair, about where some of this money was disbursed. 
Chair because the expert will deal with some more 
detail in relation to what was done in relation to this 
contract, we have already told you that the service level 
agreement was sparse and unprofessional, quite frankly.  
But according to the Chief Engineer of the department, Mr 
20 
Makepe, his idea of what would be done, not contained in 
the 
service 
level 
agreement, 
was 
that 
the 
houses 
containing asbestos would be audited – in other words, the 
number of houses containing asbestos would be audited 
and there would be an assessment accompanying that in 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 44 of 141 
 
relation to detail that the expert will explain.   
Those houses would be labelled or identified with 
geo- positioning, GPS identification, there would be some 
details provided regarding the structural integrity of the 
houses. Does not seem that that was done.  In other 
words, if the house is about to collapse then the whole 
house should be simply be demolished and rebuilt and also 
removing asbestos in a house which was not structurally 
sound has its own dangers and all that information would 
be collated in a report and provided to the project 
10 
management unit so that they could go take the next step. 
Now, Chair, the way this is done of course is that sit 
at a desktop computer and you look at aerial maps of the 
region and you say that looks like and asbestos roof.  You 
then train people from the community to take a laptop – or 
not a laptop, a device, to the house and take a photograph 
of that house and all that information then is collated and 
put into a report. 
Mainly there would be a picture of the roof taken 
because remember, the SLA, Chair, talked about roofs of 
20 
houses, not water pipes or pressure boards or anything like 
that and that data is then used to produce reports.  
Notionally, that date then allows the second phase of the 
project to take place at a later stage which the business 
plan and the SLA appointed MasterTrade to do.  But the 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 45 of 141 
 
expert will tell you this has to be done properly because 
you are taking out a life threatening substance, you are  
exposing fibres, those fibres are carried in the air, people 
breathe them and they, quite frankly, die. 
I have referred to the several disputes between the 
parties involved but again they are disputes within the 
confines of a limited amount of funding.   
The established facts show, just to summarise, the 
provincial government undertakes to pay R255 million.  
MasterTrade quotes R44 million to do most of that work, 
10 
bar R10 million.  The MasterTrade's quote of R44 million 
includes a R17 million profit, right, and there are expenses 
listed differently in the evidence of different witnesses.  
So, for example, MasterTrade said they would spend R3 
million 
on 
data 
for 
the 
digital 
devices 
to 
take 
the 
photographs.  The expense list in ORI’s subcontract is 
60 000.  So there are all sorts of question marks when one 
digs into the detail of even the reduced amounts of 44, 21 
and the like. 
So just if one takes all those versions together - 
20 
and again perhaps this is an area of too much detail for 
present purposes - it is all in the report in all its detail – 
either the second subcontractor, ORI, a Mr Manyeke, does 
all the work for approximately R21 million involving R9 
million expenses, so more than 50% profit.  Or between 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 46 of 141 
 
them, MasterTrade and ORI do the work for R44 million, 
less expenses, or according to Mr Radebe of MasterTrade, 
the field work is done by Manyeke as a consultant for R5 
million.  Whatever version finally went the day in the courts 
there is no question of a gross overcharge in contract 
between the joint venture and the department. 
Then there is the question of invoices, Chair.  Once 
again it seems that the payment of invoices and the 
recordal of work done to justify the payment is wholly 
inadequate and bordering on the improper.  Or, not 
10 
bordering, simply improper. 
It may be – and this requires further investigation, 
but it may be that the documentation which accompanied 
the 
payments 
of 
the 
invoices 
contained 
gross 
misrepresentation.  There are documents which show, 
Chair, when a payment, for example, of R50 or R30 million 
is paid, in a column in the document that asbestos was 
removed, but before taking that further, it would require an 
answer.  We do not have the answer yet, but there are 
huge question marks around, firstly, the adequacy of the 
20 
documentation 
accompanying 
payments 
and 
secondly, 
regarding the representations made in those documents. 
Ultimately, audit reports were provided, several 
reports were provided as a result of the conduct of the 
work under the contract, the joint venture contract and 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 47 of 141 
 
these reports of part of the documentation before you and 
the expert will examine one of those reports in a lot more 
detail because one cannot assume that even though R44 or 
R21 million was done, the work was properly done, the 
work was done with sufficient care and caution to guard the 
rights of the people in the communities who were living 
with asbestos roof over their head. 
But what happens, Chair, is that after the payment 
of R230 million, R25 million outstanding, the subject of a 
court case at the moment, the Public Protector began an 
10 
investigation and produced a report, the current public 
report.  And so once that report came out, the head of 
department, Mr Mokhesi suspended further payments to the 
joint venture and that was at the stage where R230 million 
of the R255 had been paid. 
In 
summary, 
the 
Public 
Protector, 
having 
investigated the matter through the Free State office made 
the following findings.  I will just deal briefly with the main 
findings of the Public Protector.  
Firstly, 
a 
complaint 
regarding 
the 
violation 
of 
20 
procurement processes in the awarding of the asbestos 
contract was substantiated.  The Public Protector found 
that the participation element – you will recall that was the 
first device used to avoid the open tender process – was 
improper because, quite simply, there was no existing 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 48 of 141 
 
contract that was participated in, a new contractual 
arrangement was entered into with different terms and 
conditions and what the Public Protector said was that the 
participation process requires the same service provider, 
absent in this case, the same services, not clear on this, 
and the same price, certainly not there, not existing. 
Then, Chair, the Public Protector also found that 
insofar 
as 
it 
was 
sought 
by 
anyone 
to 
justify 
the 
procurement 
process 
followed 
by 
reference 
to 
the 
unsolicited proposal rubric, that too was also flawed and 
10 
unlawful, particularly because there was a failure to issue 
the request for quotation.  In other words, to publicise this 
arrangement so that other parties could enter the fray if 
they wanted.  If was simply described as an abuse of the 
procurement system. 
Secondly, Public Protector found that the service 
level agreement was in contravention of the department’s 
own supply chain management policy because it did not 
actually reflect what was said in the unsolicited proposal or 
the appointment.  So it was a poor document in all 
20 
respects and also contravened the department’s own 
supply chain management policy. 
What happened in the Free State, similar to what 
happened in Gauteng, is that the Auditor-General of the 
Free State declared the procurement as irregular, released 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 49 of 141 
 
that report on the 31 July 2015 and Chair, you have 
expressed concern about what happens to these reports, 
what is their effect, do they result in any concrete action 
that is required by their content?   
Well, after the release of the report, declaring the 
procurement irregular, the department still made further 
payments of R139 million to the service provider.  In other 
words, that report was simply ignored and severe findings, 
including 
findings 
of 
wilful 
misconduct 
and 
gross 
negligence on the part of the accounting officer, Mr 
10 
Mokhesi, were found to have existed by the Public 
Protector. 
And then a further finding, the allegation that the 
services 
provided 
were 
not 
cost-effective 
and 
the 
department did not receive value for money, that was found 
to be substantiated.  So much seems clear even from the 
brief survey we have given you of volumes and volumes of 
documents relating to that issue.   
What 
the 
Public 
Protector 
found 
on 
her 
investigation was that the evidence and documents prove 
20 
that the project was one hundred percent completed and 
reports were generated by the ORI Group.  That is the 
second 
subcontractor, 
the 
first 
subcontractor 
to 
MasterTrade.  First subcontractor MasterTrade, second 
contractor ORI.  The Public Protector found that the fee for 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 50 of 141 
 
all that work was R21 million and all that work was done 
and what is interesting, is not only was the fieldwork done 
by the subcontractor, the second contractor, but also the 
production 
of 
reports 
was 
done 
largely 
with 
its 
participation. 
We referred earlier, Chair, to a complaint about the 
advanced payment, the finding was that that was irregular 
as well but for the reason that the original contract was 
null and void as being contrary to all the procurement 
prescripts.  But I have already pointed out to you, Chair, 
10 
that that prepayment of R51 million was more than enough 
to cover the costs of the whole contract.  So before any 
work had started, the contract was paid. 
And what the Public Protector has directed the 
Premier to do as a result of the report is to investigate the 
accounting officer in terms of Section 84 of the Public 
Finance Management Act and to report the conduct to the 
Hawks and the South African Police Services and those 
processes are underway.  There was also a direction that 
the 
Director 
of 
Supply 
Chain 
Management 
in 
the 
20 
department, Mr Matlakana be investigated.  We will hear 
more about him later, we have just received a letter from 
his 
legal 
representative 
which 
will, 
despite 
his 
own 
agreement to attend, undertaking to attend today, explains 
why he has not attended or purports to explain. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 51 of 141 
 
Then, Chair, two close the circle on the asbestos 
project, there is the evidence given by Mr Dukwana in 
relation to the costs of business figure.  Now this 
schedule, Chair, has been investigated at great length, it 
has been put before Mr Sodi of the joint venture because it 
is a document related to the business of the joint venture 
and emanating from joint venture records.  So it has been 
testified to directly.   
It records several abnormal business expenses.  It records 
them in a way that is abnormal and it shows, on the face of 
10 
it at least – and I stress on the face of it because that is 
where we are at present, payments to persons or entities 
from the income received, the 255 or 230 as it turned out, 
million rand.  Where the schedule shows what may be 
termed a legitimate business expense, in other words a 
subcontractor expense, the payment to MasterTrade, it is 
recorded to the last cent in that schedule to MasterTrade, 
no initials MasterTrade is recorded there as the sub-
contractor receiving forty-four odd million Rand in a 
precise amount on that schedule, but where it is arguable 
20 
that some concealment is necessary because it’s an 
abnormal business expense, one see’s merely initial.  Now, 
the question is, is it just coincidental that those initials are 
– happen to be initials of officials in the Free State 
involved in facilitating that or are – is there some other 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 52 of 141 
 
explanation, there doesn’t seem to be another explanation? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I mean, what must be clear is that the 
author of the spreadsheet meant that – I mean those 
initials refer to somebody. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And they refer to somebody who, 
according to the author was to be paid a certain number. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And Mr Sodi – because if he’s still alive 
and he was the 50% of the joint venture must be able to 
10 
tell us who was that, that was to be paid that amount 
because you are part of the joint venture, you ought to 
know, I would imagine and of course it’s quite interesting if 
the initials seem to be similar to initials of somebody who 
has a role to play in the whole project. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   One will recall, at the beginning of 
the narrative, Chair, Mr Mpambani undertook to unlock the 
opportunity to engage the necessary officials to facilitate 
the grant of the contract of R255million value to the joint 
venture. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    The persons involved in that 
process, initials which are the same as their initials, let me 
put it that way for the moment rather than saying their 
initials here on that schedule as the recipient of money.  
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 53 of 141 
 
Mr Sodi says, this is a record of sub-contractors, I don’t 
know what these mean.  So, when a person with initials 
coinciding with the initials of an official in the Free State, 
who’s participation and cooperation was necessary to 
unlock the opportunity appear on the schedule as being 
entitled to, on the face of it, R10million.  R10million goes 
out of his business, he says, I don’t know where R10million 
of my profits went but he says, Chair, and in a strange way 
this has its own logic to it, he says, Mr Mpambani prepared 
this schedule, he did it in my office on my computer and I 
10 
don’t know where my profits went, I can’t explain where 
tens of millions of rand of my profit go, I’m happy to accept 
that what he did was correct.  The – but of course as far as 
the initials were concerned it is correct, it is correct, I 
stress, that they went to these officials, monies went to 
these officials, that was his job.  Now was the payback 
time for having unlocked the opportunity and he had to 
organise it, but there is correspondence between the party 
that 
the 
investigators 
have 
produced, 
email 
correspondence 
between 
Sodi 
and 
the 
deceased, 
Mr 
20 
Mpambani which stipulates that Mr Sodi is to see to these 
payments and Mr Mpambani will see to other payments and 
that evidence will be before you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then it becomes difficult and we’ll 
see, maybe Mr Sodi will explain, it becomes difficult to 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 54 of 141 
 
accept that, between the two of them, Mr Sodi and Mr 
Mpambani, didn’t know all, you know, who everybody on 
the list was. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the fact that those initials 
coincide with the initials of the officials who participated in 
the facilitation of the project. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And Mr Soni, in time, but Chair, the 
payments have been – certain payments from the business 
have been traced by the investigators and I’ll come to 
10 
those in a moment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But whatever – for any business 
valued – Mr Sodi’s business, there will be evidence at 
around 2014/2015 turned over in excess of a billion rand it 
was a very, very successful business and he was custodian 
of billions of – at least more than a billion rand.  For that 
business to record the expenses of a R255million contract 
in the manner in which it was done is to say, the least, 
extraordinary.  The only logical explanation for this, 
20 
unusual recordal of business expenses by reference to 
initials, is the necessary the need to conceal, at least to a 
certain extent.  The – we must deal with, particularly the 
allegations made by Mr Dukwana and the response to 
those allegations by Mr Zulu, Mr Zulu said that document is 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 55 of 141 
 
simply a piece of paper to which no credibility at all can be 
attached. Now, whatever the value of that observation at 
the time Mr Dukwana gave evidence as you are aware 
Chair, the investigators have taken the matter much further 
and so in relation to deciding the authenticity of the 
document, apart from answers to questions given this week 
there are certain factors which, no doubt, you will take into 
account in assessing its authenticity and its reliability as a 
source of evidence and we will make our submissions to 
you in this regard but firstly that document has been 
10 
admitted to be a document relating to the business of the 
joint venture in the asbestos project as being prone to and 
testified to in consultation by Mr Sodi.  He says that, that 
document was prepared on his computer in his office by his 
erstwhile JV partner, Mr Mpambani and what he said was 
that it reflected, largely costs payable to sub-contractors, 
in other words expenses of the business.  I’ve pointed out 
that certain expenses, initials certain expenses which 
would, otherwise appear to be legitimate, full description of 
the recipient of funds. 
20 
 
I’ve dealt with the issue of the initials which 
coincide with the initials of officials and it was Mpambani’s 
work to secure the cooperation of those officials in 
facilitating the conclusion of the contract in the manner in 
which it was done and on the terms. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 56 of 141 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   To the extent that Mr Sodi’s version is 
that the document was prepared by Mr Mpambani, if the 
document was a business document, in the sense that it 
was internal Mr Sodi may have to explain how he – how it 
would come about that he doesn’t know what certain 
initials 
– 
who 
certain 
initials 
refer 
to 
because 
Mr 
Mpambani, if he’s the one who put those initials would 
have put those initials so that the two of them knew who 
the person was because that person was about to be paid 
some money from the business, from the joint venture. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I’m just looking for the document 
itself because the point you make is aptly illustrated on the 
document itself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I mean if I write – if I prepare document 
meant to communicate something to you I would use – if I 
use initials it must be initials that I think you understand or 
you know and of course if you don’t know you will ask me 
when you get the document, what does this mean? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, well the first question is, this 
document obviously reflects the recordal of an intent.  The 
20 
next question is, was that intent carried out and that’s the 
subject matter of certain evidence and investigations that I 
will deal with in a moment but just looking at the document, 
TZ cost to business R10million, TM cost to business 
R5million, AM cost to business R10million, OM cost to 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 57 of 141 
 
business R1million, MEC cost to business R2.5million, then 
we have a name MasterTrade not cost and then names of 
others who were involved and…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So not MT? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I’m sorry? 
CHAIRPERSON:   MasterTrade, not MT? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Not MT at all nor the person SR in 
MasterTrade.  Now, to say, as the person in the joint 
venture running the business, running this side of the 
business, 
remember 
Mpambani’s 
job 
is 
to 
unlock 
10 
opportunities, that I don’t know where twenty to thirty 
million rand of my profits is going, is extraordinary – an 
extraordinary proposition at the least, exactly your point 
that one would assume that those initials would be known 
unless there’s some very convincing explanation why I, as 
50% member of a joint venture would allow tens of millions 
rands, simply to be dispersed to destinations of which I 
have no knowledge.  When, if that was so, that he didn’t 
know, at least there was a duty to enquire why this 
coincidence between the initials of officials and the 
20 
business that I am responsible for and the legislation is 
replete with the red flags in that regard and I’ll deal with 
just one aspect of the governing legislation on corruption 
later. 
 
So, Chair, I dealt with the document containing the 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 58 of 141 
 
initials which coincide with initials of officials involved in 
facilitating the programme. The document also contains an 
accurate record of amounts paid to sub-contractors, for 
example, MasterTrade which we know, from other original 
evidence to be the correct amounts paid to them.  So, the 
content of the document is authenticated by reference by 
other original record.  Fourthly Chair,  many of the other 
payments to persons bearing initials or entities bearing 
initials have been investigated and they are dealt with 
thoroughly in the investigator ’s report, I’ll deal with some 
10 
in a moment, just by way of an example but what is 
important is, those payments do not relate to work actually 
done, so for example, payments to Mr Tau or payments 
involving Mr Tau, Mr Tau’s entity and the explanation 
simply is,  from Mr Sodi who acknowledges that payment 
says that, well that’s just something that I do from my 
monies I pay out but why these should be recorded as 
business expenses, of course, is another question as 
opposed to simply a gratuitous donation.  The payments 
and the relevant circumstances surrounding the payments 
20 
are summarised in the investigator ’s report and if I may 
deal with one or two, simply to put the full picture of the 
whole project and its outcome before you by way of this 
opening address.  Bear with me a moment – the evidence 
of Mr Dukwana was clear that according to his evidence 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 59 of 141 
 
the amounts reflected on the cost of business schedule 
were paid as gratification in relation to the Free State 
asbestos contract.  Now, as was correctly pointed out by 
you, at the time, Chair that, that was insufficient evidence 
to actually implicate a particular person and thereafter the 
investigators were tasked to do their work which they did 
and the results of their work, I will deal with in a moment. 
 
The allegation, and I stress at this stage, an 
allegation because we have to go through the evidential 
process is that TZ would have referred to Mr Thabani Zulu 
10 
who was the former DG of the National Department of 
Government at that stage and what is reflected is a 
payment of R10million.  Now, whether that is correct or 
not, it’s merely an allegation at this stage made by 
Dukwana to which Mr Zulu will have full opportunity to 
respond but what we do know is that Mr Zulu will have full 
opportunity to respond but what we do know is that Mr Zulu 
was, at least, involved if not instrumental, firstly in the 
participation 
contract 
and 
secondly 
in 
the 
budgetary 
process of unlocking funds there.  The second initial TM, is 
20 
alleged, and I stress again alleged, to be the initials of Mr 
Thimotsi Moeketsi also known as Tim, the Accounting 
Officer 
and 
Head 
of 
Department 
Free 
State 
Human 
Settlement.  It is alleged that R5million was/would be 
payable to him.  What we know is that the initials TM 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 60 of 141 
 
appear on the spreadsheet and we know that he was 
involved 
in 
signing 
the 
contract, 
involved 
in 
the 
participation and the unsolicited part of the contract, the 
signing of the SLA payments and the like, he’s the 
Accounting Officer and in terms of the Public Finance 
Management Act 
he 
cannot 
escape 
liability, 
he 
can 
delegate but it’s very clear in the legislation that he retains 
accountability for that. 
 
AM we know that the former Premier ’s initials were 
AM, Mr Magashule and we know there has been evidence 
10 
of 
certain 
payments 
made 
to 
his 
office 
for 
present 
purposes but the legislation is clear, whether you receive 
an amount of money for yourself or for others it still 
qualifies as an offence in terms of the legislation, we’ll 
deal with that in more detail in due course.  OM, whether 
coincidentally or otherwise is the former MEC in the Free 
State for Human Settlement.  MEC, the MEC at the time 
was…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said OM you didn’t mention the 
name. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, just MEC but the MEC at the 
time also received some benefits. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hmm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then MasterTrade is there by 
name, 
an 
accurate 
reflection 
of 
the 
true 
facts 
it’s 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 61 of 141 
 
established by facts external to the document.  The identity 
of others has not been uncovered. Martin clearly refers to 
Martin Zwane who received monies, there’s and invoice for 
him issued by him for R1.5million which is reflected in the 
cost of this in the schedule.  Steve, there’s a Steve Matau, 
an Engineer who was paid for engineering work done on 
behalf of the joint venture an amount of R1.2million and 
there are others including JT, Jimmy Tau who also received 
money as the investigators found out and the last name is 
Diedericks which must, obviously refer to Margaret-Ann 
10 
Diedericks the former acting Head of Department in the 
Gauteng Department of Human Settlement.  She is the one 
who signed the participation letter from the Gauteng side 
thus facilitating the conclusion of the contract. 
 
Mr Sodi has been interviewed and he’s given much 
of the evidence necessary to, at the very least, determine 
the authenticity of the document, it’s not a fabrication it’s a 
real document with real information.  The costs reflected 
there on his version deal, principally with sub-contracting 
costs, there’s no explanation for how all those persons with 
20 
all those initials coinciding with officials’ initials would 
have been involved in sub-contracting there’s simply a 
profession of ignorance in that regard and here you made 
your observation about that.  He says, that document was 
attached to emails he received from Mr Mpambani, he says 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 62 of 141 
 
that he acknowledges the receipt of directions from Mr 
Mpambani to deal with the persons highlighted in yellow 
although he denies making any such payments.  He 
acknowledges that it was prepared on his computer he 
says that Mr Mpambani worked in his office but he would 
not speculate about the initials, save the concession in 
relation to JT, Mr Jimmy Tau.  He gives an explanation that 
he appointed Mr Jimmy Tau as his Business Development 
Manager after the – Mr Tau’s retirement, but he does 
acknowledge that Mr Tau received money generated from 
10 
the profit in that particular content and then there was an 
upfront payment recorded on that schedule of R4.4million 
which was acknowledged as being correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Jimmy Tau is represented by initials, 
as well, in the document? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, he knows what those initials – who 
they refer to? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hmm, yes okay. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   There was an outflow recorded 
there in the schedule of approximately – sorry Chair an 
analysis of the accounts of Blackhead, the bank accounts 
who 
show 
payments 
to 
various 
persons 
involved 
or 
represented by their initials or by initials, at least on that 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 63 of 141 
 
list.  There were several financial transactions investigated 
by the investigators of the Commission in relation to the 
first initial or person bearing those initials on the schedule 
that he is there.  There’s no evidence at present, available 
to the Commission of a single amount of R10million being 
paid.  Some amounts were traced from the bank accounts 
of 
Blackhead, 
Mr 
Sodi, 
to 
a 
motor 
dealer 
in 
Pietermaritzburg.  Two transactions are relevant, the first 
was a payment reflected in the accounts of Blackhead 
through a TZ, initials were used, the initials TZ will identify 
10 
that payment and that payment was recorded on the 
receiving end of the motor dealer in Pietermaritzburg as Mr 
Zulu, so the use of the initials on the side of the payer 
being Blackhead Consulting, Mr Sodi and the fact that they 
related to Mr Thabani Zulu on the receiving end via the 
motor dealer correct.  In one transaction the money was 
used to buy a Maserati for a Mr Nthuli quite aware that set 
of transactions has its origins and why it should be so has 
not,  finally been established by the investigators but what 
is clear is that TZ, Thabani Zulu, TZ payer, Thabani Zulu 
20 
recipient paid for a luxury vehicle out of money and we 
know why and where that money should have gone, I won’t 
emphasise the point, it’s obvious. 
 
There was a second transaction of R600 000 which, 
it is apparent now that it was made by Mr Sodi to the motor 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 64 of 141 
 
dealer at the time of these – at the project for an amount 
of R600 000.  It, again, is reflected on the recipient’s side 
as reflecting the initials TZ, now I may be corrected in 
relation to all these initials and where they are reflected 
but certainly that will be corrected in due course in detail if 
it is subject to correction but here the recipient is reflected 
as TZ and Mr Zulu uses it as a deposit for a vehicle and so 
much is common cause.  Mr Sodi pays R600 000 to a motor 
dealer it’s used as a deposit for a Range Rover bought by 
Mr Zulu.  The explanation for that which you will hear 
10 
evidence about in due course is that Mr Zulu has an 
involvement 
or 
owns 
a 
lounge 
called 
TZ 
Lounge 
coincidentally, in Pietermaritzburg which appears to be a, I 
don’t know what our investigators have been looking at, it 
appears to be an entertainment establishment of sorts, 
where, 
on 
version 
or 
on 
one 
explanation 
R600 000 
reflected the amount of the tab run up by Mr Sodi at the 
lounge on Mr Zulu’s version a more – well, I’m not sure 
whether it’s more understandable explanation is that, it 
was monies owed by Mr Sodi for goods and services 
20 
related to the business of the lounge in Pietermaritzburg, 
well let’s hear about that in due course in all its details but 
on the face of it R600 000 is quite a large bill to run up at 
an entertainment venue. 
 
Then PM, there’s evidence of monies emanating 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 65 of 141 
 
from Mr Sodi or Blackhead being paid in the interests of Mr 
Makezi for the purchase of a property.   
So an amount of R650 000.00 is paid via a trust to 
attorneys which is used to buy a property in which according 
to the investigators it is apparent that Mr Mokhesi lives but 
the explanation of Mr Mokhesi is no this was a joint business 
venture.  He and Mr Sodi became friends and they decided 
to invest in a property and there is an agreement which 
shows how the income from rent was to be divided and what 
is to happen on the property in due course.  Now whether 
10 
this is all genuine or not can be investigated and dealt with 
in at best, but what is significant here is that a person 
involved in the grant of a tender of R255 million the 
accounting officer could not be in business with the recipient 
because it allows for all sorts of benefits like this to be 
granted.  And certainly this is a benefit.  The fact that you 
have now gained a partner to help you buy a house in which 
you live for however long whatever its nature as a joint 
venture is does not allow you to escape the provisions of the 
law in this regard.  But quite apart from that Chair and as a 
20 
matter of any recommendations that you may have in 
procurement should be absolutely forbidden that there 
should be any private contractual arrangements between 
those on either side of a procurement arrangement.  Be that 
as it may that is the – and there are others too Chair that 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 66 of 141 
 
involve the payment of fees at the – from this money at the 
request of the Premier of the time Mr Magashule.  Now the 
legislation is again quite clear that whether you receive a 
benefit or a gratification for yourself or on behalf of others 
student studying it falls foul of the legislation and no doubt 
the Law Enforcement Agencies will pay close attention to 
that in due course. 
 
That evidence has been traversed already but its 
implications in terms of the legislation may need further 
clarification before you.   
10 
 
Chair I am not going to go further in the examples 
there are others they are the subject matter of detailed 
research they are all contained fully under and all their detail 
with supporting documentation and explanation and an 
analysis of the relevant evidence in relation thereto. 
 
Suffice to say that the document appears not only on 
the face of it but in relation to all the accompanying evidence 
to be a genuine document deflecting actual transactions or 
partial transactions. 
 
The evidence shows that people on that or initials on 
20 
that coincide with the initials of officials who received 
gratification or income or benefits from the monies arising 
from the contract.  And importantly those persons to a large 
extent were persons involved in the procurement process in 
facilitating 
their 
bid 
entirely 
overpriced 
– 
massively 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 67 of 141 
 
overpriced – extortionately overpriced in fact without any 
compliance as found only the Public Protector with the 
procurement prescript and the evidence in that regard is 
clear. 
 
So the whole story goes full circle Chair and it is 
illustrative not because it is unique or unprecedented but it 
shows a pattern.  It shows a pattern the ability to identify a 
money making opportunity, using funds of the fiscus to that 
purpose, an abuse of procurement processes, engagement 
with officials to facilitate the abuse of the procurement 
10 
processes, the production of work which the expert will tell 
you simply not warranted even by the lesser amounts that 
were charged, the pocketing of huge amounts of fiscus 
meant Chair for the livelihood of poorer members of the 
community but end up buying Maserati’s.  It is a sorry – a 
very sorry tale to say the least but the full circle is there 
from the manipulation of procurement right through to the 
production of benefits and in between an entirely cost being 
affected and quite frankly criminal project. 
 
That Is by way of opening Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair the witness who has been set 
down – two witnesses were called for today.  A Mr Matlakala 
who agreed to come today but we have learnt recently 
through his appointed lawyers that the – he claims he has 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 68 of 141 
 
reason not to appear this week.  He was not summonsed but 
he was – he was here or to be here by his own agreement.  
We will deal with that after the long adjournment.  I just need 
to update myself on the correspondence received this 
morning.   
 
And then the expert who will take up some time now 
and this afternoon.  I do not know whether Chair you wish to 
take an early adjournment or whether we should use the half 
hour and adjourn as normal between one and two? 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is your estimate of how long the 
10 
expert might take? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  At least an hour – an hour and a half. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Well maybe – maybe we should start 
with him.  We have about twenty five minutes – thirty 
minutes and then we take lunch and then after that – ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If we may Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What happened to the lamp that was 
supposed to be next to the witness?  I see it is not there.  
20 
You would not know anything about it Mr Pretorius but it is 
those who – who know – who know what I am talking about.  
It is supposed to be next to the witness so that if they have 
to read anything they can do that.  So if it is going to be 
disruptive to take it now then during the lunch adjournment it 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 69 of 141 
 
should be placed next to the witness.  If this is the one so 
that if the witness has to read anything they do not struggle 
with seeing the writing.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair in the under Free State 1 is 
Exhibit TT1. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would it be convenient – I know if we say 
Free State 1 we will know which bundle we are talking about 
but do you have any objection if we called it Bundle FS1? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I think I could accept that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [Laughing] let us make all of them Bundle 
10 
FS1, 2 and so on. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes we will do that – we will replace 
this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes no that is fine ja.  Just so that – you 
know if it is Free State 1 without bundle one does not know 
whether Free State 1 means something else different from 
bundle. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  So Bundle FS1. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So in Bundle FS1 for the record 
20 
Exhibit TT1 is the statement of Mr Jacobus Roets. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And you asked that to that statement 
that affidavit be admitted as and marked Exhibit TT1. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  TT1.  Chair at the moment and I think 
this has something to do with the lockdown measures. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 70 of 141 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes I see it is not commissioned. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It is signed but not commissioned. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I must just check that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If you will bear with me.  Yes Chair 
the intention is that it will be attested to but of course the 
witness can confirm that on oath now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The document. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Well I must just then say the 
document which appears or starts at page 1 of Bundle FS1 
which purports to be an affidavit by Mr Jacobus Roets is 
admitted and is to marked as an exhibit and is to be marked 
as Exhibit TT1. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  The expert has 
examined a report around which there will be no dispute.  It 
is a report dated February 2015 emanating from the 
Asbestos Project and will comment on that.  That is not 
attached here to this it should have been but it is not and it 
20 
will be referred to in one of the bundles.  It is in Bundle 8 – 
FS8 at page 270.  The witness will be asked to identify it 
however. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And it is in front of you.   
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 71 of 141 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay the – is that the one that should have 
been an annexure to his affidavit/ statement? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it does – it appears somewhere else? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In – okay in one of the bundles. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And there is no quarrel about its 
authenticity. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Or its identification and the witness 
will confirm that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay so I think to the extent that in his 
statement/affidavit he refers to that document maybe then 
one must make a note as to where it is to be found. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And for the record it is to be found at 
page 270 of Bundle FS8 but it may be that it should be 
20 
attached to the final affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja maybe… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    When it is attested and numbering 
arranged accordingly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja it may be attached maybe the last page 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 72 of 141 
 
of the statement is 23 maybe it could 23a, b, c, d. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Up to the end.  Ja and then it is more 
convenient. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you.  So before we start Chair 
may the witness be sworn? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja Okay alright.  Please administer the 
oath or affirmation. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Oath. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
10 
MR ROETS:  Jacobus Carel Roets.   
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR ROETS:  No – not. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR ROETS:  Yes. 
REGISTRAR:    Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so help me 
20 
God. 
MR ROETS:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not know – you may be seated.  I do 
not know whether the transcribers would have heard the 
responses from the witness.  He did – ja they did not they 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 73 of 141 
 
indicate they did not hear the responses.  I am going to ask 
that you repeat the oath.  Please take off your mask so that 
they can hear when you – and Mr Registrar keep the two – 
two and a half meters distance.  Maybe he thought you were 
too close that is why he put on his mask.   
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
MR ROETS:  Jacobus Carel Roets.   
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR ROETS:  I do not. 
10 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR ROETS:  Yes. 
REGISTRAR:    Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so help me 
God. 
MR ROETS:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Before addressing Mr Roets Chair if I 
20 
may just emphasise one aspect which emerges from the 
narrative as a whole and particularly from the evidence of Mr 
Roets is that not only are we here dealing with the duty to 
deal fairly transparently and cost effectively with state funds 
in procurement processes and in the execution of contracts 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 74 of 141 
 
under the auspices of provincial or national government but 
we are also dealing with another issue here Chair.  The state 
and through the state the executive has a constitutional duty 
to provide adequate housing and to safeguard the lives of 
the inhabitants of the various communities in the country.  
The question arises and you will hear from the evidences is 
whether these duties have been carried out.  We know that 
just from the small survey that we have done in this 
investigation of hundreds of millions of Rand being spent in 
the manner in which has been alluded to in this case but the 
10 
roofs are still there and the roofs with all their dangers are 
still there.  So whether the constitutional duty of the 
executive has been carried out is a question that will need to 
be addressed and we will address it in submission.  Mr Roets 
your occupation? 
MR ROETS:  Occupational Hygienist. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right and do you belong or are you a 
member of an entity which … 
MR ROETS:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And in terms of which you carry out 
20 
your work? 
MR ROETS:  Yes so we are accredited by SANAS in terms 
ISO 17020 and we approved inspection authority by the 
Department of Employment and Labour. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right we will come to that in a little 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 75 of 141 
 
more detail later.  But you have been asked to give an 
opinion in relation to an asbestos audit conducted in the 
Free 
State 
by 
the 
Free 
State 
Department 
of 
Human 
Settlements in 2014/2015, is that correct? 
MR ROETS:  Yes.  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What are your qualifications? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry do not speak too far from the 
microphone Mr Roets so that I can hear.  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Would you tell the Chair please of 
your qualifications and experience? 
10 
MR ROETS:  I am an Occupation Hygienist. I have done 
Analytical Chemistry Diploma in Analytical Chemistry with 
the TUT and then also completed a professional diploma in 
Occupational Hygiene from a British Institute of Occupational 
Hygiene.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And do you have any experience in 
relation to asbestos in particular? 
MR ROETS:  Yes for the past thirty years more or less I have 
been practicing Occupational Hygiene and since the start of 
my business or career I have worked for Transnet Chemical 
20 
Services where I have started dealing with asbestos because 
they transported asbestos throughout South Africa.  So I 
started monitoring and assessing and assisting in the 
eradication and removal of – of spilt asbestos and cleanup of 
asbestos throughout South Africa. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 76 of 141 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright. If you could… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Roets Mr Pretorius asks you 
the questions but you are telling me the stories.  So make 
sure I can see – see you as you tell the story because 
sometimes that is important to understand what you mean. 
MR ROETS:  Ja thanks Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You may address the Chair as the 
Chair.  Right just be a little more specific there.  We will 
come back to it in a moment in more detail but when you say 
you were involved in work relating to asbestos there are 
10 
various stages of that work.  What are those stages? 
MR ROETS:  Yes Mr Chair.  When we do asbestos work the 
first thing is to actually identify if there is a problem, the risk 
associated with the asbestos and the work that needs to be 
done.  So we will most probably start off with doing an 
inventory or assessment of asbestos in terms of the 
regulations that was promulgated.  Once that you know 
where the asbestos is, how much of asbestos there is and 
what is the risk – the potential risk of exposure then can – 
you can go and set up a plan on how to mitigate or put in the 
20 
necessary controls for this asbestos and if you need to 
remove asbestos because it is in a poor state or the risk of 
exposure is higher than you need to draft a plan of work and 
submit it to Department of Employment and Labour for their 
notice.  This plan is normally approved by an approved 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 77 of 141 
 
inspection authority before any work is done.  And once this 
plan has been submitted to the Department of Employment 
and Labour they will – or the work will commence after about 
thirteen to thirty days because of the notice periods that you 
need to provide.  And the work then that follows is done by a 
registered asbestos contractor that is appointed by the 
Department 
of 
Employment 
and 
this 
appointment 
or 
registration used to be done annually but nowadays the term 
or the time is actually set on three years – every three years 
we must reapply for their approval.  These are the guys that 
10 
will come in and under their training they will remove the 
asbestos in accordance with the approved plan of work in a 
safe and responsible manner and the waste will then be 
transported to a registered hazardous waste site.  So it 
cannot be disposed of in a normal waste or landfill area and 
once that it is deposited in that hazardous waste site they 
will receive a safe disposal certificate that the waste is 
properly disposed of and will be managed in time to come. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If I understand you correctly in order 
to remove… 
20 
MR ROETS:  And the illness is called asbestosis in the later 
stage of your illness.  The fine, fine asbestos, blue asbestos 
that you get or crocidolite can penetrate right through your 
lung and sit on the chest lining where it can cause 
mesothelioma and that is a cancer of your chest lining which 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 78 of 141 
 
is a fatal illness most probably you will die within one year 
after contracting mesothelioma.  There is also other illnesses 
like lung cancer that can be caused and there are some 
papers currently that the people seem to think or the people 
that investigate these things and analyse it seems to think 
that it can also cause colon cancer if people ingest the 
asbestos by accident.  So these are the illnesses that can be 
caused. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I understand from your paper that 
asbestos fibres may be released from asbestos material into 
10 
the air and then as you say they are ingested into the lungs.  
Once that happens is it curable? 
MR ROETS:  Well as we know and nowadays you can 
actually transplant lungs into a person so it is possible if 
asbestosis is identified in a person that with the medical 
knowledge that we have got nowadays that you can actually 
cure a person but you will definitely give him a very hard life 
because the symptoms of asbestosis is that the hard 
calcified areas in the lungs will actually tear away from the 
soft tissue of your lungs when you breathe and your lungs 
20 
can start bleeding.  So it is a very bad illness to have and 
what you actually die of most of the time is a lack of oxygen.  
Because what happens you decrease the effective gas 
exchange area in your lungs so where you need to pick up 
oxygen or uptake oxygen in your lungs and give off carbon 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 79 of 141 
 
dioxide from your lungs that area is getting smaller and 
smaller because of the calcification of the portions of your 
lung and so yes people are still dying today of asbestosis 
and mesothelioma. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If one is exposed to asbestos fibre in 
the manner you have described is it life threatening? 
MR ROETS:  It is life threatening definitely. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The prevalence of asbestos as you 
have stated has given rise to concerns on the part of the 
legislature and legislation has been passed controlling or 
10 
presaging the eradication of asbestos, is that correct? 
MR ROETS:  Chair yes that is true. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You just tell the Chair about that 
because one of the matters that the Chair will look at is 
whether there has in this case been compliance with that 
legislation? 
MR ROETS:  Chair yes we have had asbestos regulations 
since 1983, 1987, 1989 and then it was changed again in 
2001 and 2002.  There was a little bit of errata on the 
regulation that it changed.  So the current regulation that we 
20 
have got is called the Asbestos Regulation 155 of 2002 and 
this piece of regulation different to the old of 1987/1989 
regulation that we used to have also includes asbestos 
containing materials.  The difference between raw asbestos 
or friable asbestos and asbestos containing material is that 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 80 of 141 
 
the friable asbestos is asbestos as mined as it comes out of 
a mine where it actually carries a very high risk. So it is not 
bonded in anything.  So the previous regulation specifically 
talked about the raw asbestos and handling and controlling 
workers exposure to the friable or the raw or the high risk 
materials.  In 2002 the new asbestos regulation also 
includes asbestos containing materials which is now the roof 
sheeting and the facia boards and ceiling panels and floor 
tiles.  All these materials that contain a percentage of 
asbestos which may be anything from 14% up to 54% of 
10 
asbestos 
depending 
on 
the 
manufacturer 
and 
so 
the 
regulation calls for certain control measures the employer 
and self-employed person that he needs to control any 
exposure.  If he employs any people to work on asbestos 
that there needs to be some controls in place to ensure that 
he does not inhale asbestos or he is not exposing anybody in 
the public to airborne asbestos fibres. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Let us just take a step back.  We 
omitted to deal with blue asbestos.  What is that and how 
prevalent was that in South Africa and in South African 
20 
buildings? 
MR ROETS:  Blue asbestos or also called crocidolite 
asbestos is the most hazardous form of asbestos that you do 
get.  Basically because of the aero dynamic properties of the 
material and the – the extent of the chemical inertness of 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 81 of 141 
 
this asbestos material.  It breaks off in very small needle like 
fibres.  It is very small – less than 0.2 micro metres in size.  
So once that it becomes airborne it stays in the air for 
extended periods of time because of the aero dynamic 
properties in its weight so it does not settle out.  So once 
that you have started with asbestos work and you emitted 
this asbestos through your activities it is possible that this 
fibres can even blown from that specific work environment 
with a very far distance from your work environment.  So the 
blue asbestos is the fibre that is actually a straight needle 
10 
like very small fibre that can penetrate right through your 
lung into the chest lining and mostly this is the type of 
asbestos that will cause mesothelioma.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now we dealing in this – sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think it is time for the lunch adjournment. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Oh yes thanks. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We will take the lunch adjournment and we 
will resume as two o’clock.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
20 
INQUIRY RESUMES:   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, let us continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you, Chair.  Mr Roets, we were 
dealing with the legislation governing asbestos at the time.  
As I understand the position, and to summarise, prior to 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 82 of 141 
 
1994, there was legislation but that legislation did not govern 
building materials which contained asbestos. 
MR ROETS:  Chair, yes, that is true.  The ’89 Regulation did 
not cater for asbestos containing materials.  So this was 
overseen during the assessment of asbestos and used all 
over South Africa to manufacture building material. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  So before 1994, there was 
nothing governing the use of asbestos in a house? 
MR ROETS:  No, not asbestos containing materials but the 
friable asbestos.  If it was insulation material that they used 
10 
around the geysers, for example.  So that would be 
legislated. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  And we are dealing here 
mainly in this case with low-cost housing.  The houses that 
we are dealing with, when would they have been constructed 
in the manner? 
MR ROETS:  Well, we have been mining asbestos in South 
Africa for many years.  So manufactured all over these 
periods.  So no specific time of manufacture but ever since 
they actually started mining the asbestos and using it in 
20 
building materials, various houses have been made. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Perhaps, mainly pre-1994.  Would 
that be fair? 
MR ROETS:  Even after 1994 to some extent because there 
was not legislation preventing the building with asbestos 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 83 of 141 
 
containing materials up until 2001. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And when were the regulations 
promulgated that dealt with asbestos containing materials, 
including materials used in houses? 
MR ROETS:  The regulation, the Asbestos Regulation 155 of 
2002, was promulgated in February 2002. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  And then the steps taken 
against asbestos got more stringent, and what happened in 
2004? 
MR ROETS:  In 2004, roundabout 2004, the Environmental 
10 
Minister at that time banned the use of any new asbestos, 
this asbestos containing materials.  So, yes, it was more 
stringent.   
 
You are not allowed to use anymore asbestos in new 
products and then the transport of asbestos and then the use 
in any building materials was banned at that stage. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And importantly for the present case, 
what happened in 2008? 
MR ROETS:  In 2008, was the physical letter that was 
written by the then Minister Marthinus van Schalkwyk who 
20 
banned the asbestos or the use of asbestos and also 
suggested that we should start implementing a phase-out 
plan for asbestos and try to eradicate asbestos if it is 
maintained and if you can actually remove it, it should be 
removed.  
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 84 of 141 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But was this a suggestion, a 
requirement? 
MR ROETS:  A written ...[indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  [Indistinct] requisite? 
MR ROETS:  Ja, a written up in regulation on the 
environmental side.  So if we understand it, we are dealing 
with two departments.   
 
We are dealing with the Department of Employment and 
Labour on the one side and we are dealing with the 
Department of Environmental Affairs on the other side.  So it 
10 
is two different pieces of legislation all together. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  We may have to obtain that 
for the benefit of the Chair but it seems to me that there was 
a level of requirement from 2008 that asbestos be eradicated 
from buildings. 
MR ROETS:  Ja.  Or either maintained in a well-maintained 
condition.  Kept in a well-maintained condition Chair.  Or like 
I said, it should be removed, if at all possible, that it be 
removed but in terms of the Labour Regulations, it was not... 
it is not banned at this stage even now. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Was any period suggested or 
required in this phase-out plan? 
MR 
ROETS: 
 
There 
was 
some 
suggestions 
in 
the 
communication that this phase-out plan should be over a 
period of ten years as a potential timeframe.  Yes, Chair. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 85 of 141 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  So the requirement to remove 
insofar as it existed in regulations or directives, required the 
removal to take place or the securing of the asbestos 
material to take place by 2018? 
MR ROETS:  That is correct.  That will be correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Now to become more particular or 
more detailed in relation to the facts of these case.  You deal 
in paragraph 22 with the process and the requirements for 
the identification of the asbestos.  Please tell the Chair 
about that. 
10 
MR ROETS:  In terms of the Asbestos Regulation, as the 
Regulation 155 of 2003, it requires in Section 7 or 
Regulation 7 that an inventory should be drafted.   
 
Also speaking about it in Regulation 14 that this 
inventory 
should 
be 
drafted 
by 
six-months 
after 
the 
promulgation of this regulation which is August 2002. 
 
Every employer or self-employed person is supposed to 
draft an inventory or do an assessment of all the asbestos 
on his property, the condition of the asbestos, the location of 
the asbestos, how much or quantity of the asbestos, what is 
20 
the condition of such asbestos, and what is the potential 
exposure hazard to people in the environment, to the 
residents, to the employees. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right. 
MR ROETS:  And this is a record. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 86 of 141 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  My questions, perhaps, was not too 
clear Mr Roets.  How difficult is it to identify asbestos in a 
building with any degree of accuracy? 
MR ROETS:  Okay.  To actually identify asbestos, it is a 
destructive test.  So there is no instrumentation that you can 
used to identify asbestos, press it up against a panel and it 
will say that this is asbestos.   
 
So it is a physical destructive test.  You need to break 
off a piece of this material and send it for analyses.  For a 
trained eye you can with some certainty say that it is 
10 
asbestos because of the condition.   
 
We will look an amount of fibres where it is in the 
asbestos containing material.   
 
You can say that this material is suspected of being 
asbestos containing material but to totally positively identify 
any such material, there is an analytical way, a technical way 
that we need to analyse the samples to positively identify. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Can one do it by reference to a 
digital map? 
MR ROETS:  No, then the ...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Google Maps for example? 
MR ROETS:  No definitely not.  The reason why I am saying 
this is, because even at a later stage Chair, asbestos was in 
the same plant manufactured or as the new tech material 
that is nowadays used, it has got the same profile as the old 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 87 of 141 
 
asbestos panels.   
 
So it is possible that if there was any renovations done 
in one of these houses, you will definitely not pick it up.  So 
you cannot say with certainty from a picture that this is 
asbestos.   
 
You can certainly say that there is a profile.  We call it 
the Big Six Profile on the big roof sheets.  So you can 
recognise 
a 
profile 
but 
you 
cannot 
positively 
identify 
asbestos in that way. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If I ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  What are the probabilities that 
you would be right if you look at, for example, the roof of a 
house?  What are the probabilities that you will get it right if 
you say that has got asbestos? 
MR ROETS:  Chair, in this situation if it is low-cost housing 
and you have done some homework in terms of maintenance 
and repairs to any of these materials, there is a big 
possibility that you can actually identify with some certainty 
that it is asbestos material or suspected materials. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So are you saying that if you have not 
20 
done any work in relation to a particular house or a 
particular set of houses, it would not be appropriate to just 
walk and look at the roof and say, “Okay, that one is 
asbestos.  That one is not asbestos”. 
MR ROETS:  Chair, if it clearly says it in the document that 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 88 of 141 
 
that is asbestos, I would not go as far because, like I said, 
there is a possibility of maintenance and replacement with 
other materials, as well as, the possibility of other asbestos 
containing materials within the same property, like ceiling 
panels and botched walls and window sills, which will 
definitely not be identified by just looking at it from the 
outside. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
So 
are 
you... 
would 
you 
say 
that 
professionally it could not be a reliable way of identifying 
houses that have got asbestos or this asbestos on the roof 
10 
to just look at the roof with a naked eye?  Or are you saying, 
it can be reliable but not all the time.  What do you say about 
that way of doing things? 
MR ROETS:  Chair, thanks.  Yes, there is a possibility that 
you can make a good estimation of quantity of asbestos or 
asbestos containing sheets or something that looks like 
asbestos by doing that way, but the whole purpose of the 
assessment in terms of the legislation, is to look at the risk, 
the potential risk because of previous damage to these 
panels.   
20 
 
It has been weathered and there is a bigger risk now 
because the fibres have actually loosened and available to 
become airborne.   
 
So one needs to have a close inspection of this material 
to do a proper inventory and assessment. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 89 of 141 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And probably your professional view is that 
the way to do that would be to send it for testing or 
something? 
MR ROETS:  Chair, yes.  What we normally do from an 
assessment point of view, is to go and look at this material, 
assess it.   
 
And look at the condition and if it is ceiling panels, for 
example, we would break off a piece and send it for analyses 
to make sure that it is asbestos or not. 
 
So, yes, it is very helpful if you can quantify and write 
10 
up all the asbestos material on a proper bill of quantities 
because that will assist you in later removal plans and 
costing of such a project. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well, several points arise out of that 
and your evidence after the long adjournment.  First point is, 
what is the effectiveness of an aerial photographic view, 
such as one would get on a computer, of a suburb?  Can that 
be relied on to identify asbestos roofs? 
MR ROETS:  Like I said Chair, the only thing that you will 
20 
achieve by that is to get an assessment perspective of 
asbestos containing materials.  You can see the profile but 
apart from that, it does not help you any... in actually 
assessing the condition of the asbestos. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  The second point is.  If I 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 90 of 141 
 
stand outside the house and I take a photograph on an iPad, 
what would the position then be? 
MR ROETS:  It is still the same issue Chair, that you cannot 
actually talk to the quantity, as well as, the quality of the 
asbestos or the condition and it will not assist in any way of 
eradicating asbestos or setting up a bill of quantities.   
 
The purpose of doing a proper assessment is to actually 
prioritise asbestos containing materials that is in a poor 
condition so that they can be removed or that can be 
removed at an early stage so that the cost can be spread 
10 
over a period of time that is reasonable.   
 
Maybe a five or a ten year phase-out plan and I think 
that is the reasoning behind the legislation. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Oh, I understand you to be saying Mr 
Roets that, it is one thing to say that house has an asbestos 
roof.  It is quite another thing to assess for the purposes of 
eradication, a program of eradication, the condition of the 
house for the purposes of planning eradication? 
MR ROETS:  Yes, Chair.  I think the main purpose of the 
legislation is to ensure that the people, the residents of that 
20 
property are safe, remain safe and there is no risk of 
exposure.   
 
So if you just go around to identify for potential asbestos 
materials, it will not assist in the final purpose of such an 
assessment.  It is to see what is the risk. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 91 of 141 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I understand your evidence to say too 
that it is not only the roof but it is the contents of the house 
that need to be identified and assessed? 
MR ROETS:  Yes, Chair.  That is the purpose.  From 
experience we can see that, for example... if I can use 
another example.  If there is a hailstorm that comes through 
some areas, you will see that most of the damages are in the 
valley of these big six panels. 
 
And it is due to the fact that the weathering over a 
period of time has caused these panels to wear out, a little 
10 
bit thinner and thinner, and then hail will damage these 
asbestos panels.   
 
And so when you do the assessment, you would want to 
see if there are any cracks in the panels, what is the 
condition, is there still one centimetre thick material, and 
that will all give you an indication what is the potential risk 
in that house. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And I understand that any rational 
programme with asbestos eradication involves prioritisation 
exercise where you take the high-risk asbestos containing 
20 
materials as a priority and the lower-risk as... further down 
the line.  Am I correct? 
MR ROETS:  Yes, Chair.  You are definitely correct.  The 
whole purpose of the regulation in terms of The Occupation, 
Health and Safety Act, not only the Asbestos Regulation but 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 92 of 141 
 
any regulation connected to it, is to control the risk to 
people, residents, employees that work in that environment 
and...   
 
So in this case, the purpose would be to remove the 
material that is now as this has got a big risk to cause 
exposure and then over a period of time to phase out all the 
asbestos in an eradication programme. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  Now this issue will come up 
later when you deal with the report but when one comes to 
the 
stage 
of 
removal 
and 
disposal, 
in 
other 
words, 
10 
eradication of asbestos, let us say in a house, who is 
empowered or authorised to do that work? 
MR ROETS:  In terms of the legislation, asbestos work is 
done by a registered asbestos contractor Chair.  And these 
contractors 
are 
registered 
with 
the 
Department 
of 
Employment and Labour. 
 
And they go through a screening process, submitting the 
necessary documentation to ensure that the people that are 
doing this asbestos work is well educated.   
 
They train.  They go for a medical... working on a 
20 
heights training and these are the contractors that are 
approved to work with asbestos and remove asbestos and 
disposal with safety. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I think you have already told the 
Chair that when you remove, you release or it generate 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 93 of 141 
 
fibres and that it creates a danger for the public and the 
workers themselves. 
MR ROETS:  [No audible reply] [Microphone not switched 
on.] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  How would you then conduct an 
assessment?  We are going back now a stage from the 
removal?   
 
I think you have said quite clearly that the assessment 
enables a proper eradication process and certain... the 
assessment must have certain features or qualifications that 
10 
will enable the removal to take place and you will comment 
on the report that was generated in this matter against that 
background.   
 
But how would you properly in terms of the relevant 
regulations conduct an assessment?  Then if you could just 
briefly outline the steps. 
MR ROETS:  What the normal assessment would be... would 
involve is to do a desktop study firstly, to identify when this 
asbestos or material covering roof would have been placed 
on it, more or less.   
20 
 
So that one can get an idea of the timeframe that the 
material was placed on the roof.  The second option would 
be... well, the standard is actually go to the site and 
investigate.  Get access to the sites.   
 
Sometimes it is difficult if it is houses because you need 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 94 of 141 
 
to get access to the house to actually go inside and view the 
house from the inside to assess the condition of this 
material.   
 
And like I have said previously, the building material or 
the roof sheets used to be manufactured up to 54% of 
asbestos in cement materials.   
 
So if there is a high concentration of asbestos in this 
building material, obviously, the risk, potential risk of 
exposure will be higher.   
 
And 
if 
this 
material 
is 
then 
in 
a 
poor 
state 
of 
10 
maintenance, it will mean that the panels can break easily 
and you need to assess this in terms of your procedures that 
you will follow to remove the asbestos. 
 
So the contents of my assessment would be a close 
visual inspection, taking of a sample to assess what is the 
amount of asbestos and the potential risk within this 
material. 
 
And then also look at the condition and prioritise which 
materials are the worst and then put up a plan to start taking 
out the higher-risk materials. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The report that you would draft after 
your inspection identification and assessment, what qualities 
would that report have to have for it to be a use in any 
eradication programme? 
MR ROETS:  Chair, through the legislation, there is a 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 95 of 141 
 
guidance document out that outlines the format of such a 
report, certain requirements that needs to be on the report 
like that plus an example of what information is required out 
of this report.   
 
Like I have said previously, the location of any such 
asbestos, more or less, an estimation of the quantity of the 
asbestos, what is the condition of the asbestos, what type of 
asbestos it is, what controls have you got in place already to 
mitigate 
the 
potential 
exposure, 
and 
what 
lack 
or 
recommendations are there to maintain the asbestos in a 
10 
good condition. 
 
So all this information will be captured on an official 
record that needs to be obtained and kept for 40-years. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You say in paragraph 29.11 that your 
company does work at a flat rate per day in relation to 
asbestos identification assessment and report.  Is that 
correct? 
MR ROETS:  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What is that rate per day? 
MR ROETS:  Currently, we are charging R 3000,00 a day, 
20 
flat rate. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And how many houses can you do in 
a day on your requirements that you have set out in your 
statement? 
MR ROETS:  Chairman, in terms of this project, it was done 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 96 of 141 
 
on the low-cost housing, the estimation of anything between 
20 m² and roughly about 40 m².  I would suggest that we can 
do per person about ten houses a proper assessment per 
day. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So that would be, if my arithmetic is 
correct, approximately R 300,00 per unit? 
MR ROETS:  Roughly.  Yes, Chair.  That is correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And you say, you would have to add 
to that administration, travel and accommodation costs? 
MR ROETS:  Yes, Chair.  We have got a basic cost of 
10 
administration fee of also R 3000,00 per day, for example, 
an inventory report.  So that can be split amongst ten 
houses.  So another R 300,00.  So roughly about R 600,00 
for the assessment, as well as, the admin costs towards that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  In relation Chair, the asbestos 
from 
the 
Free 
State, 
you 
were 
approached 
by 
the 
investigators and asked to look at and comment on certain 
documentation. 
MR ROETS:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The principle document is your report 
20 
of 2n d February 2015 which is in Bundle FS8 at page 270 but 
that document is before you.  Is that the document you have 
looked at? 
MR ROETS:  Yes, Chair.  That is the document. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You say you have worked in this 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 97 of 141 
 
industry for some time, decades, in fact.  Have you come 
across Blackhead Consulting (Pty) Limited in the course of 
your work? 
MR ROETS:  Never Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And have you come across Diamond 
Hill Trading 71 (Pty) Limited? 
MR ROETS:  Never Chairperson. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What are the chances that those entities, 
maybe particularly Blackhead, could be quite active in the 
10 
industry without you knowing? 
MR ROETS:  Chairperson, currently I think there is around... 
the last figures I have seen, there are around 290 odd 
registered asbestos contractors in the country. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ROETS:  I do not know and do not work for all of them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ROETS:  So I cannot say that they are not active in the 
industry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR ROETS:  I am not aware of it.  I have been involved in 
the industry with various role-players in the legislation and 
certainly in my dealings, I have never run across any of their 
names. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you able to say in the light of how 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 98 of 141 
 
much time, how many years you have spent in the industry 
and in the light of what I conceded to be high-profile status 
that you seem to have in the industry because you told me 
about your involvement in the drafting of regulations and so 
on?   
 
Are you able to say whether out of those... I think you 
have said three hundred and something entities involved in 
the whole country, are you able to say you are familiar with a 
certain percentage of those that are quite active?  Or is 
something difficult to say? 
10 
MR ROETS:  Chairperson, I think it is quite difficult to say. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is difficult, yes.  Okay. 
MR ROETS:  There are so many... I, certainly, have dealt in 
different industries with a lot of asbestos contractors, as well 
as, people involved in drafting such inventories. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ROETS:  One need to have a look at the legislation.  It 
does not call for a specific person or entity or body to this 
inventory.  It calls for a competent person to do such. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
MR ROETS:  So it is also possible that if this entity is 
competent, they know enough about asbestos, that they do 
not need to be registered as an asbestos contractor. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
MR ROETS:  But as soon as they are removing or handling 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 99 of 141 
 
asbestos, they definitely must be registered. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You were asked to comment on the 
unit price of R 850,00 for assessment and also the proposed 
cost for the assessment of R 1 350,00.  That Chair was the 
original price proposed in the proposal to the Gauteng 
Department of Human Settlements. 
 
But I understand you are unable to comment on that 
because you have not seen the work clearly defined. 
MR ROETS:  Yes, Chairperson.  When I actually had a look 
10 
through the documentation provided to me, I was provided 
with one report, final report, as well as, five examples of 
assessments that the company had done and also the 
original proposal that was provided by the municipality. 
 
And in these documents, I do not think I have had 
enough information to make a clear statement about the 
costs, this thousand odd three hundred rands.   
 
It certainly looked a little bit high in terms of the amount 
of houses that needed to be assessed but... ja, I do not think 
I had enough information. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The state of the work that was 
required, did you look through the documentation to learn 
what that scope was in any detail? 
MR ROETS:  Yes, Chairperson.  At the time when I assessed 
and went through the documentation, it was clear that there 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 100 of 141 
 
was very little in terms of defining the words “audit and 
assess” and for me that was problematic and to look in this 
final document if they actually achieved or done that was 
required in the original quote, so that was one of the 
problems, that the terms were not defined properly in the 
document. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In your opinion were they defined 
sufficiently to allow, if they were complied with, a proper 
programme of eradication? 
MR ROETS:   Even the proper eradication purpose or 
10 
proposal, one needs to have a proper bill of quantities to 
quote on the said project of abatement or removal of or 
eradication of asbestos in the area.  So if you can assess 
and properly define the amount of asbestos you can 
actually give a price, a costing to that.  If you have not 
done that, you have not assessed the risk of potential 
exposure, I think it is very difficult to put up a proposal on 
the eradication if you do not have that information. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Actually, if you have not done that, 
would the position not be that you have not assessed? 
20 
MR ROETS:   Yes, Chair, that is my whole argument is that 
the documentation that was placed in front of me and given 
as examples, I can find – I find that that is not enough 
information to – call it a proper assessment in terms of the 
current regulations, what must be in an assessment, a 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 101 of 141 
 
proper assessment, and it will also hinder the phase where 
asbestos needs to be abated at a later stage or removed at 
a later stage because there is definitely no bill of 
quantities that will hinder the process further on. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Before you go on and for the 
benefit of those of us who are not building experts, what is 
a bill of quantities? 
MR ROETS:   Bill of quantities, Chair, is the amount of 
asbestos, amount of houses, amount of asbestos in each 
house and that you need to define in terms of square 
10 
meterage, in terms of the weight of asbestos because it 
comes into play when you have to calculate the amount of 
travelling that you need to do in terms of transporting this 
waste to hazardous waste site, the time spent on the site, 
the amount of labour that you need to employ to remove 
the asbestos and the amount of personal protective 
equipment that needs to be provided, accommodation 
maybe in that area, bins that you need to organise to place 
this asbestos waste in for the transportation as well as the 
cost for the final and safe disposal of the asbestos, so all 
20 
these things are published in what we use as an inventory, 
we just call that a bill of quantities, we can actually send 
and 
circulate 
that 
to 
potential 
registered 
asbestos 
contractors so that they can actually put up a price to 
remove or eradicate the asbestos. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 102 of 141 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that information, was that 
contained in the report? 
MR ROETS:   Chair, through the five examples that I had 
from the different assessments that they have done, no, 
definitely not. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And in order to obtain that 
information would one need to do another assessment? 
MR ROETS:   Chair, yes, this assessment will definitely 
have to be redone to get a proper bill of quantities to 
enable a tender process to remove asbestos. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You say in paragraph 34.2 that the 
output from the project that we are talking about today is a 
report.  What does that report tell you? 
MR ROETS:   Chair, the report that I had in front of me 
dated the 2 February 2015, in terms of my view of this, it is 
a scoping report of the potential problem of asbestos in a 
region or a district and that is as far as it goes.  It does 
not give any clear indication of how much asbestos there is 
and what is the potential risk to the residents or people in 
the public and does not give any indication about that.  So 
20 
ja, in terms of proper assessment, I would say that this is 
not a proper document that can be used.  Maybe on a high 
level for parliament it might be a good document for them 
to use to see what is the potential risk but in terms of 
eradication, definitely not. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 103 of 141 
 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Now 
what 
is 
the 
significance 
of 
establishing the level of harmfulness or danger to the 
occupants of the house to not assess how serious the 
damage is or the risk to the residents?  What is the 
importance of not doing that for purposes of the safety of 
the people who live in the house?   
In other words, if you are supposed to assess the 
houses for asbestos and you do not do that, you just stand 
in the street and have a look at the roof and not actually 
go and break it, I think you said, or some pieces and take 
10 
them to where they are supposed to be tested. 
MR ROETS:   Yes, there is certainly some pros and cons 
doing the assessment.  When we physically go out and do 
an assessment we try to remove a piece in areas where it 
cannot harm to the residents and the procedure would call 
for new ceiling, the portion where you actually removed 
and broken out a piece to seal it so that you do not cause 
additional risk to the residents.   
But in terms of your question, it is also a matter of 
education of the people that stay in a residence like that.  
20 
So if the community did not properly educate the residents 
of a property like that on the potential risk and exposure 
risk and sources of asbestos fibres while staying in a 
house you will find some of the residents might be busy 
with 
alterations 
themselves 
removing 
some 
asbestos 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 104 of 141 
 
because of damage and they did not maintain it properly in 
the past.   
So in this proposal document you will see words 
like asbestos containing rubble, meaning stuff that people 
already removed from their houses and put on sidewalks 
and so on, so this asbestos is lying, there is a potential of 
vehicles travelling and pulverizing this material lying in the 
road or on the sidewalks or dead spaces and then 
pulverising and causing additional exposure. 
So if you leave the asbestos as is, you do not 
10 
educate the residents on potential risk and tell them not to 
drill into the asbestos and put up fixture and put in any 
alterations or make alterations to these materials, there is 
a risk that the fibres may be released during these 
processes and people will be exposed, they will inhale the 
fibres.  And especially in certain areas like the Northern 
Cape where the crocidolite or the blue asbestos have been 
mined, there is this additive effect, so in the environment 
there is potentially already some fibres and if you then 
also go break panels in the sand and the break panels you 
20 
will add to that risk of exposure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And there was a reference I think in the 
documents to the scope of the work being audit and 
assess, I think or assessed and audit, I think audit and 
assess.  The audit part I take it means identify the houses 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 105 of 141 
 
and tell us how many or which ones, is that right? 
MR ROETS:   Ja.  Yes, Chair …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
And 
assess 
is 
then 
what 
you 
have…[intervenes] 
MR ROETS:   Yes, Chair, I would say that the first portion 
on the stuff they have done might be the first portion, the 
audit portion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The auditing portion but not the 
assessment. 
MR ROETS:   But the assessment portion is lacking. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was not done. 
MR ROETS:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Properly or at all. 
MR ROETS:   Yes, I would say so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph 35 you summarise 
what might be your evidence in relation to assessment you 
say the condition of the roof needs to be looked at, you 
need to establish how many residences are at high risk of 
potential exposure, what houses should be prioritised for 
20 
eradication and in addition to that the specific information 
that a bill of quantities would provide, how much asbestos, 
where, in what condition and how embedded in the 
residence it might be. 
MR ROETS:   Yes, that is true, Chair.  It will definitely 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 106 of 141 
 
assist in spreading the cost over a period of time.  We can 
prioritise high risk areas in terms of asbestos that was 
maybe 
put 
up 
first 
or 
residence 
when 
he 
is 
busy 
renovating, doing some repairs to their roofs or already 
removing asbestos panels and breaking it.   
So this assessment would be used to identify these 
houses or residence or so that they can be completed first 
or handled first and then the rest, panels that is in a good 
condition, maybe there was a plan by the residents to paint 
and seal the panels properly and nicely.  This will be a low 
10 
risk and they can be dealt with at a later stage.  So you 
can spread the costs of eradication over a period of time. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You are asked a question by the 
investigators and you record that in the report: 
“Does counting houses with asbestos roofs justify 
the cost of R850 per unit?” 
And you then answer that by saying: 
“Well, there is a lot more involved in a proper 
assessment.” 
Is that correct? 
20 
MR ROETS:   That is correct, Chair.  As previously said 
that we need to assess the condition of this asbestos to do 
a 
proper 
assessment, 
to 
look 
at 
any 
cracks, 
any 
renovations, any previous removal.  in terms of the current 
regulation it talks about well-maintained condition and 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 107 of 141 
 
sealed.  So if you want to keep in a well-maintained 
condition you need to remove all mould and try to prevent 
mould growth which will weaken the asbestos.  So this, all 
these things will be looked during an assessment of such 
asbestos problems. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then you were asked by the 
investigators and you put it in your report, the price of 
R32 760, which was the price in the proposal for the 
removal of asbestos in this case. 
MR ROETS:   Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you were asked to comment on 
that.  The calculations that you do, do they assume a 
proper assessment? 
MR ROETS:   Yes, Chair, the calculation that I did is taking 
into consideration that there is a proper bill of quantities 
set out to the amount of asbestos in each area.  What is 
the distances that one need to travel between these areas 
that will all help and assist you to do a proper costing of a 
project like that for the removal and tender process. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And your estimate cost? 
20 
MR ROETS:   Estimated cost for the removal, that is, from 
experience with current contractors, registered asbestos 
contractors that I work with, on this – and if I can 
remember correctly is about R6, R7 000 per house, I must 
just make sure from this, actually done a little calculation, 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 108 of 141 
 
R4 329 and that is working on a house that is roughly 
about 20 squares, low cost housing, very small.  Obviously 
if the house is bigger it might be higher than that, but ja, 
that is cost to the company that will remove that so 
obviously they still need to add a profit to this cost but my 
estimation on a small house like that would be plus minus 
R5 000. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You were then shown and had 
regard to the report before you of 2015, of 2 February 
2015. 
10 
MR ROETS:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you were also given a report 
by the investigators of houses that they looked at, is that 
correct?  
MR ROETS:   That is correct, yes, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If you would just comment on the 
contents of the report as you do on page 19 of your 
statement and following. 
MR ROETS:   The five examples, Chair, that I received 
gave a Google Maps picture of the property which I 
20 
actually by accident opened up on my computer and 
looked, it is exactly the same, and then also a street 
photo.   
Somebody that took a picture from the street to 
show that this is asbestos or a big six panel on the roof 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 109 of 141 
 
with a comment that it is asbestos.   
Apart from that, there was comments on the walls 
that was cracked in some areas but there was no 
comments on the condition of the asbestos with potential 
risk of exposure and even size.  The only size that I got 
was a document that was pulled off by I think the 
investigators at a later stage, 2018 or something, that 
gives a municipal size of the property itself but not the 
dwelling, the house, so there is no indication of how much 
asbestos we are talking about on any of the examples that 
10 
I examined. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I do not want to confuse you or the 
Chair and I might have done so, I apologise, let us deal 
with the quality of the work as appeared in the report 
rather than anything that the investigators may have done.  
Just put that aside for one moment.  The comments you 
have just made about the audit and assessment in the 
report, do they apply? 
MR ROETS:   Ja, Chair, the five examples when I 
examined, it definitely does not show an assessment of 
20 
asbestos and even audit, it will give an indication of there 
is asbestos on this house because of the picture that they 
have taken and with the assumption that it might be 
asbestos.  But apart from that, this whole report is 
structured around the structure, the integrity of the house 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 110 of 141 
 
itself, the building, the bricks and so on but very, very, 
very little information other than a potential number of 
houses in a certain district, that is all that is outlined in 
this report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, in other words, are you saying that 
as the product of an assessment which it is supposed to be 
this report that they, Blackhead and its joint venture 
partner, was lacking in quite a significant way? 
MR ROETS:   Yes, Chairperson, it was definitely lacking.  
If you look at the original proposal it called for the audit 
10 
and 
assessment 
of 
asbestos 
and 
it 
also 
called 
for 
assessment of asbestos contained in rubble and I did not 
find any information in the reports about any rubble lying 
around.  So even if you have to quote or tender on such a 
project you did not have – or you do not have all the 
information available and as you previously say, audit 
would be a good description of what was done and the 
latter portion was left out in the report as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It appears from the documentation 
20 
that we have and the investigators have obtained that the 
whole purpose of the audit and assessment was to enable 
a second phase of removal and eradication.   
We have touched on this before but in your report 
at page 20 you answer the question whether in your 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 111 of 141 
 
opinion the report that was produced, the final audit and 
assessment report …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You mean in his statement, you said in 
his report. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In his statement, I am sorry, at 
page 20, paragraph 38. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In your statement you answer the 
question as to whether the report in its final form there 
could be used as a basis for an effective eradication 
10 
programme, removal and eradication programme. 
MR ROETS:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What is your answer to that 
question? 
MR ROETS:   Yes, Chair, my answer to that was that this 
document is not useful at all and it will not assist any of 
the contractors to effectively plan and cost such a big 
project.  So, ja, ineffective …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What would they have to do in 
order to quote? 
20 
MR ROETS:   In terms of setting up a proper bill of 
quantities for people to quote on, they definitely need to 
redo this job. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So what you are saying is very important 
and I just want to make sure that you are quite definite 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 112 of 141 
 
about it.  If you are not so sure you need to say so. 
MR ROETS:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because Mr Sodi is going to come and 
give evidence here. 
MR ROETS:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you quite satisfied and are you quite 
definite that this report really is of not much use for 
purposes of any effective eradication of asbestos and 
therefore whatever Blackhead and its joint venture charged 
for it when its mandate was to – or included to assess 
10 
asbestos, this report is of either limited use or no use at 
all?  Is that something you are quite definite about? 
MR ROETS:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or you want to put it a little lower than 
that? 
MR ROETS:   Chairperson, what I want to say and I think 
that I am comfortable in saying about this is that the 
proposal, the costing that they originally have done per 
house, if I use my calculation and experience will definitely 
cover the cost, it will be a very high cost but it will cover 
20 
the cost, that this report that they have submitted will not 
give you the necessary information to accurately cost for a 
project like that and to remove a project because you 
cannot assess the risk, you do not what equipment to use, 
how much asbestos to transport, to what is the transport 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 113 of 141 
 
requirements, how long this project is going to take to 
remove.  So that information is definitely lacking in this 
report.  It will not give the ordinary person on the street or 
registered asbestos contractor enough ammunition to do 
this job properly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you say that the assessment would 
have to be redone. 
MR ROETS:   According to me, I think the assessment 
needs to be redone. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR ROETS:   And a proper bill of quantities set up. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, the point that you are 
making would be more graphically made by reference to 
the actual documentation and the report itself or attached 
to the report.  Can I ask you to go to FS9, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so FS9? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   FS9, this is the investigator ’s 
report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you have page 416?  If you 
would go to page 416, please?  And that is – well, perhaps, 
no, do not go there yet.  At the top of the page you will see 
numbering in red and at the top left you will see numbering 
in black.  The numbering in black top left is the numbering 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 114 of 141 
 
as advised by the Chair, the number in top right I am told, 
Chair, is the insistence notwithstanding instructions for 
later record purposes of the bundles, but we can ignore the 
red numbers for your purposes.  Chair, let us look at FS9, 
page 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, for what it is worth, if there has to 
be a renumbering such as the one they have done here 
with the black numbers, I think they should try, if possible, 
to put it also – to put those numbers also on the right side 
of the page because when you are paging through you 
10 
cannot see where it is, it is difficult to see so you go 
according to the red number pages, page numbers, but 
then those are not the ones in regard to this particular one 
bundle that one is following. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, I took great care this last 
weekend to ensure this was done in accordance with your 
instructions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
And 
I 
remember 
reading 
somewhere that the black numbering should go on the top 
20 
left, that was clearly an error on our part. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And in future it will go in top right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine, it is just that when you 
page through, if it is on the right hand side, it is easy to 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 115 of 141 
 
see.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, it makes sense, it makes 
sense. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, you said page 3? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Now is this the type of 
information that was contained in the report in relation to a 
particular house? 
MR ROETS:   Yes, Chair, these are some of the examples 
that I was provided to look at and if you look at the 
10 
information it is very lacking in terms of identifying the 
potential risk of fibre release. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, what does it give you? 
MR ROETS:   It actually just say that the roof material is 
asbestos.  On this particular example, it gives you a partial 
picture of the house and it is also saying that it is a 
pitched roof where in this case it looks more like a flat 
roof.  Talking about a pitched roof and a flat roof, it will 
assist in quantifying the amount of asbestos because you 
multiple if you have got a square meterage of a dwelling or 
20 
a house and you know it is a pitched roof, you can put in 
some calculation to get a closer estimation of a quantity, 
so it is important to have a correct information but apart 
from that, this report that they have got per house does not 
give you any information about the asbestos.   
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 116 of 141 
 
I have seen this -  maybe stepping off - in terms of 
a training that was provided to the guys that was doing the 
assessment, the example of training that was provided, it 
did not give the necessary information to the people that is 
doing the assessment to say this is what asbestos looks 
like.  So only an example of the form, the shape of the 
material but nothing about any other types of asbestos that 
we need to have a look at.  So that information should 
filter through to an assessment like this so that you can do 
a proper and comprehensive assessment. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let us go back to this page of 
information in relation to a particular house.  Is all the 
information that would be provided in the report in relation 
to a particular unit or dwelling? 
MR ROETS:   That is correct, that is all the information 
that was provided even in the final report, they only give 
amounts of houses that contained asbestos, not quantities 
or nothing else, only so much percentage of this district’s 
houses contains asbestos.  That is all the information. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So if one looks at page 3 of bundle 
20 
FS9, right, and one sees there in relation to a particular 
house certain information.  You have got the erf number, 
you have got the GPS coordinates and then under the 
structural assessment report you have a photograph taken 
from a distance, the picture of the house is partly obscured 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 117 of 141 
 
by bushes.   
You then see that the information contained there is 
roof material, asbestos; roof type, pitched; house type, 
single; finishes on wall, plastered; visible wall cracks, no; 
house extended, yes; solar geyser, no.  That is the full 
assessment of that particular drawing, is that correct? 
MR ROETS:   That is correct, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now that information then is 
collated with other information to tell them the municipality 
that 
houses 
of 
this 
type 
or 
qualifying 
under 
these 
10 
conditions or items of this nature wit items of this nature, 
there are say a thousand in this district, a thousand in that 
district, but this is the sum total of what occurred. 
MR ROETS:   That is for information that is provided in the 
final report is they numbered the amount of houses that 
was inspected and then they used this information to say 
such a big percentage of the houses in that specific district 
contains asbestos.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So if I took this page 3 that we’re 
talking about and I gave it to you and I said to you, Mr 
20 
Roets, please tell me how much it would cost and what you 
would have to do to remove asbestos from this house, what 
would you tell me? 
MR ROETS:   Well Chair, I would definitely say, I will 
submit a cost as soon as I went back to the site and 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 118 of 141 
 
assess the condition and the size so that I can give a 
proper cost of that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now, if you look at information that Mr 
Pretorius was reading to you on page 3, in respect of this 
house, how much of the information given there is really 
relevant for purposes of assessment for asbestos. 
MR 
ROETS: 
 
 
Chair 
the 
only 
information 
relevant 
…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is the roof type of any relevance? 
MR ROETS:   The type assist – if you have got a size of 
10 
the ground, square meterage of the house, the pitch or the 
type of house will assist, in this case it will not assist even 
the picture on that, you can’t clearly see that it is Big 6 
type of  panel it looks like a galvanised sheet rather, so if 
the person that did the assessment is not teached properly, 
educated properly, how to identify asbestos then this might 
be misinformation …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And finishes on the wall? 
MR ROETS:   Finishes on the wall, it’s got no bearing 
…[intervenes]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   No relevance? 
MR ROETS:   No Chair no relevance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Visible wall cracks? 
MR ROETS:   No relevance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No value whether the house is extended 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 119 of 141 
 
or not? 
MR ROETS:   No relevance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Solar geyser? 
MR ROETS:   Potential relevance if it’s a solar geyser 
versus, maybe an old geyser that they’ve got insulation 
around, it can be problematic but the solar no, no 
relevance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But to just say solar geyser, yes or no. 
MR ROETS:   No relevance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It doesn’t mean much. 
10 
MR ROETS:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so roof material, asbestos, that’s 
fine 
but 
the 
rest 
is 
either 
irrelevant 
or 
marginally 
irrelevant? 
MR ROETS:   Yes Chairperson, if you look at the original 
proposal the only thing that comes out of it for this specific 
example, it’s the asbestos roof. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR ROETS:   And that’s the only information. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So basically, what the Department 
of – the Department in the Free State is told here is simply 
that, here is a picture of a house with a roof that looks like 
asbestos? 
MR ROETS:   Yes, Chairperson when I eventually were 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 120 of 141 
 
asked to look at this, my original thought about the 
proposal versus the report is, it was a good document for 
Government to find out if there’s a problem in a specific 
district and that’s all.  No information that is relevant for 
anybody to go remove or eradicate it to control asbestos at 
all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now, this might be difficult to say but 
you 
must 
tell 
me, 
if 
for 
purposes 
of 
an 
asbestos 
eradication programme, because that’s how it’s read, it 
seems, if for that purpose you are given the task or 
10 
contract to do an audit and assessment, what percentage 
of the job would you say is represented by the auditing 
part of the job, in terms of importance?  Is that something 
you are able to say is it 50/50 percent is it 20/80 or is it 
difficult to say? 
MR ROETS:   I would say that the audit, Chair, would give 
you a good idea of how big is the problem and if you have 
got a problem, so in terms of, let’s call it, high-level 
management of asbestos or high-level knowledge about 
asbestos in your province or in certain districts it’s a very 
20 
good tool.  In terms of eradication, and I think that is what 
the original purpose was, it doesn’t give any information on 
the assessment of the asbestos.  So, in the context of the 
original enquiry or purpose of this, I would say that the 
audit is about maybe 10% and the assessment would be 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 121 of 141 
 
90%. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if this job, the way it was done, 
would require, as you have said, if you are asked to do the 
next phase which was meant to be eradication as I 
understand the position.  If it would require that you re-do 
the assessment would that not mean that in fact, you would 
not need their auditing because you’d have to, necessarily 
audit as well? 
MR ROETS:   Yes Chair, I totally agree with that statement, 
I think we have found out that there is asbestos in that 
10 
district now, so I think the audit portion is gone you don’t 
need that information for the eradication anymore and the 
biggest portion of work would now require the proper 
assessment and setting out the bill of quantities and 
prioritising worse or better cases to start your work with. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, would it be correct therefore, to say, 
for the purposes of an asbestos eradication programme 
doing auditing without doing an assessment doesn’t help 
anyway because an assessment can’t be done without 
auditing?  Therefore, if an assessment has to be done 
20 
whatever auditing may have been done before becomes 
redundant because you are going to go to every house 
anyway, would that be correct? 
MR ROETS:   Yes, Chair, that would be correct if one 
maybe looks …[intervenes]. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 122 of 141 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, it’s not like you can build up on the 
work that they did in terms of auditing. 
MR ROETS:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You can’t do that because you will have 
to go to every house and therefore you will get to know 
how many houses are there. 
MR ROETS:   Yes, Chair, I think in terms of looking at 
future, maybe the audit will give you a good idea that I 
don’t need to visit that specific district anymore because 
there’s no asbestos or there was no asbestos identified so 
10 
I will not focus on that area or there’s a very low amount of 
houses, I might have a look at it at a later stage. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ROETS:   Or use it as a training operation maybe, a 
training project but the focus for moving from hereon 
forward would be the assessment 100% on the assessment, 
I would not spend that much time on the audit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hmm, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You did a calculation just to 
illustrate some of the issues raised by the Chair on page 
20 
21 of the – not of the report but of the FS1 Bundle Exhibit 
PT1 go to page 21 of Exhibit PT1 if you would in the final 
paragraph, you did a calculation …[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
I’m 
sorry 
we’re 
moving 
back 
to…[intervenes]. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 123 of 141 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   To page 21 of PT1. 
MR ROETS:   Of FS1? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We’re in FS1, I’m sorry yes in FS1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then we go to 21 – page 21. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   2-1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright and the 21 even on this 
Bundle FS1 is the black 21? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Look please at the second 
10 
paragraph on that page. 
MR ROETS:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You did a calculation based on 
certain assumptions, you said if there were 300 000 houses 
assessed, 
which 
is 
the 
number 
that 
was 
in 
the 
documentation in this case, correct? 
MR ROETS:   Sorry Chair, I think the pages is messed up 
in this copy. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright go back to – do you see the 
top left-hand column…[intervenes]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just check that he has got the right 
Bundle first, because – so when there’s a reference of a 
page number it’s the black numbers is the right ones. 
MR ROETS:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Look at paragraph 2 if you would 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 124 of 141 
 
please, you did a calculation. 
MR ROETS:   That’s correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   On certain assumptions, now we 
know that the number of houses that had to be assessed 
here was not more than 300 000. 
MR ROETS:   That’s correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct and we know in the final 
report that 155 workers were trained over a few days and 
were set to photograph houses. 
MR ROETS:   That’s correct Chair. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And we know that, according to the 
report 31 days was spent doing this work, all this work was 
done in 31 days. 
MR ROETS:   That’s correct with a statement, Chair, in the 
final report that they had trouble with people being absent 
coming to work and some labourer issues so it might even 
be less than 31 days but the time stated in the report is 31 
days. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So, you say it might even be less? 
MR ROETS:   It might even be less. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let’s assume 31 days and you 
work out that if that number of workers worked for 31 days 
in an attempt to cover 300 000 houses, you would have 
about two to five minutes per house? 
MR ROETS:   That’s correct Chair. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 125 of 141 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That’s to take into account too 
walking 
between 
houses, 
getting 
access, 
taking 
the 
photographs, logging the data and the like. 
MR ROETS:   Yes, Chair, I just for interest sake, started  
with a calculation on the amount of houses, I think that 
they even mentioned that they had to do 6 000 houses 
extra, additional that they went to and they trained 155 
people of which, some of them left and didn’t return and 
some of them were absent on several occasions and I did a 
calculation on the amount of houses, time spent in these 
10 
houses at the end of the day came out to about three to 
five minutes that they have to spend to assess a house, 
take a picture, log the data into the hand-held device that 
they were provided and then submit the information to a 
central data base and then travel still to the next dwelling 
or the next house and do the next assessment. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright in paragraph 41.2 on page 
24 of your statement TT1, you say what you would do in a 
project of a similar nature if you were briefed to do so. 
MR ROETS:   That’s correct. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Tell the Chair about that please? 
MR ROETS:   So, the assessment for 300 000 houses in 
my capacity, in my business, I’ve got 7 personnel that is 
trained to do this so I will probably plan, because I need to 
take all my people to the site and assess the asbestos, 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 126 of 141 
 
spend proper time, allocation of each house to properly 
assess that house, photograph, capture all the information 
so that I can set up a proper report for this.  I worked, 
roughly take about two to three years to do an assessment 
a proper assessment of this nature. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And cost? 
MR 
ROETS: 
 
 
Cost 
calculation, 
anything 
between 
R20million an R30million for the entire project. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   For a project taking almost 3 
years? 
10 
MR ROETS:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now, when you say, in paragraph 41 of 
your statement how long it would take to do this kind of 
job, to what extent is that based on your own experience of 
being involved in this kind of job there in the past years? 
MR ROETS:   Chair, yes I’ve been involved in several 
projects like this for the mining industry and we spend, 
roughly about 30 minutes per house – 30 minutes to 45 
minutes, a lot of the time is spent actually gaining access 
to a house because people tend to go to work sometimes 
20 
and so you will battle to get into a house and sometimes 
you have to set up a specific time after work to go assess 
houses like this so definitely hinders your assessment and 
time that you have to spend but I would say anything 
between 30 and 40 minutes spent per house to properly 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 127 of 141 
 
assess and log all the information plus time spent on the 
final report to get all this information into a proper bill of 
quantities.  So, in total I would say round about 30 to 40 
minutes per house, estimation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is there anything you wish to add 
in relation to any of the questions you’ve been asked or in 
relation to your report? 
MR ROETS:   No Chair I’m finished. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   On a few occasions, in your report and 
in your oral evidence you have indicated that your opinion 
is based on the information you were given and I got the 
impression that there may be instances where you would 
have liked to have more information, is that correct are 
there areas where you would have like to have more 
information in order to give an opinion or to give a more 
definite opinion? 
MR ROETS:   Yes Chair, certainly when I had a first look at 
the information there was definitely lack of definition in 
20 
terms of the requirement from the requested side to our 
side, what is needed, so guidance for the contractor maybe 
on, what is meant by the words audit and assess and what 
is the outcome that I would like form such an assessment.  
So, information like that there’s definitely – if there was 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 128 of 141 
 
any, would assist in making proper comments.  In all this 
information I had five examples of houses that was 
assessed, I would have liked, maybe one or two of 
examples of bigger dwellings, bigger houses, houses that 
might also contain facia boards and ceiling panels and see 
what is the information that was actually recorded on those 
houses so that one can make a fair comment about 
asbestos other than roof sheeting because what I’ve seen 
from information that I’ve got is that, firstly, these 155 
people that was used there might be a problem in terms of 
10 
how they were actually told to assess, what’s the level of 
training that were provided.  The little information that was 
provided in the final report, certainly did not tell them what 
does asbestos look like and I think that should have been 
the first thing that came out to, let’s call it, declare 
somebody competent to do an assessment, to do asbestos 
assessments so that information will definitely assist more 
to make comments about it but information provided and 
the final product that was provided in terms of the final 
report certainly show that there was no clear indication in 
20 
the beginning of what is required, what do I want. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay but what I would like is that if 
there’s any information that you didn’t get which the 
investigators may have access to that they make an 
attempt to get you that information and if necessary you 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 129 of 141 
 
can 
do 
a 
supplementary 
statement 
or 
affidavit 
to 
supplement your evidence to say, when I prepared my 
affidavit/statement of 30 July 2020, in respect of this 
aspect this is what I had but I since had access to the 
following and I stand by what I said or in the light of this 
further information, I have a different view and this is what 
I wish to say, that’s what I’d like you to do, is that alright? 
MR ROETS:   That’s right, thanks Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   On that, Chair, two things on your 
10 
answer to the Chair, you mentioned firstly information 
given to the contractors by the department as to what was 
required of them, you say that was information that was 
inadequate? 
MR ROETS:   Yes, Chair, I was just looking at the amount 
of money that we’re talking about and the original – the 
proposal, I think, 36 or 37 pages long of information that 
will be done of which one or two pages was about the 
asbestos and the rest was about the structure and the 
engineering of the project and then the appointment from 
20 
the other side was two pages for R255million to assess and 
eradicate or the first phase 
as they 
call it is the 
assessment – audit and assessment of the asbestos but ja, 
in terms of my view of the documentation that was bracing 
this whole project, it was very, very limited. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 130 of 141 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, you make the point that in a 
couple of pages an instruction was given to perform work 
and that work was described in a relation to a project, 
extensively and I stress extensively, worth R255million. 
MR ROETS:   That’s correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But you then went on to talk about 
the second category of information that you were given. 
MR ROETS:   That’s correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you commented on the fact 
that, that information was false, that we should note that, 
10 
that is precisely the information that the contractors gave 
to the Department. 
MR ROETS:   That’s correct, that’s the information that 
was provided to the Department as a final product, you’ll 
find examples that I did receive that was their final product 
in terms of their assessment, it’s got very, very little 
information. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Tell me, if the Department had consulted 
somebody or somebody who has knowledge and experience 
of the type of job that Blackhead and Diamond Hill were 
20 
given to you do  you think, based on your experience that 
they could have agreed to pay so much money for the 
auditing and assessment of asbestos in this project? 
MR ROETS:   I think, Chair, that if they were provided 
some assistance from people in the field that has got 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 131 of 141 
 
knowledge of such projects, they might have thought that 
this money is a little bit too much for such little work. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But what I’m talking about is, you see, 
I’m a Judge if I’m going to give somebody a job to, 
electrical work in my house I need to have an idea what 
electricians normally charge because otherwise if I don’t 
have an idea about that, I could be charged an arm and a 
leg and I wouldn’t know and then I pay and then I find out 
later that I paid far more than I should have been charged.  
Now in the context of the department I would have thought 
10 
that, unless the people who made the decisions have the 
knowledge and he experience of what is required in this 
type of job and what should be charged, unless they 
themselves had that knowledge I would have expected that 
they would seek a professional who could advise them, to 
say one, is this price that is being proposed here a 
reasonable price in the industry for this kind of job and if 
this advice was no, this is too much then they would go 
back to Blackhead then Diamond Hill can say, no, no we 
can’t agree to that but if they were told no, no, no, this is a 
20 
reasonable price and they are able to rely on that advice 
then they will go along. So, my question is, whether you 
think, if they had consulted somebody who might have the 
same kind of experience as yourself in this sector, whether 
that person would have advised that the price they agreed 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 132 of 141 
 
to pay was reasonable for this kind of job.  
MR ROETS:   Yes, Chair, definitely they benchmark with 
the assistance of approved inspection authority or one of 
these asbestos contractors that handle such a big contract, 
they will definitely make a better decision on the amount 
that they have to pay for this type of work and also to 
define, in terms of the documentation provided that this is 
what I need.  The product, at the end of the day, need to 
be in line with the asbestos regulation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes and you say that based on your 
10 
experience in the industry, a reasonable price for this kind 
of job would have been between R20million and R30million, 
is that right? 
MR ROETS:   That is correct, Chair, I’ve actually estimated 
a lower cost, my costs in terms of time spent and 
resources spent, I think came out to about R8million to 
R9million and then I even went to town and called it 
R20million so that we can just compare it, but ja the cost is 
definitely less than R255million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja okay. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you Mr Roets, thank you 
very much. 
MR ROETS:   Thanks. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much Mr Roets for 
coming to assist the Commission, thank you for coming to 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 133 of 141 
 
give evidence, if necessary we’ll ask you to come back but 
if – possibly try and spare you with the trouble but if there 
is any further information that can be given to you, which 
you had not been given to you, which you think is 
important in order for me to have a proper and correct 
picture of your evidence about his project, please talk to 
the investigators and the legal team so that, that can be 
done, so that one will have a correct picture. 
MR ROETS:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much, you are excused. 
10 
MR ROETS:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, the witness that was to 
follow is Mr John Matlakala he is the procurement person 
in the Department in the Free State, Human Settlements 
Department in the Free State.  Much of the arrangement for 
this week happened before you asked me to deal with the 
evidence and lead the evidence Chair, so what I say I have 
only, in a broad detail, I’ve taken instructions over the long 
adjournment.  Mr Matlakala was informed on the 14 t h of 
20 
July that he would be required to attend at the Commission 
during the week of the 3 r d to the 7 t h of August.  He was 
then informed on the 27 t h of July that he was required to 
come on the 5 t h of August, that date, he was informed, was 
changed when we arranged the detail to the 4 t h of August 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 134 of 141 
 
and at all stages, he agreed that he would come on the 4 t h 
of August.  Then on the 3 r d of August, yesterday, we 
received an email from Mr Matlakala saying that he was no 
longer represented and he would tell us when he was 
represented and when he could then appear.  In response 
to that a letter was drafted and sent who – to Matlakala 
advising him that he had confirmed his availability a date 
had been reserved and he must attend and if he has 
anything to say about his appearance and representation, 
he must apply to you Chair, it’s not in our province as 
10 
evidence leaders and as investigators to grant or refuse 
postponements 
and 
the 
like, 
when 
dates 
have 
been 
arranged and this was told to him in a letter dated 3 r d of 
August 2020 confirming that he was required to appear 
today.  We received a reply today from Mutlaw attorneys 
representing Mr Matlakala, who said or who say in the email 
that 
they 
act 
on 
behalf 
of 
Mr 
Matlakala 
that 
they 
acknowledge that he was required to provide oral evidence 
before the commission today but they say: 
“Kindly 
take 
note 
that 
our 
offices 
received 
20 
instructions during the course of the midnight hours 
on 3 August 2020.” 
So that is midnight hours last night I presume that means.  
“And had been unable to adequately prepare a 
substantive application for postponement in terms of 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 135 of 141 
 
Rule 11 and accordingly request a postponement of 
the proceedings today to allow our client adequate 
legal representation.  We trust that you find that in 
order.” 
I think we have tried to respond verbally to that but there has 
been no response to that and Mr Matlakala did not arrive and 
that is the position we are in now with regard to Mr 
Matlakala. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So if he is not here, I beginning to wonder 
whether the commission should not just issue summonses 
10 
against – you know against everybody because it looks like 
the stage at which we are more and more people come up 
with some or other reason for not appearing.  And whereas in 
the past just notification to people seemed to be enough at 
least for most for them to come and appear.  But now we 
issue notifications and people either do not come or send 
emails to put up one or other reason for saying they will not 
be able to come.  So it seems that we must really seriously 
consider compelling everybody. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Otherwise we will keep on having these 
problems. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  One of the significant 
differences between the witnesses or many of the witnesses 
– not all – many of the witnesses that are now presenting 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 136 of 141 
 
evidence before you Chair is that they are in one way or 
another implicated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And are being called to account. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So it seems there the reluctance is 
creeping in. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well not creeping in – rushing in. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Yes.  So I think that probably each 
10 
work stream must have a look in the weeks ahead and see 
people who have been notified to appear and apply their 
minds to the question of a summons even if a notice to 
appear has already gone to consider whether a summons 
should not be issued to make sure that people will be – will 
be here.  And if their – because then failure to appear when 
there is a summons that has been served will be a criminal 
offence. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well the problems do not end there 
though because Mr Mokhesi who is the accounting officer for 
the Free State Department has also raised certain issues.  
He agreed to come during the week.  We notified on the 15 
July.  He was then informed of a particular date and it 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 137 of 141 
 
appears he confirmed that he would appear on the 5 August 
2020.  However last week we received an email saying that 
they had only received six clear court days’ notice – that is 
incorrect they received over two weeks’ notice and agreed to 
attend on that basis and then requesting an alternative 
convenient date.  The attorney said he is not available on six 
days’ notice well that is a matter between attorney and 
client.  The client had been given many more days than that 
and his counsel apparently has tested positive for Covid-19 
so that is the situation there.  We have sent a similar letter – 
10 
the secretary sent a similar letter to Mr Mokhesi on the 3 
August 
– 
yesterday 
saying 
– 
acknowledging 
the 
correspondence and the communications and saying that the 
“Please be advised that it is not within the power or 
discretion of the investigators or the legal team to excuse 
you from appearing on the commission on 5 August you are 
therefore required to appear as agreed and explain any 
reasons you might have for a postponement of your 
evidence.” 
And that is the situation with Mr Mokhesi.  My instructions 
20 
are that we are told that he has not responded to that.  We 
will make further enquiries both with the attorneys and the – 
Mr Mokhesi himself and revert to you Chair.  Thursday and 
Friday are full though – more than full. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Mr Mokhesi was supposed to appear 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 138 of 141 
 
tomorrow? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I guess that – well I would be 
handing down my decision in relation to 
Mr Fuzile’s 
application for Leave to Cross-examine Mr Van Rooyen 
tomorrow at ten.  So I guess that if Mr Mokhesi has not made 
a substantive application – what was his reason for – oh is it 
the lawyer who says I am not available within six days? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes the – Mr Mokhesi acknowledged 
receipt of notice. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Agreed to attend. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Agreed to attend during the week and 
then on the particular day – tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It seems he only gave his attorneys 
six days or short notice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  For the attorney to prepare and brief 
20 
counsel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Counsel that they want to appear has 
Covid and the attorney says he has not had enough time to 
prepare. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 139 of 141 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Well I think in that position we must 
be here at ten o’clock when I finish with my decision, we will 
be expecting him to be here and if he is not here – I mean if 
he is here to make an application for a postponement, we 
will deal with that.  If he is here and he is able to give 
evidence we continue.  And if we are here and he is not here 
to either make an application for a postponement or give 
evidence then we will have to deal with that default on his 
part. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  We will have to – because it would 
mean he – he was asked to be here, he agreed to be here 
and then decided not to be here. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:  On his own. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And that against the background have 
– of having to appear and having been given every 
opportunity to appear and answer the case. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That was made. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it is serious for anybody to – not to 
appear in those circumstances but I think it is even more 
serious when we are talking about either a HOD or a former 
HOD of any department who is an accounting officer who 
was an accounting officer. 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 140 of 141 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So we will be here.  If he is not here then 
we will – we will look at the situation and necessary 
decisions will be taken. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair.  In the meanwhile, I 
will communicate your directive to the evidence leaders. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In regard to summons. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no that is fine.  Okay we will then 
adjourn for the day. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 5 AUGUST 2020 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
04 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 244 
 
Page 141 of 141 
 
 
 
