 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
06 AUGUST 2020 
 
 
DAY 246 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757 
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 219 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
06 AUGUST 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 3 of 219 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 06 AUGUST 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Pretorius, good morning 
everybody. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  By agreement three witnesses have 
been set down for today.  The first is a Mr Zulu.  He is 
represented and you will hear from his counsel in a minute.  
The second is Mr Manyike and the third possibly will not be 
called Mr Duminy from SMD Motors. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm okay.  Thank you.  Counsel for Mr 
Zulu.  They must just sanitise the podium before you – you.   
ADV DAYAL SC:  Thank you Mr Commissioner. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you.  Just for the record you can 
just place yourself on record again. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. Mr Commissioner my name is Shane 
Dayal I am counsel from Durban and Johannesburg. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  I am instructed in this matter by Mr Manoj 
Maharaj of Attorneys Maharaj Attorneys.  I represent two 
20 
witnesses today.  The first Mr Duminy you have heard from 
my learned friend about Mr Duminy’s evidence and I 
represent a witness who I do not wish to obviously disclose 
for reasons that will become clear as I address. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 4 of 219 
 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Mr Commissioner.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV DAYAL SC:  Mr Commissioner just by way of a brief 
background you will recall that during the course of last year 
in August I together with my learned friend Mr Hellens SC 
appeared for a witness.  He was given a Section 3.3 Notice 
by the commission in respect of certain evidence that 
allegedly implicated him that was to be given by a Mr 
Dukwana. 
 
Now Mr Dukwana you will recall Mr Commissioner 
10 
has already given evidence during the course of last year 
and a I understand from my learned friend Mr Pretorius his 
address to commission yesterday which I watched that all of 
the evidence that is going to be led during the course of this 
week relates to what is termed the Asbestos Project in the 
Free State. 
 
The very basis of that evidence that the commission 
has at this stage is as a consequence of Mr Dukwana’s 
evidence.   
 
Now during the course of last year when I did appear, 
20 
we put before the commission an affidavit from my client.  
We raised in that affidavit certain issues we have with Mr 
Dukwana leading evidence on a certain aspect. It was a 
spread sheet if you recall I will not go into any further detail 
but I think you do recall and you have seen – you have seen 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 5 of 219 
 
the affidavit in any event. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  And we raised the issue about – we raised 
two issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry do not speak too far away from 
the microphone. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They are so – if you are too far away, I 
cannot hear.   
ADV DAYAL SC:  I apologise. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes you will recall that we – we raised two 
issues in the affidavit.  We said firstly that before our client 
is called in a very public forum such as this one on TV and 
before his reputation in any way is tarnished or dragged 
through the mud so to speak, we would like two things.  One 
is we would like the commission to properly investigate the 
allegations in Mr Dukwana’s affidavit and we would also like 
20 
the commission to consider that we would like to cross-
examine Mr Dukwana. 
 
Now we specifically in our affidavit if you recall 
tendered full cooperation to the commission.  We tendered 
our documents, bank statements whatever the commission 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 6 of 219 
 
required.  But we specifically said in the affidavit that before 
we are called into a very public forum these – given the 
importance of the commission and its responsibilities to 
investigate these allegations and to please give us an 
opportunity to cross-examine Mr Dukwana. 
 
Anyway, that affidavit and you will recall that affidavit 
was – was given the commission during August last year.  Mr 
Hellens and I then appeared I think it was the 27 August 
there is a transcript in respect of that where various things 
were raised and Mr Commissioner then after considering all 
10 
of the issues raised then decided that it is prudent for the 
commission to properly investigate and thereafter to make a 
determination on calling Mr – calling the witness. 
 
What happened then was two things.  Firstly, in 
regard to the investigations we cooperated.  In regard to the 
issue of the cross-examination that was on the commission’s 
own letter held in abeyance and at this stage if I may just 
make reference to the further affidavit delivered by client 
which I think is before Mr Commissioner. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not know whether the bundle you have 
20 
is the same. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  It is probably not but I am – I am… am… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja – yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  But I am specifically referring to its 
annexure TW2 – TWZ2.1.   
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 7 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  The first affidavit of … 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Can I – for the sake of convenience. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  I can just ask my attorney to give me a 
copy of the letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And it may be that if you read. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  And I can then – I can then hand up my 
copy of my letter please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Thank you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Sorry Mr Commissioner can I just … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Thank you Mr Commissioner I apologise 
for that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes if one looks at this letter this is a letter 
addressed by the commission itself.  It is by the secretary of 
the commission Mr Tshabalala and it makes reference to the 
initial statement that my – the initial affidavit that my client 
20 
put up last year. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  And it confirms receipt too of the affidavit.  
It notes what is stated in paragraph 7.2 and 11 that is the 
unequivocal tender by my client to cooperate with the 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 8 of 219 
 
commission’s investigations.  To make any documents 
available including bank statements.  To make himself 
available for an interview.  To make himself available to 
answer any questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  And then it say: 
“In view of those undertakings in the following – on the 
following page the commission’s investigators will conclude 
its existing investigations and revert to you.  In this regard 
they will make contact with you in order to interview you with 
10 
the – and obtain the relevant documentation.” 
But most importantly it says in paragraph 4. 
“Consequently, your client’s application will be held in 
abeyance pending finalisation of our investigations.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  That is the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Reference to the application to cross-
examine Mr Dukwana. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Now … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Unfortunately, the letter does not give a 
reference so that one could see who within the commission 
prepared it.  Of course, it is signed by the acting secretary 
but she signs a lot of letters that come from different work 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 9 of 219 
 
streams and different units of the – of the commission and I 
would have like it if there was an indication as to the 
reference.  I – I – but I – I suspect looking at the letter that it 
may have been prepared by somebody within the legal team 
who may have been involved in – in the Dukwana – in the 
Free State Asbestos matter.  That is my – but the letter does 
not give an indication.  But – I think continue to make the 
point you wanted to make. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Just on that issue if I may? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV DAYAL SC:  You will recall that it was not my learned 
friend Mr Pretorius. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  That was leading the evidence last year. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  It was Advocate Mokoena. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Mokoena. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  That was leading the evidence. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  So it could very well – I am speculating but 
it could very well be… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well by – I think by 13 December he had – 
he was no longer involved in the commission so it may be 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 10 of 219 
 
other members of the legal team. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  I see. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who were involved. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or somebody who was involved. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But that is fine.  That does not necessarily 
say anything about the point you want to raise. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your point is – you received or your 
10 
client’s attorneys received a letter from the commission and 
this is what it was saying. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Indeed.  And that was in December last 
year. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  And then you will recall we have put in as I 
have said two affidavits but what happened then after 
December 
is 
eventually 
a 
Mr 
Lambrechts 
– 
Etienne 
Lambrechts 
from 
the 
commission 
came 
back 
and 
communicated directly with my client and so on and 
20 
subpoenaed documents from the bank and when we in fact 
had already said that we cooperating there is no need to do 
that.  But be that as it may I just want raise the issue of not 
just the conduct of some of the representatives of the 
commission and I – and I say that will all humility and 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 11 of 219 
 
respect but with an equal amount of strength that my client 
has been treated rather shabbily and unfairly. 
 
For one when he made this tender as far back as 
August last year. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  The tender was not in fact taken up.  In 
fact, what happened then was there were subpoenas issued 
for bank statements and so on. There was a threat that he 
must be – he is going to be summonsed before the 
commission. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  There was a stage where there was direct 
communication with the client instead of my instructing 
attorney know full well that my attorney is on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  There was somewhat of harassment as to 
my client being forced to disclose his whereabouts for 
certain things to be served on him.  This is all dealt with in 
the further affidavit.  I need not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have seen it. 
20 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes, I think you have seen it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have seen it yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  But the point of my address is simply this 
at this stage.  Other than the manner in which my client was 
treated it appears that there is a procedural… 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 12 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe I must just say this before you 
move away from the – your client’s complaints about how he 
has been treated.  I do understand that there will be an 
affidavit that – the response to the allegations of how your 
client has been treated because I would like to see a 
response to the allegations.  So I cannot say much now but I 
have read what your – what the allegations are and I 
understand that at some stage there will be enough evidence 
that will be – that I will look at to see what the response is.  
And then I can only say something once I have seen that. 
10 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes I appreciate that Mr Commissioner. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  That aside there would also need to be a 
response in respect of our application to cross-examine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  And at this stage may I just refer firstly to 
the affidavit of my client – the first affidavit in August last 
year and I think you have that before you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I know I have got no less than two 
affidavits from your client. 
20 
ADV DAYAL SC:  It is the first affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it the one with seven pages? 
ADV DAYAL SC:  That is right and… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or you mean the first to be provided to the 
commission? 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 13 of 219 
 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Indeed, and that affidavit is in fact 
attached to the further affidavit as well as a matter of 
convenience. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Pretorius has got the same bundle 
as myself he might be able to tell me where – where I find it 
in the bundle.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair under 1 at page 150. 
CHAIRPERSON:  150.  That is Bundle FS1 page 150 and 
150 refers to the black numbers hey? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Yes I have got it. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Mr Commissioner if you – firstly you would 
look at paragraph 7 and obviously our page numbers are 
different so I apologise I cannot tell you which page but it is 
paragraph 7. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well – my paragraph – my paragraph 7 
starts with “I wish to make a number of”. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  That is the one. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the one ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  So just bearing in mind the background 
that Mr Dukwana is if I may term it the commission’s star 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 14 of 219 
 
witness on the asbestos eradication project. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  In the Free State. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  So bearing that in mind this is what my 
client.  He said, firstly he wants to make a few things – he 
wants to make a few points and he says: 
“In regard to the statement or with regard to the statement of 
Mr Dukwana any responsible legally trained person who has 
regard to the statement to which I am referred would be 
10 
reckless and indeed – sorry would be reckless.  If they did 
not conclude that the statement comprises an undirected 
rambling gossip sheet there appears to be no substantiation 
whatsoever 
for 
the 
allegations 
loosely 
made 
by 
the 
deponent.” 
And then he says the following if you could please go Mr 
Commissioner to paragraph 7.4 or 7.3 rather.  He says: 
“I would remind the commission that it has to go about its 
work in a responsible manner and that it is positively under a 
legal duty to avoid unsubstantiated allegations from being 
20 
publicly aired with the consequent damning consequences.  
In my case they will be serious indeed.” 
And then he says: 
“I insist on a right to cross-examine Mr Dukwana” 
In paragraph 7. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 15 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that what he regards as an application 
for leave to cross-examine? 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That one sentence? 
ADV DAYAL SC:  And – well no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And he does not have a right. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Mr Commissioner can I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  He only has a right to apply. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes.  But can I … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Not a right to cross-examine. 
10 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Can I – can I – can I make two points on 
that score?  You have a discretion and I read – I have read 
your rulings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  You have a discretion, the test is well set 
out in your rulings.  There is no right to cross-examine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  But my point is our application has not 
even yet been considered. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but I am – if you rely on this sentence 
20 
to say there is an application for leave to cross-examine, I 
think you probably will have difficulty. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Well… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because he is not applying here for leave.  
He is just stating what he believes – what right he believes 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 16 of 219 
 
he has.  What he does indicate is that to say the least he 
has an intention. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To cross-examine probably that part.  But 
on the face of it it would seem to me that if this is what is 
relied on, he possibly still needs to make a proper 
application for leave to cross-examine. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  That may very well be and I take your 
point.  But just bear in mind that as far as the commission is 
concerned they recognised this an application to cross-
10 
examine because they said to us in December – well when I 
say they I apologise I mean the letter – the letter said to us 
in December written on behalf of the commission that your 
application will be held in abeyance.  And it seems that they 
recognised two things.  They recognised our tender to 
cooperate which is clearly set out in the letter and they 
recognised our application to cross-examine and they said, it 
will be held in abeyance.  But even if – even if we have to 
bring a fresh application and Mr Commissioner is of the view 
that this is not suffice as an application my point is that that 
20 
still has to be decided.  As far as we were aware the 
commission 
recognised it 
as 
an 
application to cross-
examine. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  We now learnt for the first time today and 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 17 of 219 
 
in fact this morning that it is not recognised as an 
application to cross-examine but that – I am not making 
much of that at this stage.  It is something that we have to 
deal with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  But it – more importantly it is something 
that the commission procedurally has to deal with because if 
indeed we are given a right – are given leave by Mr 
Commissioner to cross-examine then firstly our application 
itself would have to be determined.  Mr Commissioner would 
10 
have to apply your mind to that application and then it is yes 
or no depending on how Mr Commissioner views it.  And 
thereafter we either cross-examine or we do not.  But at this 
stage it is premature to even go into the application when on 
the commission’s version that application in any event is in 
abeyance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  And obviously has not been decided as 
yet.  So we say with all due respect that is yet a further 
prejudicial aspect to my client.  That causes serious 
20 
prejudice with respect because now we have a situation 
where initially the commission says to us last year, here is a 
Section 3.3 Notice in respect of Mr Dukwana’s evidence.  We 
come along and we say to the commission, we have 
difficulties with Mr Dukwana’s evidence for the reasons set 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 18 of 219 
 
out in our affidavit we would like to cross-examine him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well – well let us start where probably we 
should have started namely what the point of your address 
is.  I think the point of your address is that you are applying 
for the 
postponement of the 
hearing of 
your client’s 
evidence.  Is that right? 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Mr Commissioner yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or not? 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Simply put I am saying that procedurally 
we have a right to certain things including having our 
10 
application to cross-examine before our client or my client is 
put into the witness box and is asked questions surrounding 
this asbestos project in the Free State and we say that the 
very 
evidence 
or 
basis 
that 
the 
commission 
is 
now 
proceeding this week to ask these questions and this much 
is 
clear 
from 
Mr 
Pretorius’ 
address 
yesterday 
is 
Mr 
Dukwana’s evidence on what the commission heard last year 
on the asbestos audit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but I just want us to be on the same 
page.  
20 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is the purpose of address to apply for the 
postponement of the hearing of Mr – of your client’s 
evidence? 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 19 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  And the basis for that application is 
that he seeks to cross-examine Mr Dukwana and he believed 
that he had filed an application for leave to cross-examine 
him.  He was told that that application would be held in 
abeyance.  He believes that he should – that application 
should be decided first before he gives evidence and gets 
questioned.  That is the basis is that right? 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Ja the essence of my submissions yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Now I think that the – in part your 
application is based on a certain sequence of events.  One 
10 
of which is that your client believes he – if he is going to be 
granted leave to cross-examine, he should cross-examine Mr 
Dukwana first before he can give evidence, is that right?  
Obviously if his application is unsuccessful, he would say 
okay I will go into the witness stand and testify if – is that 
correct? 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Mr Commissioner I think there are two 
aspects to that.  Before he even gets to the point of the 
cross-examination, he would like his application decided. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no, no but that is what I am saying. 
20 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am saying first he wants – he says his – 
he believes he has a pending application for leave to cross-
examine Mr Dukwana. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 20 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  He believes that should be decided first. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before he can be called to give evidence 
and to be questioned? 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And if his application is decided first 
obviously it can be that his – it is granted or it is refused. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If it is granted, he would further in – say 
he must first cross-examine Mr Dukwana before he takes the 
10 
witness stand.  If his application or leave to cross-examine 
Mr Dukwana is unsuccessful, I take it he will say okay then 
in that event I would take the witness stand. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Well he – yes.  I think I would like to make 
just one point to add to that if I may. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Remember he came last year – my client 
came along last year to the commission and said, these are 
the issues I have with Mr Dukwana’s evidence please can I 
cross-examine him.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  The commission then said to us in 
December we recognise implicitly in that letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm 
ADV DAYAL SC:  We recognise your application to cross-
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 21 of 219 
 
examine but it is in abeyance.  So he procedurally with 
respect his application for cross-examine – to cross-examine 
has – is still in abeyance in respect of a witness that I am 
given to understand has already given evidence at length. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  About the asbestos project. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  So the point is that he would like his 
application – he would like Mr Commissioner to apply your 
mind to the application first before he is compelled into the 
10 
witness box in a very public forum to be questioned about 
issues surrounding the asbestos project. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I – my recollection from even last 
year is that your client’s concern was largely – largely 
revolved around a certain amount of money that was 
reflected in the spread sheet as having been given or 
intended to be given to somebody with certain initials.  I am 
not sure if there was any other concern at that stage that he 
raised. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Well he could not raise any other concern 
20 
at that stage. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Because Mr Dukwana had not yet given 
evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 22 of 219 
 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Mr Dukwana had given an affidavit and as 
is the customary practice with the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Mr Commissioner then sends a Section 
3.3. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Notice to say you are possibly implicated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  This is the evidence that you are 
implicated in or allegedly implicated in you now have rights.  
10 
You can seek to cross-examine.  You can come and give 
evidence or you can send someone on your behalf to give 
evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  So we had not at that stage heard any of 
Mr Dukwana’s evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Then Mr Dukwana after we came along on 
the 27 August and Mr Commissioner found that that aspect 
should not be dealt with at all and so on and we left the 
20 
commission at that stage.  Mr Dukwana then gave evidence 
at length. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  As I am given to understand of the 
transcripts about the Free State Asbestos Audit. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 23 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  So just bearing in mind at that stage that 
is what we were asked to deal with.  It could very well be a 
case at the stage when we either have to bring a fresh 
application call it to cross-examine or supplement our 
application to cross-examine.  It may be other aspects that 
we require to be – to cross-examine or not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But as you stand there is the position that 
for all intents and purposes as far as you know your client’s 
concern arises from Mr Dukwana’s evidence in relation to 
10 
what was in the spread sheet? 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Mr Commissioner if I may.  Can I just ask 
you before I answer that question because the answer to that 
question is no that is not my only concern. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  But I think I need to tell you why and if you 
look for example at the further affidavit of Mr – of my client 
and that appears – I am sorry I do not have the page number 
but it is the further affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV DAYAL SC:  But attached to that affidavit appears the – 
to – appears the questions that were put to my client. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  By the commission’s investigators. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 24 of 219 
 
ADV DAYAL SC:  And that is annexure TWZ8. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Is that the one relating to the car? 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Sorry Mr Commissioner? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is what you are talking about allegations 
about a car? 
ADV DAYAL SC:  It is not just – no it is not – it is not just 
the car. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh ja okay. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  If for example if one looks at this 
document – can I perhaps just point you to. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  So the document is dated the 14 May 2020 
it is from the commission.  This time it is signed by – oh 
sorry it is not signed by anyone but I think it is clearly a 
document from the commission because it was a letter 
saying these are the questions, we would like you to answer 
and then we answered the questions.  But the questions 
revolved around some of - some of the questions revolved 
around the following:  It referred firstly to the signed affidavit 
of Mr – oh sorry the signed affidavit of my client dated the 23 
20 
August. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  It asked questions about whether that is a 
document signed by him.  It then asked questions about Mr 
Dukwana’s spelling of his name and so on.  It then asked 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 25 of 219 
 
questions about the spread sheet in paragraph 2.4 that Mr 
Dukwana made reference to in his affidavit.  And it then 
asked various other questions about companies and parties 
such as Blackhead and – and so on which are issues that we 
all – we have addressed completely in the letter.  But the 
point I am trying to make is that the questions that were 
asked revolved around Mr Dukwana’s evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Those are the questions that were asked 
by the commission and those were the answers we gave. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  And that is what the commission wants us 
to deal with today by getting into the witness box to deal 
with.  And I see it as... it is all due ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but from what I have read, it seems to 
me that your client is ready to deal with any of these 
allegations from what I have heard.   
 
The impression that I have is that he is ready to deal 
with all of these allegations.  It may well be that he would 
prefer to cross-examine Dukwana before he takes the 
20 
witness stand.   
 
But when I read all these affidavits, I certainly get the 
impression of somebody who is ready to say, “Bring them on.  
I will answer these.  I will deal with all of these.”   
 
That is the impression I get.  It may be a wrong 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 26 of 219 
 
impression but that is the impression I get. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Can I perhaps correct that impression, if I 
may? 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs]  Ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  The answer to those questions, because of 
the conduct of the Commission’s investigators ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  ...and I can take you through the affidavit 
but he answered those questions ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No, no, no.  I ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV DAYAL SC:  ...under pain of the possibility of 
subpoenas and being summonsed to the Commission and 
been asked about his whereabouts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  No, no, no. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  And he answered those... I am sorry to 
interrupt you but... and he answered those questions 
consistent with his tender that he originally made last year to 
say, “Please, interview me.  Ask me these questions.  Do not 
subpoena my bank accounts.  Do not embarrass me”. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV DAYAL SC:  “I am cooperating”. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay.  No, that is fine.  I think I 
understand what your client is to say.  I would like to hear 
what Mr Pretorius has to say.   
 
As we speak, my concern is that if the witness has had 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 27 of 219 
 
enough time to deal with the issues and as put in his 
affidavit, it may be that it is not something that should 
warrant postponing his evidence.  That he might prefer to 
cross-examine a witness before he gives evidence.   
 
Number two, there is the problem in that, as I have 
indicated, on the face of it, for me, if reliance is placed 
simple on that one sentence, the way he says, “I insist on my 
right to cross-examine”.   
 
That if reliance is based on that to say there is a 
pending application, there might be difficulties with that.  I 
10 
accept that you received or he received a letter from the 
Commission which seemed to think that it was an application 
for leave to cross-examine.   
 
But I will hear what Mr Pretorius has to say.  Those are 
my current thoughts to say there might be difficulties.  But 
certainly to the extent that there might be doubt about 
whether that is an application for leave to cross-examine if 
he decides he does want to file an application or file 
documents or affidavits, that will make it clear, he is 
applying for leave to cross-examine, that could still be done.   
20 
 
He might have to file a combination application to the 
extent that it might be outside the time limit but there is no 
bar that says you cannot do it anymore.   
 
He can explain the position.  And it may well be that if 
he gets evidence, by the time he finishes, even he is 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 28 of 219 
 
satisfied that after sufficiently... with whatever Mr Dukwana 
said, I think... I do not think maybe I should bother about 
cross-examining anymore.   
 
But also, it might emerge that there is very little in terms 
of disputes, disputes of fact.  Remember that with regard to 
Mr Dukwana and amounts of money which were reflected in 
the spreadsheet, remember that he was simple talking... 
interpreting what he was seeing there.   
 
And there, in regard to your client, there were just 
certain initials, certain amount.  He does not know... he did 
10 
not know anything, as far as I recall, beyond that and except 
knowing various of government officials who had something 
to do with the Asbestos Project.   
 
That, as far as I recall, that is about all that I think he 
was saying, you know.  He could not be definitive about 
anything. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Sorry, can I just address you very briefly 
on that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  H’m. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  When... firstly, I think it must be borne in 
20 
mind that this is a very public forum Mr Commissioner.  As 
we stand here, we are being televised ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  ...the country, around the country. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m-h’m. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 29 of 219 
 
ADV DAYAL SC:  When one has to get into a witness box 
on... in this kind of forum, which is public as this is, one 
obviously has certain rights which need to be protected.   
 
Now if Mr Commissioner is of the view that you can carry 
on with the evidence and there really is no prejudice at the 
end of the day, I ask Mr Commissioner just to bear this in 
mind. 
 
The prejudice is extreme because if my client was 
cooperative with the Commission at all material times and he 
has answered their questions, both by way of written 
10 
answers and in terms of two affidavits now, and he is then, 
for the sake of it just called into the witness box to be 
publicised ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, I am sure he is not being called for the 
sake of it. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Well, that is my point.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Is that really what it is coming down to? 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, I do not think it is coming to... down to 
that. 
20 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Well, I say this to you with all due respect, 
then just bear in mind that it is a public forum. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  And there is a responsibility that the 
Commission has in, not only finding a balance between what 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 30 of 219 
 
must be done correctly in terms of the Constitution’s 
purposes, 
but 
in 
respect 
of 
witnesses’ 
integrity 
and 
reputation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  That is the first thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  The second thing is.  I am not asking Mr 
Commissioner to stop this Commission dead in its tracks 
while I go ahead and bring my application to cross-examine.   
 
There are other witnesses who will be given evidence 
10 
over the next few days as I understand.  The Commission 
can carry on with its work.   
 
But the point I am trying to make is this.  When Mr 
Commissioner says that:  “Well, we can deal with the issue 
of the cross-examine later”.  And later it might actually 
transpire that we do not even want to cross-examine. 
 
I ask Mr Commissioner to just bear this in mind, that the 
very basis of the Commission’s allegations in respect of the 
asbestos audit arise from the evidence of Mr Dukwana.  
When it comes to my client, that is why he is being called as 
20 
a witness.  That is why he has been asked questions.   
 
To not give him an opportunity, firstly, for an application 
to cross-examine Mr Dukwana, to be decided, and then if 
that is decided in his favour for him to cross-examine Mr 
Dukwana, is extremely prejudicial to my client. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 31 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV DAYAL SC:  I am sorry, Mr Commissioner.  Can I just... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay, you just want to... ja 
...[intervenes]  
ADV DAYAL SC:  Just to make sure that there is nothing 
further. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Yes.  H’m. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Right.  Mr Commissioner ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
ADV DAYAL SC:  I just... my instructing attorney just 
10 
reminds me to raise this point.  And that is, when Mr 
Commissioner says that my client can give evidence before 
Mr Dukwana is cross-examined and then can decide later 
whether he wants to cross-examine him and so on.   
 
Just bear in mind that what then Mr Commissioner is 
then permitting, is for Mr Dukwana’s untested evidence to 
stand and for my client to then give evidence.   
 
And then at some later stage to be given, firstly, an 
application... firstly, an opportunity to have his application 
decided to cross-examine and test that witness and then 
20 
possible test that witness under cross-examination which is 
a bit like putting the cart before the horse, so to speak. 
 
Because as much as you say, “Well, my client can come 
and give evidence”.  And then decide at a later stage 
whether to cross-examine Mr Dukwana or not, it works the 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 32 of 219 
 
other way as well and that my client may want to cross-
examine Mr Dukwana first and then decide. 
 
Indeed, the Commission may then decide say, “Well, 
there is no need to call my client”. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV DAYAL SC:  Because, in fact, there is no evidence that 
he needs to deal with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, remember that you could... remember 
that it would be permissible to have a situation where a 
witness has implicated you and you give evidence without 
10 
cross-examining that witness. 
 
And it would happen where your application for leave to 
cross-examine has been refused and properly so.  So the 
whole thing does not exclude... the whole scheme does not 
exclude that happening. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you could have a situation where you 
have to come and give evidence without cross-examining the 
witness who has implicated you.  So from that point of view, 
assuming that you are correct about saying Mr Dukwana’s 
20 
evidence would stand, then in that way, it stands.  By the 
time you come and give your evidence, you have not cross-
examined. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Indeed.  But that is speculation because at 
the end of the day, until ...[intervenes]  
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 33 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no.  I am talking about the principle. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes, I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  In law... in law ...[intervenes]  
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...within the context of the Commission 
where there is no right to cross-examine ...[intervenes]  
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...but you have to apply for leave to cross-
examine. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Indeed.  Yes.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Some applications would be granted. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Others will be refused. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you... what you... the point you made 
was simple that if your client gives evidence without Mr 
Dukwana being cross-examined, you will be given evidence 
in circumstances where Mr Dukwana’s evidence has not 
been tested.  And I am simple saying, legally within this 
context that can happen. 
20 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Mr Commissioner, I take your point and it 
can happen but my point is, it is not just that.  My point was 
his application to cross-examine has not even yet been 
decided and that is where I find, with respect, the procedural 
...[intervenes]  
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 34 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Look ...[intervenes]  
ADV DAYAL SC:  ...irregularity because it is if... it... and I 
think I have conceded that you do not have to give him the 
leave to cross-examine.  There is a discretion.  There is a 
test and you exercise the discretion judicially.   
 
But even before you have exercised that discretion and 
applied your mind, that application has to be decided which 
is presently being held in advance on the Commission’s own 
version and it has not yet been decided. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
ADV DAYAL SC:  So it could be a case that you give us 
leave to cross-examine or not but you even decided that yet, 
with respect.  And that I think is point made. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Well, of course, it is unfortunate that 
there has to be an argument whether there is an application 
for leave to cross-examine.  
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But we all know that what you rely on in 
terms of the affidavit and what you rely on in terms of the 
Commission’s letter ...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes.  Mister ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  ...that of December 13t h. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Mr Commissioner, I must tell you this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes? 
ADV DAYAL SC:  If I knew... if I had known that the 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 35 of 219 
 
Commission’s approach was that there is no application, I 
would, obviously, brought an application. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV 
DAYAL 
SC: 
 
But 
I 
was 
under 
the 
impression, 
particularly in light of the letter of December, until this 
morning that there was an application to cross-examine and 
it has been held in advance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Mr Pretorius. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you, Chair.  Chair, we take 
issue with the current application, whatever its implications 
are on two fundamental basis. 
 
Firstly, Mr Dukwana is not the star witness before the 
Commission in relation to these issues.  Nothing that will be 
put to Mr Zulu, hopefully today, will deal with the evidence 
that Mr Dukwana gave. 
 
It is true that he put a spreadsheet, a Cost of Business 
Schedule.  He did it as a whistle-blower.  He could not testify 
to it with authenticity and he gave evidence of a largely 
20 
speculative and hearsay nature. 
 
That the legal team and the Commission... Commission’s 
investigators have put aside entirely.  They have made their 
own investigations.  They have done their work. 
 
And it is at those investigations and that work that has 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 36 of 219 
 
already been put to Mr Zulu in the questions, it is that 
investigation and the product of that investigation that we 
will deal with in questioning, hopefully today. 
 
So there is an entire break between what Mr Dukwana 
said on the one hand and what we are dealing with today 
with Mr Zulu. 
 
The Cost of Business Schedule by way of an example 
has been put to the witnesses and has been authenticated, 
as was said in my opening address.  You will recall in my 
opening address, not one part of that opening address refers 
10 
to the evidence of Mr Dukwana. 
 
So the idea that Mr Dukwana must be cross-examined on 
the 
basis 
that 
he 
could 
not... 
cannot 
deal 
with 
the 
authenticity of the schedule is an entirely collateral to the 
issues that will be dealt with. 
 
The issues that will be dealt with today with Mr Zulu are 
entirely based on investigations that happened after Mr 
Dukwana. 
 
Mr Dukwana could be criticised.  He could be dealt with 
on the basis that he did not know what he was doing when 
20 
he put up the 10.6.  That he was speculative. 
 
It is not going to assist you Chair to reach the decisions 
that you must reach about this matter.  You will have to 
evaluate investigations, what witnesses say about those 
investigations and a host of documentary evidence.  There is 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 37 of 219 
 
no link between what is going to happen today except a 
historical fact.   
 
Chair, the questions today will deal with, firstly, Mr 
Zulu’s participation or facilitation of the Asbestos Project in 
the procurement process.  Mr Dukwana is entirely unhelpful 
in that respect and gave no evidence in that respect.   
 
The second is Mr Zulu’s participation or facilitation of 
adjustments to the provincial budget something that Mr 
Dukwana cannot help at all.  No cross-examination is going 
to assist in that. 
10 
 
And the third is.  We will deal with two payments.  Not 
any allegation that appears on the Cost of Business 
Schedule but the product of investigation with the motor car 
dealer in Pietermaritzburg in two payments.  One of 
R 1 million and one of R 600 000,00. 
 
Again, entirely unrelated to anything that Mr Dukwana 
says.  But I am happy Chair to give you and my learned 
friend an undertaking that I am not going to deal with 
anything that Mr Dukwana says. 
 
It will be entirely documents obtained through the 
20 
investigation and evidence obtained in regard 
to this 
spreadsheet from other witnesses.   
 
In fact, Chair, the Cost of Business Schedule, I do not 
intend to deal with Mr Zulu at all.  I am dealing with entirely 
different evidence in that regard.  That is the first issue in 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 38 of 219 
 
respect of which ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  And that, of course, it seems would make... 
that, of course, it seems would suggest that there would be 
hardly any justification to postpone the hearing of Mr Zulu’s 
evidence today, just so that he can cross-examine somebody 
who gave evidence on something that he is not going to be 
questioned about today. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And in fact, it does not take much 
10 
speculation.  One can look at the allegations made by Mr 
Zulu in both his affidavits.  He says, in essence, in relation 
to Mr Dukwana’s evidence:  “You have put up something to 
which you cannot testify at all.  It is entire speculation.  This 
document, if it is a real document at all, cannot be put by 
you before the Commission”. 
 
So Mr Dukwana admits that or he does not admit it and 
he denies that.  How does that help you Chair when the test 
of the authenticity of that document which I am not going to 
deal with today in any event.  I am going to deal with 
20 
entirely... the fruits of investigations on an entirely different 
basis. 
 
What does it help Chair?  You would have say, “Mr 
Dukwana, you based your evidence on an entirely hearsay 
document.  You could not justify it.  You could not talk to its 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 39 of 219 
 
authenticity”.  And that is the end of it. 
 
But in any event Chair, I have made it clear.  The issues 
that will be dealt with today have all been put to Mr Zulu.  He 
has put it on affidavit.   
 
Now when he answered those questions on affidavit or 
as an annexure to an affidavit, he did not say, “I cannot deal 
with these issues”.  He has given evidence.  That evidence 
is on affidavit.  He has not said, “I can only do this when I 
need to cross-examine”. 
 
That leads to the second point Chair.  We cannot have a 
10 
situation in this Commission.  The Commission is under 
tremendous pressure.   
 
It must deal with its matters.  You, Chair, with the 
discretion that you have, subject to elements of fairness, of 
course.  You, Chair, will decide what the sequence of events 
will be. 
 
When witnesses would come, what issues they will deal 
with – that is within your discretion.  You have an onerous 
task.  It must be completed by December by all accounts. 
 
So it does not help the progress of this Commission for 
20 
witnesses to tell you in effect how you should run the 
Commission, Chair. 
 
Chair, if I could just for your assistance please deal 
with... the formal way to deal with this matter is perhaps not 
the best way to deal with the matter but it is significant. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 40 of 219 
 
 
Rule 3.4 makes it very clear that if you want to cross-
examine, you must do so in a particular way.  That read with 
Rule 11.3.  It says: 
“Any application must follow a particular format...” 
 
It must be a proper motivation and a proper application 
in terms of the Rules.  A line in an affidavit does not suffice.   
 
The fact that there was an incorrect statement in the 
letter 
does 
not 
elevate 
that 
application 
to 
a 
proper 
application.  It does not do so at all.   
 
The fact remains, there has been no application to 
10 
cross-examine in terms of the rules but there are other ways 
to deal with it rather than that formalistic approach and I 
have given that to you. 
 
If I may just assist you Chair by giving you the 
references 
to 
the 
relevant 
documents. 
 
On 
the 
23rd of August 2019 in Mr Zulu’s first affidavit, he said: 
“I insist on my right to cross-examine...”   
 
Not accompanied by any other application.  That is in 
FS1 page 153 paragraph 7.4.  Then on the 28t h of July 2020 
in his second affidavit, Mr Dukwana says... it is not Mr 
20 
Dukwana.  My apologies.  Mr Zulu says in his own words: 
“I reserve the right to cross-examine...” 
 
And then he says later on in the affidavit and this is at 
FS1 page 162: 
“My request to cross-examine Mr Dukwana has gone 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 41 of 219 
 
unanswered...” 
 
And then on the 13t h of December 2019, the State 
Capture Commission said... the secretary said: 
“Your client’s application will be held in abeyance...” 
 
Now that is an unfortunate statement Chair.  There is no 
getting away from it but it does not excuse an application 
that must be made in terms of the Rule 3.4 read with 11.3.  
That duty remains. 
 
And in the Rule 3.3 notice, the person implicated, 
attention is pertinently drawn to how or in terms of what 
10 
rules applications must be made. 
 
Then Chair on the 28t h of July 2020 when the second 
affidavit was put up by Mr Zulu, there was an agreement to 
appear on 6 August 2020. 
 
It was an unconditional agreement.  On that basis today 
has been set aside for Mr Zulu and it... or at least a large 
part of today. 
 
That was unconditional.  There was no statement there 
“but we first want to cross-examine”.  This is something... it 
may be that it just seeks to avoid what is the inevitable 
20 
consequence of having to answer questions before you, 
Chair. 
 
In relation to complaints as to how Mr Zulu has been 
treated.  I, in the course of the last week... I only came into 
this matter two weeks ago Chair. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 42 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In the course of the last two weeks, I 
have asked for a full response to be prepared.  That has 
been prepared.  It is part of the bundle that we can give it 
to...  
 
But that, however important it may be to Mr Zulu and 
however important it may be to the Commission, Chair does 
not go to the central issue of today’s proceedings and those 
are the three areas that need to be covered. 
 
The second point is that Mr Zulu is not been taken by 
10 
surprise.  He knows what issues are going to be dealt with.  
He has been presented with ten documents that he has been 
given an opportunity to consider and consult with his 
lawyers. 
 
So his agreement to appear on 6 August 2020, is 
understandable in that context.  I must say that the 
correspondence between the parties is quite cordial and 
polite and constructive. 
 
What is not, in our view, very constructive is the tone 
and content of the various affidavits but that can be dealt 
20 
with in due course. 
 
The former point I have made.  One more... two more 
points Chair.  This is not an adversarial process.  It is not a 
trial where you allow one side to win and one side to lose.   
 
Mr Zulu is not here in a contest against Mr Dukwana or 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 43 of 219 
 
anyone else for that matter which can be won or lost.  The 
formal rules of court proceedings do not apply in a 
commission. 
 
You, Chair, will decide it in a matter that best assist you 
to make findings in relation to your Terms of Reference and 
that requires both a procedural set of considerations, as well 
as, a substantive set of considerations. 
 
And the answer is, what is going to assist you Chair to 
get to the bottom of the allegations today?  And to allow the 
witness to answer and ventilate his answers to the product of 
10 
the investigations that have taken place on those three 
issues.  Those are our submissions Chair.  We must 
proceed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Any reply from counsel for Mr 
Zulu?  Thank you, Mr Pretorius.  They will sanitise the 
podium before counsel for Mr Zulu goes there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Mr Commissioner. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  So from what I gather from my learned 
friend’s address to Mr Commissioner, he is going to be 
20 
leading then evidence only in relation to what is stated by 
Mr Duminy, as I understand it, in his affidavit.  And I say 
that because Mr …[intervenes]   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, he says – let us say what he says, 
Mr Zulu, on the basis of what Mr Dukwana may have said 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 44 of 219 
 
he will be questioning him on the basis of the product of 
the investigation of the Commission subsequent to Mr Zulu 
having brought to the attention of the Commission certain 
things and he says Mr – it is not going to be helpful for Mr 
Zulu to really cross-examine Mr Dukwana for purposes of 
today because he would be questioned on the basis of the 
product of the investigation conducted by the Commission.  
Ja, that is what he says. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Mr Commissioner, as I understood him, 
he said that he is going to be asking my client questions 
10 
relating to certain payments that were made to a motor car 
dealership in Pietermaritzburg.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, that includes that, I think. 
ADV DAYAL SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I do not know if you want to – if you 
can make it the only thing.  He says it is the product of the 
investigation of the Commission and it is not really so 
much about what Mr Zulu may have said – Mr Dukwana 
may have said about Mr Zulu. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes, the point I am just trying to 
20 
understand here is if there is not going to be any questions 
at all about Mr Dukwana then the questions that my 
learned friend wish to put, firstly I just remind the 
Commission that my client received another Section 3.3 
notice in respect of allegations made by Mr Duminy and he 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 45 of 219 
 
received a separate Section 3.3 notice in respect of certain 
allegations made by Mr Mogese.   
In his affidavit before the Commission he says I 
take no issue with those affidavits, I have received the 
Section 3.3 notice, those allegations made in those do not 
implicate.  So he does not want to give any evidence, he 
does not need to give any evidence on that.  That evidence 
is already there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, if he has no issue with it, you will 
say that he can say that – if he asked anything about it, he 
10 
can just say I have already said I do not dispute what they 
say.   
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is it. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  The point I am just trying to make is that 
this is the Commission’s procedure, we were given 3.3 
notices to say we are possibly implicated persons in 
respect of allegations made in two affidavits and we said in 
our – in his affidavit he says I do not have a problem, 
nothing in those affidavits implicate me, so I just want to 
20 
draw that to your attention. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  So whether or not there is evidence that 
is actually required by my client is a question that 
obviously the Commission needs to determine because if 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 46 of 219 
 
there is not going to be any questions revolving around the 
evidence of Mr Dukwana then what we are left with really is 
the evidence of Mogese and Duminy and my client has 
already said he takes no issue with that.  That is my first 
point. 
 
My second point is my learned friend says that well 
there was an agreement for my client to appear here today.  
Well, that is not entirely correct.  As much as there was an 
agreement to appear, that agreement has a background.  
The background is that my client was being threatened with 
10 
a summons to appear today, irrespective of what has 
happened before and what we have said in the affidavits 
before.   
 
So hands tied, so to speak, here he is because 
otherwise he would have been summoned.  He does not 
want to disrespect the Commission and he certainly does 
not want to run foul of the law so he is here.  That is the 
point, it is not simply a case of well, we are here because 
we are happy and we agree to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It may well be that to the extent that 
20 
your client may have already at the date – I think Mr 
Pretorius said the 28 July.  If at the time he had already 
received a summons – and I do not know if he received a 
summons or just a notice but it may be that within the 
context of a summons it would have been expected if – it 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 47 of 219 
 
would have been expected that if you client was – or 
believed that he should be allowed to cross-examine first, 
cross-examine Mr Dukwana, that he would say because I 
have issued a summons I will appear there but I want you 
to know that I will appear but I will still argue that before I 
give evidence I should be given a chance to cross-examine 
Dukwana.  I do not know whether that is what he means in 
that context.   
 
But, you know, it just seems to me that if for 
purposes of today Mr Dukwana – what Mr Dukwana said 
10 
plays no role at all or play a minimum role that there is no 
reason why we should not continue and Mr Zulu should 
give evidence.  That is that because your entire application 
for a postponement was really based on saying he is now 
going to be asked about Mr Dukwana’s evidence and Mr 
Pretorius says but that is not what is going to happen. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Mr Commissioner, firstly on the issue of 
the summons, it is dealt with in the further affidavit from 
paragraph 31 onwards. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Where on the 21 July Mr Lambrechts said 
that he has been instructed to prepare a summons for my 
client. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Now this after – there has also been 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 48 of 219 
 
correspondence between the attorney, there is an Advocate 
Renate at the Commission, my attorney corresponded with 
her with Lambrechts to say we are willing to cooperate at 
all material times, we have been willing to cooperate.  
Despite that, there was then the email from Lambrechts 
saying he is now instructed to prepare a summons for my 
client. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I can tell you this about being 
instructed to issue a summons, we have recently been 
experiencing a lot of difficulties for a long time from 2018 
10 
and last year we mostly simply requested people to appear 
without issuing a summons, it did happen with regard to 
certain people and the approach was informed by – or the 
approach was if people are cooperating there is no need 
for a summons, okay?  But of late there have been certain 
challenges and the fact that we have a very serious time 
constraint so recently I was even saying – I think it was in 
an open hearing, maybe the Commission should issue 
summons against everybody irrespective whether you are 
cooperating 
or 
not 
because 
sometimes 
somebody 
is 
20 
cooperating and then something comes up and because 
there is no compulsion it is easy to then change whereas if 
there is a compulsion then you know you cannot change 
that.   
 
So there are certain challenges.  It might not reflect 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 49 of 219 
 
on a particular individual if a summons is issued, it might 
be that if we want to make sure that we minimise the 
prospects of our time not being used properly.  
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The best thing is to issue a summons 
and if you receive a summons do not feel bad that – do not 
think that the Commission thinks I am not cooperating but 
sometimes the summons even protects you when somebody 
else may be your superior at work, might say hey, hey, hey, 
no, something else has come up now so you can say that is 
10 
a summons, I have to go there whereas if there is no 
compulsion you might be prevailed upon to not come, so – 
but I am just mentioning that to give the context but I think 
coming 
back 
to 
your 
application, 
as 
we 
speak, 
my 
inclination would be to dismiss it because it was based on 
Dukwana and Mr Pretorius says the evidence or the 
questioning really will not be based on Dukwana. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Mr Commissioner …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you may still have another point.  I 
am saying that is my inclination. 
20 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If you have another point you can still 
put it, ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  I appreciate fully the issue of the 
summons; I am just putting in context this agreement that 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 50 of 219 
 
it was as a result of this threat of the issue of the 
summons. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  And I fully appreciate the importance of 
the work of the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  And the necessity to summons witnesses 
but in this context when my learned friend says well, we 
agreed to be here today, we agreed to be here today 
because despite us cooperating and saying we will be here 
10 
today there was a threat of a summons. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  That is the only point there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Mr Commissioner, on this issue of it is 
based only the application for the adjournment to deal with 
the issue of cross-examination is based only on the 
evidence of Dukwana, I just have this to remind Mr 
Commissioner about.  As I understand my learned friend’s 
address 
from 
yesterday, 
all 
the 
evidence 
that 
the 
20 
Commission is dealing with this week or from yesterday or 
today, tomorrow or whatever the case is, including the 
evidence of my client, is evidence in respect of the 
asbestos audit in the Free State.  It is not evidence about 
anything else, it is not evidence about general aspects of 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 51 of 219 
 
the issues, it is related specifically to that audit. 
 
Now if one, without me going into the details of the 
questions which appear in TWZ28 – sorry, TWZ8 to the 
papers, that is the letter that the Commission sent setting 
out the questions and the answers given my client.  It is – 
you cannot look at that evidence in a vacuum and say well, 
because you did not have a right to cross-examine Mr 
Dukwana who gave evidence on an aspect of the Free 
State asbestos audit, therefore any other evidence outside 
of that, despite it being related to the Free State asbestos 
10 
audit is permitted before you are allowed to cross-examine 
Mr Dukwana.  That, with respect, is looking at the issues in 
vacuum whereas if one looks at the purpose of my client 
being called today to give evidence it is clear, it is 
evidence related to the Free State asbestos audit. 
 
Now simply to say well, I am going to ask for my 
learned friend to say I am going to ask questions – sorry… 
CHAIRPERSON:   But there is no – even on your own 
approach, there is no application that your client has 
lodged for leave to cross-examine anybody in regard to any 
20 
evidence other than Dukwana.  So – and from what one can 
see and Mr Pretorius also made the point, your clients 
knows exactly what the issues are in regard to the other 
evidence that is not Mr Dukwana’s evidence, he has 
answered questions, he has not say no, I need more time 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 52 of 219 
 
to answer these questions, he has answered the questions. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  That is correct, he has cooperated in 
accordance with his tender. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  But the point I am simply making is this, 
one cannot just divorce that evidence from – and ignore all 
of the evidence that has already been given by Mr 
Dukwana and look at the evidence …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if I postpone, for what purpose 
would I postpone? 
10 
ADV DAYAL SC:  The purpose is simple this, that before 
my client is called …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   If we take out Dukwana. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Sorry… 
CHAIRPERSON:   If we leave Mr Dukwana out of it. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
What 
would 
be 
the 
purpose 
of 
postponing? 
ADV DAYAL SC:  The purpose is this, Mr Commissioner, 
before my client is called into a very public forum to be 
20 
asked questions relating to the Free State asbestos audit, 
he should be given an opportunity to cross-examine the 
very witness that the Commission relies upon in respect of 
that particular aspect of the Commission.  Mr Dukwana has 
been the witness that the Commission has relied on, has 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 53 of 219 
 
been the witness, call it the complainant, so to speak, in 
respect of this Free State asbestos audit.  Now to simply 
look at Mr Dukwana’s evidence in isolation is, with respect, 
inappropriate because before my client is then asked to get 
into the witness box in a public forum such as this where 
his reputation may be affected, where he may suffer 
defamation, 
where 
he 
may 
be 
asked 
unnecessary 
questions, he surely should be given an opportunity to 
cross-examine the very witness that the Commission is 
relying upon to continue with this evidence on the Free 
10 
State asbestos audit. 
And that really is the point, that you cannot 
separate the evidence, you cannot simply look at Mr 
Dukwana’s evidence in complete isolation to the evidence 
that 
is 
now 
being 
sought 
to 
be 
led 
today 
by 
the 
Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I will give you three minutes to 
conclude, is that fine? 
ADV DAYAL SC:  That is it, I have got no further 
…[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   You have no further submissions. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Those are my submissions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  I just implore Mr Commissioner not to 
look at the evidence completely in isolation to what Mr 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 54 of 219 
 
Dukwana has already laid as the basis for this Commission 
to proceed to question my client on the Free State 
asbestos audit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV DAYAL SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you very much.  The 
application brought by Mr Zulu for the postponement of the 
hearing of his evidence is dismissed.  If reasons are asked 
for, they will be given.  We will take the tea adjournment 
now and it is twenty eight minutes pas eleven, we will 
10 
resume at quarter to twelve.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, are we ready to continue? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you Chair.   Mr Thabani 
Wiseman Zulu is as it were on the stand, may he be sworn 
in? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay please administer the oath or 
affirmation.  Mr Zulu you might wish to either remove your 
mask or move it a bit otherwise the transcribers will not 
20 
hear you.  Yes, okay. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record? 
MR ZULU:   Thabani Wiseman Zulu. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 55 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:   No. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR ZULU:   Correct. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth, the whole and nothing else but the truth, 
if so please raise your right hand and say so help me God. 
MR ZULU:   So help me God. 
THABANI WISEMAN ZULU  [d.s.s.] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, you may be seated. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Not a good time for that to happen, 
my apologies.  Morning Mr Zulu. 
MR ZULU:   Morning. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Zulu you have in these 
proceedings submitted two affidavits. 
MR ZULU:   Right. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The first affidavit appears at page 
159 of the bundle marked Free State 1.  You have it in 
front of you? 
MR ZULU:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just tell him Mr Pretorius that when you 
refer to page numbers you will be referring to the black 
numbers on the left of each page. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Zulu if you look at any page in 
that bundle you will see in the top left-hand corner Free 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 56 of 219 
 
State 01 and then a number.  Can you see that? 
MR ZULU:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And in the top right-hand corner 
you will see numbers in red those are for record purposes 
you do not have to bother yourself with those numbers.  
MR ZULU:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So when I refer to a page number, 
I will be referring to the number in black in the top left 
hand corner of each page.  So the first affidavit that you 
submitted to the…[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on Mr Pretorius we are going to be 
using bundle FS1.  Is that right? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct FS1.  I don’t know if your 
spine has yet been…[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I have requested…[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Amended. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This be written on the spine although it 
was not with me.  So if all others can be reading bundle FS 
whatever so that one would know that FS1 refers to the 
bundle. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That instruction has gone out, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In any event…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   So Mr Zulu when either Mr Pretorius or I 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 57 of 219 
 
refer to bundle FS1 we will be referring to this bundle that 
bundle that is in front of you and on the spine, you will see 
FS1 maybe it is not written bundle but that is bundle FS1. 
MR ZULU:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And if you want to write it on the spine 
with you it is fine as well but if you will remember that is 
okay. 
MR ZULU:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And Mr Zulu if it is easier for you, 
you can lower your mask when you speak so that we can 
10 
all hear.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And of course, Mr Zulu when you nod 
that will not be captured in the transcript it is better if you 
say yes or no, okay. 
MR ZULU:   Noted Chair.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So if we go Mr Zulu to FS1 the 
bundle in front of you at page 159 you will see an affidavit.  
That is your second affidavit but perhaps I should do it in 
order…[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:   159, yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So let’s start I am sorry at page 
148 you will see a cover page. 
MR ZULU:   148, yes got it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you have that? 
MR ZULU:   Yes. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 58 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And if you go to page 150 of FS1 
you will see an affidavit.  Do you see that? 
MR ZULU:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If I may ask you then to identify 
the signature on page 6 on page 155 rather.  Is that your 
signature? 
MR ZULU:   155?  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is your signature?  Would you 
speak up please Mr Zulu. 
MR ZULU:   Yes, it is. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you know the contents of this 
affidavit? 
MR ZULU:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Are they as far as you are 
aware…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you confirm that it is his signature 
that appears on page 155?  Is that your signature? 
MR ZULU:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR ZULU:   Yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   He did say so but not loudly 
enough for the stenographer to hear. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then if we go to Exhibit TT5.2 
on page 157 please. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 59 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Pretorius is it not easier that we 
immediately you ask me to admit this as a certain exhibit? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I would have done it at the end but 
now it is convenient. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, it is convenient to do it now. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Would you Chair admit the affidavit 
which appears in bundle FS1 at page 150 and the following 
as Exhibit TT1.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   TT5.1 or TT1? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sorry TT5.1.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, 5.1 so the affidavit of Mr Thabani 
Wiseman Zulu appearing at page 150 and I am referring to 
that number will be admitted as Exhibit TT5.1.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then if you go please in the 
same bundle FS1 to page 157 you will see there the cover 
page of another exhibit, Exhibit TT5.2.  Do you see that, 
page 157?  
MR ZULU:   Yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And if you go please to page 159 
you will see the first page of another affidavit that is 
Exhibit TT2 together with all its annexures.  
MR ZULU:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If you would please identify the 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 60 of 219 
 
signature then at page 159 sorry not page 159 my 
apologies that is the first page…[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   It is 173, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:   173? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, is that your signature there above 
despondent? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that your signature? 
MR ZULU:   I am getting there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   173. 
10 
MR ZULU:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And as far as you are aware the 
contents of this affidavit are they true and correct? 
MR ZULU:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   There are a number of annexures 
to the affidavit which appear in the following pages and we 
will come to those in the course of your evidence.  But if I 
may draw your attention to one of the annexures at 
page…[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are the…[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    …204.  I am sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are the annexures separate from the 
affidavit to which there are annexures?   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No they follow on Chair from the 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 61 of 219 
 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The one that you were dealing with now 
the affidavit starts at page 159 and goes up to page 173. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   After that I do not have annexures, I 
have got another affidavit by Mr Zulu. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, that affidavit is in fact his first 
affidavit which is annexed to his second affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so that affidavit is also an 
annexure? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is an annexure to this…[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, it is a repeat of his first 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  If it is referred to in the affidavit 
starting at page 159 if it is referred to as an annexure I 
would think that we must leave it as part of Exhibit TT5.2 
but if it is not referred to in the affidavit it would be a 
stand-alone affidavit even if it might have similarities in 
terms of content were said.  
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, well in the further affidavit the 
one beginning at page 159 of the first one. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is paragraph 2…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 62 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   He said on 23 August 2019 I had to 
first do an affidavit in response to a notice in terms of rule 
33 that I received on 5 August 2019.  For ease of reference 
I attach it to be marked Annexure TWZ1.1…[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   A copy thereof…[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, okay that is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So that is all there with its 
annexures. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is fine. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And it has its own annexures to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Annexures to, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And I would like to draw your 
attention Chair to an important document amongst those 
annexures it appears on page 204 of Bundle FS1 if you 
would go there please its Annexure TWZ8 to the affidavit 
that we don’t refer to that now we will just refer to the page 
number it is marked with tab 8, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes I see it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   With tab 8. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.       
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is a copy of a letter sent to 
you by the commission on the 14 t h of May 2020.  
MR ZULU:   At page 204.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I aim to find it.  It is a letter from the 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 63 of 219 
 
commission addressed to you at page 204. 
MR ZULU:   Yes, dated 14 May 2020. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.   
MR ZULU:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now that letter was sent to you and 
your answers to the questions are contained in the letter.  
So this is actually not the letter sent to you this is your 
response because in each paragraph 2.1 to 2.2 and all the 
following paragraphs in italics in a different colour font 
although it may not be very clear in this light Chair are 
10 
your answers to the questions and we will get back to 
those answers.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I see you nodded you mean yes. 
MR ZULU:   Correct that is correct Mr Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And Mr Zulu we have a request of 
the Stenographer…[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:   I said it is correct and I know that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you very much hey.  Alright I 
would like you to refer you - there is a short route and a 
longer route and I would like to ask you to comment on the 
20 
statements of Mr Mokhesi.  You know Mr Mokhesi? 
MR ZULU:   If you can elaborate. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   He is the head of department or 
was the Head of Department, Free State Human Settlement 
at the time that the events we are talking about occurred.  
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 64 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:   Yes, I know him.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You know him? 
MR ZULU:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now he attested to an affidavit and 
I just want to ask your comment on the content there at a 
general 
level 
and 
your 
response 
would 
help 
the 
commission with its work and then we will if necessary, 
after that go to the original documentation.  But if I could 
ask you to look at page 35 of bundle FS1. 
MR ZULU:   235? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 35. 
MR ZULU:   Page 35? 
CHAIRPERSON:   35, yes.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   35, the black number.  We know 
and you would have come across this in the questions put 
to you by the investigators…[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:   Sorry just help me with the page number? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am sorry. 
MR ZULU:   Just help me with the page number on the 
bundle.   
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 35, Free State 1 or FS1, 
page 35. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is in the affidavit of Mr Mokhesi. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   This is an affidavit of Mr Mokhesi 
and this is his evidence to the commission.  
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 65 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Remember to look at the black numbers 
all the time or page numbers, page 35. 
MR ZULU:   Black numbers that is…[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Page 035 but we just say 35.  
MR ZULU:   Yes, it starts with 0157. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes, 
okay 
disregard 
Free 
State, 
disregard 01, disregard the hyphen, disregard the zero.  
When we say 35 we just mean the last digits, two digits.  
So we will not be mentioning all the things that come 
before it but if you look at the red page the numbers at the 
10 
top is TT2.1 and NM508. 
MR ZULU:   On their Chair, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Just to place this statement that I 
am going to put to you in its context we know that as part 
of the asbestos project service providers joint venture 
comprising Blackhead and Diamond Hill made a proposal to 
the 
department, 
Free 
State 
Department 
of 
Human 
Settlements.   
          And this is the proposal that is referred to herein 
20 
the pages that follow from pages FS135 and following and 
what I would like to draw your attention to is that this 
proposal for the present at least according to the evidence 
of Mr Mokhesi was made at risk.  If you look please at 
paragraph 13.3.2 on page 36 it says they and that is a 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 66 of 219 
 
reference to the service providers in the asbestos project 
undertook to execute the above work or mandate on a risk 
basis.   
          My understanding of this specific proposition was 
that they undertook the work subject to approval by 
National Department of Human Settlements and of course 
approval of a business plan relating to this project.  Now 
before we deal with that paragraph at the time that this 
project was underway 2014 and 2015, what position did 
you occupy in government? 
10 
MR ZULU:   Director General, Department of Human 
Settlement. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right, you were the Director 
General of the national department, is that correct? 
MR ZULU:   Correct. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
And 
beneath 
the 
national 
department were your respective provincial departments in 
each province? 
MR ZULU:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the arrangements we are 
20 
talking 
about 
principally 
at 
least 
were 
arrangements 
between a service provider on the one hand we know that 
it emerged as a joint venture but that is something we can 
talk about at another stage and the Gauteng sorry the Free 
State 
we 
also 
deal 
with 
Gauteng, 
the 
Free 
State 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 67 of 219 
 
Department of Human Settlements.  There was a – the 
project involved those two parties, am I correct? 
MR ZULU:   Chair I am not sure whether you are referring 
to the paragraph that talks about business plans national 
department being responsible for that…[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The outcome to that in a moment, I 
just want you to give some background. 
MR ZULU:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Really for context purposes view. 
MR ZULU:   Alright.  
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And because we have not placed 
on record your position at the time perhaps, we should.  
Your position at the time as I understand it was the 
National Director of Human Settlements, National Director 
of Human Settlements. 
MR ZULU:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I do not know about National 
Director General.  I think he was Director General of the 
Department of Human Settlements at national government 
as opposed to provincial.  Is that correct Mr Zulu? 
20 
MR ZULU:   Correct, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But this business proposal we 
know was made to the provincial department in the Free 
State.  This particular proposal for the asbestos project in 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 68 of 219 
 
the Free State, you know about that? 
MR ZULU:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright.  Now if we can revert to 
paragraph 
13.3.2 
please. 
 They 
that 
is 
the 
service 
providers undertook to execute the above work or mandate 
on a risk basis.  My understanding of this specific 
propositions says Mr Mokhesi was that they undertook the 
work subject to the approval by the National Department of 
Human Settlements and of course approval of a business 
plan relating to this subject.  Do you agree with that 
10 
proposition? 
MR ZULU:   I will agree with that proposition in so far as 
the national business plan was that falls under the 
jurisdiction of the Director General of the Department of 
Human Settlements.  In that context I will agree with that 
statement. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sorry your voice is very soft I do 
not mean to badger you at all but could you just repeat that 
please. 
MR ZULU:   I am saying in the context that all projects that 
20 
are being undertaken by different provincial departments 
are managed under the department of national department.  
So in that context including their business plans.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright. 
MR ZULU:   Yes. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 69 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So do I understand you correctly 
that this statement is a correct statement provided one 
understands that all projects of a provincial department or 
under the supervision if we can put it that way of the 
national department.  Am I correct? 
MR ZULU:   It is a joint responsibility.  The supervision is 
also 
within 
the 
Accounting 
Officers 
at 
a 
provincial 
level…[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:   And the national department because it 
10 
approves the business plans also has an oversight over 
those plans.  So it is a dual responsibility…[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So the approval of the business 
plan would be necessary and that approval would have to 
be given by the national department before it could 
properly proceed? 
MR ZULU:   I did not hear your first words when you 
started your sentence Mr Pretorius if you can please repeat 
your first words. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Before any human settlements 
20 
project can proceed at a provincial level it requires the 
approval of that business plan by the National Department 
of Human Settlement? 
MR ZULU:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  And if one then goes 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 70 of 219 
 
to…[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:   If you want me to elaborate on that I can what 
I mean by that.  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, sure. 
MR 
ZULU: 
 
 
So 
every 
financial 
year 
the 
National 
Accounting Officer has a responsibility and duty in terms of 
the law to approve all business plans prior to budgets 
being allocated for implementation purposes.  And should 
there be a deviation we need to deviate from any process 
or any project during the implementation of those plans 
10 
you will require the approval of the national department. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And ultimately that is your 
approval? 
MR ZULU:   Accounting Officers responsibility of course in 
consultation with other structures. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, and you were the Accounting 
Officer at national level were you? 
MR ZULU:   Correct? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Zulu although it is Mr Pretorius who 
will be asking you most of the questions.  His asking you 
20 
so that you can tell me.  
MR ZULU:   Oh sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay so…[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:   My apologies Chair it is just that he is asking 
me. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 71 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I understand ja perhaps when you 
look this side when you speak then I do not miss anything. 
MR ZULU:   I will try and balance my body language.  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am not saying do not look at him at all, 
so you can look at him but when you answer try and look 
this side. 
MR ZULU:   Okay, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So to take that one step further Mr 
Zulu the business plan as I understand it and please 
10 
correct me if I have it wrong.  The business plan has the 
consequence that certain budget allocations are made in 
terms of that plan.  Am I correct? 
MR ZULU:   Just elaborate on that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well you – let me put it to you this 
way so you can explain it in your own words.  What is the 
relationship between a business plan and the annual 
budget of the province? 
MR ZULU:   All business plans that are approved first at a 
provincial level and then submitted at national level for 
20 
confirming the availability of the budget are aligned with 
the existing budgets.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Ah, so when a business plan is put 
to you and approved there must be an allocation in the 
provincial budget so that that plan can be carried out.  Do I 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 72 of 219 
 
understand you correctly? 
MR ZULU:   Under normal circumstances that is how it is 
supposed to be.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The normal circumstances? 
MR ZULU:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But there are circumstances when 
that does not occur and perhaps, we dealing with them 
here.  If you go to paragraph 19 of that affidavit on page 
44.  There Mr Mokhesi refers to your involvement in this 
matter in the project in your capacity as Director General 
10 
national and what he says is that Mr Thabani Zulu and I am 
referring to page 44 of FS1 at paragraph 19.1.  Mr Thabani 
Zulu was then Director General of the National Department 
of Human Settlements.  That is a correct statement is it? 
CHAIRPERSON:   He just wants you to confirm that that 
part of the statement is correct. 
MR ZULU:   That I was the Director General of the 
department? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
20 
MR ZULU:   I have already confirmed that earlier on in the 
beginning Chair, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, you did. 
MR ZULU:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then he goes on to say before a 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 73 of 219 
 
provincial 
department 
could 
reprioritise 
or 
amend 
its 
business plan it should make a motivation to the DGF 
national level to effect such reprioritisation which affects 
its business plan and ultimately its budget.   
          So let me put the following question to you before 
you deal with that statement Mr Zulu.  If as in this case, 
there was no provision in the budget for the execution of 
this particular asbestos project the budget would have to 
be amended as it were to allow funds to be released for 
the project.  Am I correct? 
10 
MR ZULU:   Yes, Chair the budget that is approved in the 
beginning of every financial year it is the first budget 
approved every quarterly session that you will have as a 
DG or as an Accounting Officer with your respective 
Accounting Officers of the provincial departments would be 
to seek the exact implementation of that particular budget 
as was budgeted from the beginning.   
          And along the lines then the budgets can be 
reviewed and if necessary, also business plans can also be 
reviewed 
depending 
on 
the 
needs 
analysis 
or 
as 
20 
circumstances as they may change as I have indicated 
earlier on. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay, so it seems that like you and 
Mr Mokhesi agree but just to clarify.  In this case there was 
no budgetary provision for the asbestos project for 2014, 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 74 of 219 
 
2015 at the beginning of the year? 
MR ZULU:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In order to unlock funds for the 
execution of the project from the Free State budget it was 
necessary to make provision now for expenditure in terms 
of a revised budget and that could only be done by the 
submission 
of 
a 
new 
business 
plan 
to 
the 
national 
department and its approval.   Is that a correct summary? 
MR ZULU:  It is correct but I would like to give context to 
that as well Chairperson. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Please do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  It may not be that there is no budget available at 
a provincial level.  It may be that there is budget but it is not 
allocated for a specific project that you may want to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR ZULU:  But if you want to review therefore your business 
plan you will have to get the National Department through its 
Accounting Officer to allow that review.  So it may not be 
necessarily that you have to get an additional budget. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I see. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR ZULU:  It may be for example that a particular project 
has not been implemented timeously for whatever reasons 
procurement delays or any other circumstances and want to 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 75 of 219 
 
redirect your budget. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR ZULU:  You are changing your business plan and 
therefore you need National Accounting Officer to do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So that is instructive thank you Mr 
Zulu.  I would like to understand it in terms of your answer 
so that we are clear what the position is.  You say that a 
province may have a budget for a particular year in general 
terms and that project then is or that budget rather is 
10 
allocated to a number of projects? 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In this case the evidence will be that 
at the beginning of the financial year no funds had been 
allocated to the Asbestos Project but you say there is a 
procedure whereby one can move allocations from one 
project to another particularly where money is not required 
for a particular project it can go to another project, is that 
correct? 
MR ZULU:  It is correct.   
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But for that to occur the National 
Department must approve an amended business plan, am I 
correct? 
MR ZULU:  You mean the revised business plan. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The revised business plan yes. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 76 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
So 
in 
other 
words, 
if 
a 
provincial 
department at the beginning of the year had its budget 
allocated to project A, B, C, D, E. 
MR ZULU:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And somewhere in the course of the year a 
proposal is made or there is some project that they think 
they should also accommodate but that project would not 
have been part of the business plan that they had before 
10 
they would have to change their business plan to take care – 
to cover this new project and seek the approval of the 
National Department, the approval of the change in the 
business plan and then because they cannot redirect funds 
from other projects to a new project without changing or 
adjusting their business plan.   
MR ZULU:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 And 
once 
they 
have 
adjusted 
their 
business plan that – then they can move funds from one 
project to the new project.  But for all of that to happen they 
20 
need the approval of the National Department. 
MR ZULU:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If we could go then to another 
document. These documents appear in various placed Chair 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 77 of 219 
 
and I am going to have to move to Bundle FS8. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Somebody… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Page 121. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Somebody will give you the relevant 
bundle Mr Zulu – they will give you the relevant bundle.  Are 
the bundles behind Mr Zulu now all marked properly?  Okay 
so if he looks at – behind him he will be able to see each 
bundle. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay alright.  Thank you. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  This is a letter addressed to Mr 
Mokhesi. 
MR ZULU:  Sorry where are we in this bundle? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am sorry. 
MR ZULU:  Where are we on this bundle? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Oh page – I am sorry.  Page 181 and 
take a moment to look at the letter please.   
MR ZULU:  100? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  181.  FS8 – 181.   
CHAIRPERSON:  You will just have to repeat the page 
20 
number for me Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  FS8 – 181. 
CHAIRPERSON:  181 okay. 
MR ZULU:  I found it Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  This is what appears on the 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 78 of 219 
 
face of it to be a letter signed by yourself in your capacity as 
Director General of the National Department of Human 
Settlements.  It appears to be dated 13 August 2014 and it is 
addressed 
to 
Mr 
Mokhesi 
- 
Department 
of 
Human 
Settlements.  Do you recall this letter?  It has been 
discussed with you. 
MR ZULU:  Well Chair it is quite an old letter but surely. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Have a look at it. 
MR ZULU:  It is my signature so I would make an ex – 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That is your signature. 
10 
MR ZULU:   I will make an assumption that it is the letter 
that I wrote at the time. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  I am sorry I interrupted you.  
You said that is your signature?  Mr Zulu? 
MR ZULU:  Yes it is my signature. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.   
MR ZULU:  Yes it is my signature. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  For the moment we will come 
back to it later in another context but for the moment if I may 
refer you to the last paragraph of that letter or the pen-
20 
ultimate paragraph of the letter it reads: 
“Kindly be informed that the Free State Department of 
Human Settlements will be held liable for any financial 
implications or operations of the service provider.” 
Now what we are talking about here as appears from the 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 79 of 219 
 
heading 
to 
that 
letter 
this 
is 
the 
appointment 
of 
a 
professional 
resource 
team 
or 
service 
provider 
to 
a 
departmental 
panel 
relating 
to 
Human 
Settlements 
Departments and Municipalities within specific regional 
areas which is a long way of saying the Asbestos Project but 
we need not go there.  I do not want to argue that point for 
you but this letter concerns the Asbestos Project.   
MR ZULU:  Yes I hope so.  It will be nice to know which 
letter was I responding to or I just – I will doubt if I just rock 
up and just wrote this letter surely, I might have been. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
If 
you 
want 
to 
read 
that 
letter 
to 
understand the context you can just take half a minute to 
read it. 
MR ZULU:  No I have read it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR ZULU:  I am just saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, you would like to see the letter that 
you are responding to. 
MR ZULU:  To get the right context before I wrote this one. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
MR ZULU:  Maybe I was responding to Mr Mokhesi’s enquiry 
of something which I am saying then it will give a better 
context for me to talk better on this letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well if you need to look at any other 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 80 of 219 
 
correspondence in order to answer the question, I am going 
to 
put 
to 
you 
of 
course 
we 
can 
try 
and 
find 
that 
correspondence. 
MR ZULU:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  For you. 
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But for the moment and it may be 
necessary to look at other correspondence but that is in 
relation to a different issue. 
MR ZULU:  Okay.  Alright. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  For the moment I just want to ask you 
to look at the last paragraph right.  It says: 
“Kindly be informed that the Free State Department of 
Human Settlements will be held liable for any financial 
implications or operations of the service provider.” 
In other words that the Free State Department has to foot 
the bill for the project.  Then it goes on to say and this is the 
part I want to put to you. 
“If need be you may have to revise your current business 
plan accordingly so as to be in line with the National 
20 
Treasury Regulations in order to achieve the objective.” 
That statement saying that you may have to revise your 
current business plans accordingly in order to comply with 
financial provisions or directives is what we are talking 
about.  Is that correct? 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 81 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:  Yes it is correct and again it confirms the point I 
made earlier that most probably if the letter that I might have 
been responding to will – will give me a better sense of why I 
had to mention this.  But I could have been reminding the 
Accounting Officer which is my responsibility at National that 
if you want to make any changes on your business plan first 
you must make sure that there is budget allocation for that.  
But 
secondly 
also 
to 
put 
into 
the 
responsibility 
and 
accountability for any changes we make that financially and 
budget wise they remain the sole responsibility of a 
10 
provincial department.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But they need your permission if a 
business plan is to be revised? 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Then if we can go to the 
same bundle at page 188 please – FS1, 188.   
MR ZULU:  This document is too faint I cannot read it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How is the lighting there Mr Zulu? 
MR ZULU:  It is not too good but I think it is document itself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is not good. 
20 
MR ZULU:  It is a small – it is a very small font and it is 
faint.  I do not know if you wanted to read it for me? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  My apologies.  I would like you 
please to go to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I just one second Mr Pretorius.  Will 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 82 of 219 
 
somebody speak to somebody I know I had said this light 
should be there and I know why they put it here but I wonder 
whether it is possible to get something.  I think this 
particular witness may be struggling to read some of the 
documents.  I do not know whether it is because of the poor 
quality of this specific letter it might be but, in the meantime, 
if something can be done about lighting for him that should 
be explored.  Mr Pretorius I interrupted you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair.  Mr Zulu is the light good 
enough for you to read? 
10 
MR ZULU:  No.  Actually, the problem is not with the light. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh it is the quality. 
MR ZULU:  It is the copy itself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay alright. 
MR ZULU:  It is the quality of the copy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay alright.  No at least if it is not the 
light that is fine. 
MR ZULU:  Thanks Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Well if necessary, we can 
assist you there.  This is a letter of appointment and it is a 
20 
letter of appointment of a joint venture by the – addressed 
by the Head of Department to the joint venture dated 1 
October 2014.  I just want to place that on record so that it is 
a letter that is important in the series of correspondence and 
documents to assist you Mr Zulu.  And if one goes to the 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 83 of 219 
 
next page that is Bundle FS8 page 189 one will see there a 
service level agreement.  The first page at least of a service 
level agreement.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  What page? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  189 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh the following page.  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  This is a service level agreement 
which on the face of it at page 189 was entered into between 
the Department of Human Settlements represented by Mr 
Nthimose Mokhesi in his capacity as Head of Department 
10 
and Blackhead Consulting PTY Ltd Joint Venture and 
represented by Edwin Sodi in his capacity as Chief Executive 
Officer the service provider.  That is the agreement which 
gave rise to the execution eventually of the Asbestos 
Project.  If you would turn then please to page 231 of the 
same bundle FS8 one will see another… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say we must move to another 
bundle? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No FS8 same bundle page 231. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You have it in front of you? 
MR ZULU:  Yes, yes I do. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you.  Mr Zulu would you just 
look at the email at the foot of the page it appears that it 
was an email addressed from your office from Thabani Zulu 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 84 of 219 
 
on Wednesday 26 November 2014 to HODHS that is the 
Head of Department Human Settlements – Free State Human 
Settlements.gov.za.  And the subject matter is Revised 
Business Plans for the Department of Human Settlements 
Free State.  It appears then to be an email addressed by you 
to Mr Mokhesi.  Do I have it correctly? 
MR ZULU:  Yes Chair.  Yes, yes Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Would you like to take a moment to 
look at it?  It is not very long. 
MR ZULU:  No I have already done that. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  It says: 
“Dear HOD please be informed that one of your items in the 
revised business plan for Human Settlements Development 
Projects relate to asbestos challenges in the Free State.  I 
therefore would like you to provide my office as to why this 
item should receive priority as suggested in your revised 
business 
plan 
preferably 
before 
the 
end 
of 
business 
tomorrow at 27 November 2014.  Warm regards Mr Thabani 
Zulu.” 
You recall that communication? 
20 
MR ZULU:  This communication it is in 2014.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your voice… 
MR ZULU:  I can only say Chair.  I can only say Chair 
because it is not signed by me so I can only … 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 85 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  I can only say that probably. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I. 
MR ZULU:  That is 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you able – are you saying you are not 
able to remember sending this email but you are not 
necessarily saying you did not send it?  You do not have 
enough context to know whether you sent it, is that what you 
are saying? 
MR ZULU:  I could have the context I am just saying Sir it is 
10 
2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry. 
MR ZULU:  I am just saying it is 2014. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  So most probably I would have sent such an 
email. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  Based again on what … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  Unfortunately when you jump into… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  Correspondence like this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:   It would have, an event that would have 
happened. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 86 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  Oh. 
MR ZULU:  That will give context to this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay. 
MR ZULU:  Now I can only make assumptions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  That most probably … 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I understand what you say. 
MR ZULU:  Most probably there was a revised business plan 
I will make that assumption. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR ZULU:  Which needed the attention of the Director 
General. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  So you – you … 
MR ZULU:  Upon which – upon which you needed to check 
the relevance of the revised business plan. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So at this stage you are only able to say 
on the face of it. 
MR ZULU:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It seems like an email I would have sent. 
MR ZULU:  Probably absolutely Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I cannot be more definite than that. 
MR ZULU:  Ja absolutely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And it would be consistent I presume 
with the evidence that you have given in some detail Mr Zulu 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 87 of 219 
 
that if there is a need for an amended business plan that has 
to be approved by the National Department under your 
authority as Accounting Officer you would have to be 
properly informed in relation to the reasons or the motivation 
for the revised business plan. 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And it would make sense therefore 
and this email is consistent with your evidence it appears 
that your office needs to have full information before it can 
approve an amended business plan.  Am I correct? 
10 
MR ZULU:  Correct.  Correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Well this – this was 
answered and we can turn the page to page 232.  This is a 
long document which is sent to you – in fact I do not want to 
mislead anybody this is not a long document it is four pages 
and in the context of this commission that is not long at all.  
But if you would go to page 232 please.  This is a document 
which appears to be addressed to you Mr Zulu as Director 
General of Department of Human Settlements and it is 
apparently at least on the face of it at page 235 signed by Mr 
20 
Mokhesi in his capacity as HOD Human Settlements on the 
27 November 2014.  That is the day after the letter that 
appears at 231 or the email that at page 231.  Is that 
correct? 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 88 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And it says in the first paragraph: 
“Your email of 26 November refers.” 
And then it goes on to motivate the reasons for the Asbestos 
Project and it highlights the fact that the Free State Province 
has a significant number of pre-1994 houses roofed with 
asbestos.  Majority are in an appalling condition structurally 
not sound, almost at the point of collapse.  It then goes on to 
deal with the health dangers, the dangers to human health of 
asbestos and in essence is a motivation for the introduction 
of the project relating to asbestos identification and removal.  
10 
Is that a fair summary? 
MR ZULU:  Yes it is. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  You go over the page please 
and look at the paragraph two thirds down the page or just 
after halfway it say: 
“The objective of the project is twofold.  First bullet: 
Quantify, audit and assess the number of houses roofed with 
asbestos sheets and  
Second bullet. 
Remove 
and 
dispose 
asbestos 
to 
an 
approved 
and 
20 
accredited disposal site.” 
It continues. 
“The rate will be to conduct door to door assessment at 
R850.00 per house excluding VAT.” 
You see that? 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 89 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:  Yes correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It goes on to say: 
“All asbestos will be removed and disposed of as laid out in 
the Occupational Health and Safety Act and Regulation 85 of 
1993.” 
That was the representation that was made to you in this  
Business plan – amended business plan.  You wish to 
comment? 
MR ZULU:  That is what it is yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It was told to you in other words a 
10 
representation was made to you by Mr Mokhesi. 
“All asbestos will be removed and disposed of as laid out in 
the Occupational Health and Safety Act and Regulations 85 
of 1993.” 
That is what you were told. 
MR ZULU:  Yes but… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  That is in terms of the process of doing the 
project. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, no I understand that. 
20 
MR ZULU:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I understand that that is what… 
MR ZULU:  That is the overall… 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Is told to you the project involved. 
MR ZULU:  That is the overall objective Chair. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 90 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  But of course, it has got phases of how you go 
about doing that.  You do not just wake up and remove 
asbestos – there is a process. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes of course. 
MR ZULU:  But the overall objective is exactly what you are 
alluding to Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But importantly you are being asked 
for your approval. 
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And in – before you give it you quite 
properly, I might add ask for full information. 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  As to this project because you are 
going to take a very important decision to allow this project 
and amend the budget for it. 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct. 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  To amend the allocations within the 
20 
budget. 
MR ZULU:  Correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Correct.  The – what you are told 
continues.  It says: 
“The above rate includes the following:” 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 91 of 219 
 
Now the rate you are given here is R850.00 per house right.  
The above rate includes the following. 
Submitting a works plan to an improved inspection authority 
of approval. 
Notifying the Department of Labour in writing of our intention 
to remove and dispose contaminated rubble asbestos.” 
Over the page at page 235. 
“Contract the service of an approved inspection authority for 
the purpose of air monitoring. 
Supply experienced medically fit staff and supervision for the 
10 
purpose of removal. 
The supply of all safety equipment and relevant PPE which 
we now know is Personal Protective Equipment. 
Cordon off the area to be stripped and place relevant 
signage. 
Transport of the asbestos to a registered disposal site. 
Disposal cost of the asbestos. 
All relevant paperwork pertaining to health and safety 
legislation.” 
Well the point is that what Mr Mokhesi was saying to you in 
20 
the plan that you requested before you approved what you 
had to approve that is the reallocation of funds within the 
budget to allow the project to take place.  You were told that 
the rate of R850.00 per house included the lawful disposal, 
removal and disposal of the asbestos.  That is what this 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 92 of 219 
 
communication appears to say to you. 
MR ZULU:  I think Mr Mokhesi would be better placed to give 
that context. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes he can… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry. 
MR ZULU:  I was saying – I was saying Chair.  I think the 
HOD who wrote this is better placed to give a context in 
terms of the pricing structure of the project. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but what Mr Pretorius… 
MR ZULU:  I do not assume that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  What Mr Pretorius is asking is your own 
understanding of what he was saying because you were to 
approve. 
MR ZULU:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  His motivating to you if there is something 
you do not understand you are not going to approve? 
MR ZULU:  Yes Chair but… 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
So 
he 
is 
saying, 
was 
this 
your 
understanding of what he is saying? 
MR ZULU:  What I am saying Chair is that the context of 
20 
pricing for the project has got – I will assume it had different 
phases.  So I would not say it is all inclusive in terms of the 
pricing structure.  I would not know that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  So I am saying the HOD is the Accounting Officer 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 93 of 219 
 
is better placed to give context into what this pricing meant. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but from your side was the question of 
pricing not one of the things that you would want to make 
sure you understood clearly. 
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before you could give your approval. 
MR ZULU:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR ZULU:  But that will be – that will be in the detail of the 
project itself. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  If you hear what I am saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  Because every project it has got different 
phases. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  So that will be in the detail of the project.  I am 
not – that is why I am saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  The best placed person is the Accounting Officer.  
20 
For me this was too high level if I were to put it to you that 
way. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Mr Pretorius. 
MR ZULU:  So I would not like to interpret what the HOD 
meant with this. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 94 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Pretorius might think differently.  
Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well let us just as you fairly require 
some context.  You have said to Mr Mokhesi of the Free 
State look you are responsible for the costs in this matter. 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If you need to amend your business 
plan to comply with the treasury requirements you must tell 
me.  That is correct. 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You then on the – it is apparent from 
this email on the 26 November say to him – listen I want 
your motivation. 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Because you asking me to do 
something, I need to understand your motivation. 
MR ZULU:  Correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  He gives you the motivation and, in 
that motivation,, he tells you Mr Zulu the flat rate of R850.00 
per house includes all these issues set out on page 234 and 
20 
235 of FS8.  That is what he tells you. 
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  He is making to you a representation 
and the purpose of that representation and the purpose of 
this whole document is to convince you to do what you have 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 95 of 219 
 
to do.  Correct? 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So why I am putting this to you is 
you were the recipient of this representation. 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the representation is not too 
difficult to understand, Mr Zulu, it says: 
“The 
rate 
will 
be 
to 
conduct 
door-to-door 
assessment at R850 per house.” 
It then goes on to say: 
10 
“The above unit rate…” 
And there is only one unit rate above. 
“…includes the following.” 
So clearly what he is telling you – and I am not sure that it 
needs much debate or further context, what he is telling 
you is that for R850 per unit all this work is going to be 
done, correct? 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just to make sure that we are all on the 
same page, I understand your answer when you say yes to 
20 
that question, you say you are agreeing that what Mr 
Mokhesi is telling you here is that that rate of R850 per 
house excluding VAT includes all the items which are listed 
next to the various bullets points on pages 234 and 235.  
We are on the same page on that?  Is that what he is 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 96 of 219 
 
saying? 
MR ZULU:    With the proviso that the person who is 01.34. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, your understanding of what 
he is saying, that is what Mr Pretorius wants. 
MR ZULU:    My understanding. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Your understanding, when you read this. 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And when you read it now. 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You have a different understanding from 
10 
the one that Mr Pretorius and I have. 
MR ZULU:    No, I do not, Chair, but if you are asking a 
further question to say is this what was meant by Mr 
Mogese?  Then that is a different question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but your understanding is same as 
ours? 
MR ZULU:    At a face value, yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that this is what he means. 
MR ZULU:    At a face value, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If he comes here and says something 
20 
else then we will deal with it then. 
MR ZULU:    Exactly, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Zulu, in fairness we will ask him 
what he meant but for the moment we are interested in 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 97 of 219 
 
what you read. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, on the face of it, I cannot see it 
meaning anything else because it says: 
“The above unit rate includes the following” 
And the only above unit rate that he talks about on that 
page is R850 per unit but of course when he comes, we 
might 
not 
know, 
he 
might 
say 
no, 
no, 
you 
all 
I 
misunderstand me, this is what I meant and then we take it 
from there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Zulu you 
10 
were given an opportunity …[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:    Are we still on the same page? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am sorry? 
MR ZULU:    Are we on the same page? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Leave it there for the moment. 
MR ZULU:    Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You may want to go back to it. 
MR ZULU:    Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, he has limited space, maybe that 
is the reason why he is asking. 
20 
MR ZULU:    Where am I going – which one am I at now? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   If you are moving to another one he 
could take it off for the time being and he would bring it 
back when he needs it. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 98 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair, we are going to have to 
deal with both so there will be some toing or froing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But we share the same challenges, 
this podium is not the most convenient, nor is yours. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Even myself I have limited space. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Be that as it may, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You were given an opportunity by 
the investigators to deal with this document and so I would 
10 
just want to refer you …[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:    Which document, Chair?  Which document are 
we at? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The document that you have just 
…[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:    Oh this one? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    Oh, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And it is a document that was 
presented 
to 
you 
when 
you 
were 
speaking 
to 
the 
20 
investigators. 
MR ZULU:    Let me …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just repeat which document you are 
talking about, Mr… 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 99 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it the letter, the motivation?  The 
motivation letter from the Free State HOD? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, it is the document which 
appears at page 232, Free State 8 or FS8.  That document 
that we have just discussed. 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think it is in the bundle that you have 
put further away from you. 
MR ZULU:    Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That you put away. 
10 
MR ZULU:    Does he need to take – to bring it back, Mr 
Pretorius, to answer? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, he does not need it at the 
moment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Just to confirm that the document 
that we have just been talking about authored by Mr 
Mokhesi  and sent to you and its contents were put to you 
in a consultation that you had with the investigators. 
MR ZULU:    Yes, Chair, if I may just… 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    I am not sure consultation, what it means, but 
in the context of consultation …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, you had a meeting/interview with the 
investigators. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 100 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:    I have never met the investigators. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You have never met them. 
MR ZULU:    I have only submitted and affidavit to the 
investigators. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR ZULU:    So I have never interacted with any of the 
investigators up to today. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, you are quite correct this was 
done in written communication. 
MR ZULU:    Correct, .That is why I wanted to get a sense 
10 
of the context of [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, you are absolutely right, my 
apologies, Mr Zulu.  If you could go to bundle 1, FS1 at 
page 210. 
MR ZULU:    Yes, I am there, 210. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And perhaps to assist you, Mr 
Zulu, we should deal first with the paragraph here that 
talks 
about 
the 
communication 
that 
preceded 
that 
motivation of Mr Mokhesi to you but before we do so 
perhaps, we had better identify the whole document.   
20 
 
You recall that next to your second affidavit was a 
series of questions and answers.  The questions came from 
the Commission and the answers came from you. 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
This 
question 
and 
answer 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 101 of 219 
 
document annexed to your second affidavit, the whole of 
the document that I am now referring to.  It appears in FS1 
at page 204.   
MR ZULU:    Yes, I am there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You have that.  That, on the face of 
it, is a letter dated 14 May 2020 addressed to Mr Thabani 
Zulu on the letterhead of the Commission. 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you will see, for example, in 
paragraph 2 it says: 
10 
“We have noticed that there are other issues or 
there are other matters that you should address in 
your affidavit which issues are not included therein.  
In this regard we request the following information  
from you.” 
And then several questions are asked. 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the answers to those 
questions were inserted by you or by those representing 
you in italics in blue after each question, correct? 
20 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right.  So that is the context of 
what I would like to put to you now.  If you could go please 
to page 210 of the same document – perhaps we should 
take one step prior to that, page 209, paragraph 2.14.  Do 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 102 of 219 
 
you see that? 
MR ZULU:    Yes, I am there, thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The question there relates to a 
document 7.  Now I can tell you, we do not need to go 
there, but I can tell you that document 7 is the email that 
you sent on the 26 November.  Would you like to comment 
on this document?  Would you like to check that? 
MR ZULU:    Just go to the paragraph on page 209 that you 
are referring to? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   209, 2.14, it says document 7, 
10 
would you like to comment on this document.  Now I am 
just saying to you, Mr Zulu, to save some time that that 
document is the document at page 231 of bundle 8 and it 
becomes apparent in your later answer so you can trust me 
on that. 
MR ZULU:    Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you were asked on that 
document and you say: 
“The contents of the email are self-explanatory in 
that it poses a single and germane question to the 
20 
head of department of the Free State Human 
Settlements department namely, why its project 
relating to the asbestos challenges in the Free 
State should receive the priority suggested in the 
department’s revised business plan.” 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 103 of 219 
 
Right? 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And then if you go over the page to 
paragraph 2.15, document 8, would you like to comment on 
this document, you say: 
“It is the response to my email dated 26 November 
2014 being document 7.” 
Now that response was put to you in this series of 
questions and document 8 is the motivation concerning 
which you have answered some questions. 
10 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It is the document that appears in 
bundle FS8 at 232.  It was also given to you as part of the 
questions. 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right?  And you were asked: 
“As per document 8…” 
You are asked: 
“What will the cost  be of the project?” 
And your answer appear here to be: 
20 
R850 per house excluding VAT.” 
MR ZULU:    Yes, Chair, as per the motivation submitted. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In other words what you are saying 
to the investigators or the Commission is what you were 
told by Mr Mokhesi. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 104 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:    As per that document that we spoke about 
earlier on. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   As per that document. 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, as per document, I am sorry 
interrupted you. 
MR ZULU:    At the face value of it, yes, ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then 24, 10.15.2: 
“As per document 8, what service will they be 
rendering?” 
10 
And your answer to that is: 
“The specific services recorded at page 3 and 4.” 
So in answer to the question in relation to what services 
would be rendered in terms of that document you quite 
correctly, I might add, refer to the services that we have 
just spoken about on page 234 and 235 of FS8 or pages 3 
and 4 of the document.  That is what you say. 
MR ZULU:    Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Pretorius, I think we are at one 
o’clock.  Shall we take the lunch adjournment? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or do you want to complete something? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, we can happily take the long 
adjournment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  We will take the lunch break and 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 105 of 219 
 
resume at two o’clock.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES:   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us continue. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you, Chair.  Mr Zulu, just to 
finish of the first topic that we were dealing with.  If you 
would look at... under FS1 at page 210.   
 
We are going to return to the answers that you gave in 
writing to the questions that were put to you by the 
Commission’s investigators, and if I can take you to 
10 
paragraph 2.1.5, please, on page 210? 
MR ZULU:  [No audible reply]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The document being referred to there 
is the motivation presented to you at your request on the 
27t h of November 2014 by Mr Mokhesi.   
 
And 2.15.1 you were asked:  “What will the cost be of 
the project?”  And your answer was: “R 850,00 per house 
excluding VAT”.  That is consistent with your previous 
answers. 
MR ZULU:  Yes, Chair.  And that is an answer that was 
20 
provided by the head of the department of... that of 
Department of Free State.  So that ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  And that is the information that 
was given to you? 
MR ZULU:  From that, yes. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 106 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In order to persuade you to make a 
decision? 
MR ZULU:  In order to agree with the revised business plan. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then 2.15.2:  “As per Document 
8, what service will they be rendering?”  “The specific 
services as recorded at pages 3 and 4.”  And those are the 
services are adjacent to the bullets that we went through 
before the long adjournment? 
10 
MR ZULU:  Yes, again provided by the actual head, Free 
State. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Information provided to you on 
which you relied? 
MR ZULU:  It was not a complete information at this stage 
Mr Pretorius.  Let me maybe state that.  This was the first 
motivation that was submitted which were needed at a high-
level to agree on the revised business plan. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  So...[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:  So there could have been more information that 
20 
the actual HOD would have had at his disposal that may 
have not been part of this first information. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No, I understand. 
MR ZULU:  Yes ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But on the face of it, what we see 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 107 of 219 
 
before us, is a request by you on the 26t h of November for a 
particular motivation.   
 
You have received it and you demanded it by the 27t h.  
You have received it by the 27t h and that contains certain 
information which is communicated to you.  That much is 
clear.   
MR ZULU:  The point I am making Chair is that the 
information provided by the HOD, as per the revised 
business plan, may not have all the information about the 
project itself but this is the information that was given to me 
10 
...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  ...at a face value. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but I think the... I think the point that 
Mr Pretorius seeks to make and wants to see what comment 
you have on it is that you asked for certain information 
...[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  This is what was provided. 
MR ZULU:  Correct Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  And if what was provided was not adequate 
for your purposes to make whatever decision you needed to 
make, you would indicate. 
MR ZULU:  In any event Chairperson, once the plan is 
revised there are then other follow-ups. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 108 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  When then, in any event, have a responsibility to 
check the business plan. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  So the point I am making. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja? 
MR ZULU:  This could have not been the only information 
that overall was available. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  So I am trying to make that to be clearly 
10 
understood. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay Mr Pretorius. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  You required information.  
The information was given to you but finally you gave your 
approval. 
MR ZULU:  Just repeat that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You required information. 
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The information was given to you.  
We have been through that information. 
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You must have taken that information 
into account in finally giving your approval? 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 109 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:  Correct.  Correct, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In summary then in relation to the 
questions that we have been dealing with and your evidence 
Mr Zulu.  Your intervention or your approval in your capacity 
as HO... sorry, Director General National Human Settlements 
was necessary and approval was given. 
MR ZULU:  It is a required process as I have explained 
earlier Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay is your answer yes? 
MR ZULU:  Yes, you see ...[intervenes] ‘ 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because they could not proceed without 
your approval? 
MR ZULU:  Yes, that is what I said earlier.  That is what I am 
trying to say, I have explained how they... the business plan 
at national level works.  And in the process of changes, what 
is also required in terms of the process. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, no, no.  That is fine. 
MR ZULU:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think Mr Pretorius just wanted you to 
confirm his understanding. 
20 
MR ZULU:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That your approval was required, it was 
necessary and it was granted. 
MR ZULU:  Yes, correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 110 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I would like to move to a different 
topic if I may Mr Zulu?   
MR ZULU:  [No audible reply]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And that is, Blackhead’s appointment 
...[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:  Which page? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  ...and by Blackhead, I mean 
Blackhead Consulting (Pty) Limited. 
MR ZULU:  On which page is it? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am sorry?   
10 
MR ZULU:  On which page? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You can put that away for the 
moment.   
MR ZULU:  Sorry? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You can put that away that document. 
MR ZULU:  Oh, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So I would like to move to a different 
topic if I may?   
MR ZULU:  [No audible reply]  
And that concerns the procurement process that preceded 
20 
the appointment of the joint venture in the Free State.  But it 
is necessary to go back a stage to what happened in 
Gauteng. 
 
The issue that needs clarification is the nature of 
Blackhead’s appointment in Gauteng, and by Blackhead, I 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 111 of 219 
 
mean Blackhead Consulting (Pty) Limited, not the joint 
venture. 
 
Do you recall that Blackhead Consulting (Pty) Limited 
provided services to the Gauteng Department of Human 
Settlements? 
MR ZULU:  As was informed and requested by the HOD of 
the Free State, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  And we will come to the 
...[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:  The request... Chair, just to be specific.  The 
10 
request that was made by the HOD to revise the business 
plan was in line with the work that Blackhead was doing in 
Gauteng.  So that is the context I am giving. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, sure.  Well, the correspondence 
that we are going to go through in a minute Mr Zulu is not 
entirely clear and let me just ask if you can recall.  The 
appointment 
of 
Blackhead 
Consulting 
(Pty) 
Limited 
in 
Gauteng, what was that appointment?   
 
Was it an appointment to a panel of service provides?  
Was it an appointment arising out of the panel of service 
20 
providers to do particular work?  Was it an individual 
appointment of the company?  What was it? 
MR ZULU:  To the appointment of Blackhead by Free State 
or by Gauteng? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  By Gauteng. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 112 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:  Yes, it was done by Gauteng, Chair.  So I would 
not be involved with the appointment of the company in 
department where I am not accountable for.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but I think ...[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:  So I cannot be responsible for it internally. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, I think Mr Pretorius simply seeks 
your understanding of what the position was in terms of 
how... what was Blackhead was appointed by Gauteng to do 
because the Free State Human Settlements Department 
sought to rely on the fact that Blackhead had been appointed 
10 
in Gauteng to do whatever and they sought to rely on that to 
say, “We are not going to go to open tender”.   
 
Now from what you have told me, this project, it would 
seem, would never have gone ahead if it did not had your 
approval as well? 
MR ZULU:  Not necessarily Chair.  Let me explain. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ja.  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  My responsibilities as the National Director 
General of Human Settlements is when you want to revise 
your business plan. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  You see the necessary approval.  Amongst those 
approvals is to consult the National Department.  The 
appointments of service providers at a provincial level, is not 
the responsibility of the accounting officer at national level. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 113 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay no, it is ...[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:  So let us be clear about that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.  That is fine. 
MR ZULU:  ....so that we do not confuse it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine.  I think that ...[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:  I do think ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  But I think that... from my point of view, I 
need that clarification. 
MR ZULU:  I do not have jurisdiction in the provincial 
departments for the appointments and all of that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.  I think everybody understand 
that.  But you see, you have indicated that this kind of 
project... there was... you used the word joint... joint... 
between the joint, I think, corporation, joint approval or 
whatever between the national department and the provincial 
department.  In the morning, you used that word.   
 
So there needs to be some approval by the HOD in 
regard to a project in his department but there is also 
approval necessary in regard to certain things about such a 
project from yourself.   
20 
 
And my understanding, and you must just tell me again if 
I misunderstood, my understanding is, if the HOD for the 
Free State Human Settlements Department had thought that 
this was a good project, they should pursue it. 
 
But you did not provide your approval for the change of 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 114 of 219 
 
the business plan and so on and so my understanding is that 
it would not have been able to go ahead.  So am I... do I 
misunderstand the position? 
MR ZULU:  No, Chair.  What I am saying is.  I do not appoint 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.  Do not tell me what you want 
to tell me. 
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am asking you a specific question.  I 
have just told you what I understood your evidence to be. 
10 
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is my understanding correct or not of what 
you said? 
MR ZULU:  It is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is correct.  Okay.  Then we can 
...[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:  I cannot approve the business plan. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no.  We can take it step-by-step. 
MR ZULU:  Okay Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That part is correct. 
20 
MR ZULU:  Okay Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR ZULU:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if you did not approve the change of 
the 
business 
plan, 
could 
the 
provincial 
department, 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 115 of 219 
 
nevertheless, proceed with the project? 
MR ZULU:  If they would have done so Chair, they would 
have done it un-procedurally. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which would not be permissible? 
MR ZULU:  Exactly Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So they could not properly or lawfully 
proceed with the project without your approval of the 
business plan at least? 
MR ZULU:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
10 
MR ZULU:  But that does not stop them.  That is the point I 
am trying to make Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No, let us deal with it. 
MR ZULU:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That does not stop them from doing what? 
MR ZULU:  From continuing with the project irrespective of 
my decision not to approve the revised business plan. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But ...[intervenes]  
20 
MR ZULU:  But if they were to do so, they would do so 
incorrectly or un-procedurally. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but ...[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:  If for somebody from the accounting office, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes, but what we are talking about is.  
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 116 of 219 
 
In terms of what they are supposed to do in terms of the 
government procedures and authorities and the laws and the 
regulations, they could not proceed ...[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...if they did not have your approval of the 
change of the plan of the business plan? 
MR ZULU:  Correct Chair.  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They could not proceed in a regular way? 
MR ZULU:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They would be doing something irregular? 
10 
MR ZULU:  Correct.  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright.  Mr Pretorius, I hope I have 
contributed to the understanding of the position? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, thank you Chair.  In fact, Mr 
Zulu summarises it quite well himself.  If I can just put to 
you? 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs]   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In Free State 1208, you say... if you 
want to look at it, you are quite welcome to do that.  You say 
in relation to a particular document, you say: 
20 
“It 
is 
not 
within 
my 
scope 
of 
authority 
and 
responsibilities to have become involved in a matter 
between a provincial department and its service 
provider...” 
 
That is clear on your evidence that the... many of the 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 117 of 219 
 
steps required for appointment of a service provider in a 
province is up to the provincial department.  That much we 
agree on.  Correct? 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You go on to say: 
“As a force head my intervention would only be 
required if my approval was required for revision of 
the business plan and budget of the provincial 
department in question...” 
 
Now in this case we know that your approval was 
10 
required and asked for it and given. 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  I think your answer was “correct”. 
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not think it was captured because 
...[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR ZULU:  The approval of the revised business plan. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If we can then move onto another 
topic and that is the procurement process that preceded the 
appointment 
of 
the 
joint 
venture 
involving 
Blackhead 
Consulting (Pty) Limited.  Would you go please to FS8 page 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 118 of 219 
 
110? 
MR ZULU:  [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you... bundle FS8? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  FS8 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
MR ZULU:  Sorry, page Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Page 110. 
MR ZULU:  Yes? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Please help us clarify Mr Zulu.  The 
letter that appears on this page appears to be signed by 
10 
yourself as Director General of the Department of Human 
Settlements, the National Department. 
 
It is dated 7t h of April 2014, it appears.  And it is 
addressed to Mr Edwin Sodi of Blackhead Consulting (Pty) 
Limited.  So far we are in agreement I presume? 
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Would you look at it, please?  
Because quite simple, it is not clear from the letter what you 
said here.  The title of the letter reads: 
“Letter of Notification.  Appointment of Professional 
20 
Resource Teams (PRT’s) to a Departmental Panel for 
Provincial 
and 
Municipal 
Planning 
and 
Implementation Support to the Human Settlements 
Departments and Municipalities with the specific 
regional areas...” 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 119 of 219 
 
 
The question I would like to put to you and by reference 
to the document, perhaps you can answer.  This appointment 
of Blackhead Consulting (Pty) Limited was it an appointment 
nationally or was it confined to a particular province? 
MR ZULU:  Chair, it is quite, again, a very old appointment 
but I would assume because it is seen by myself, this would 
be an appointment at national. 
 
And the reason for that would be as simple as, I do not 
have jurisdiction to appoint any service provider at a 
provincial level.  So this would be my submission right now. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Hm. 
MR ZULU:  A national appointment.  And if I look at the title 
of this letter, it will be only but one service provider.  It will 
be a combination of different service provides.  All form part 
of the... of your PRT’s ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  A panel. 
MR ZULU:  A panel at international level.  So I would 
assume if I were to go back and check the records of the 
department, this will not have not been the only company 
that is appointed to be part of the PRT’s.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m-h’m. 
MR ZULU:  But that will be inclination for now. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But what your... what you say Mr 
Zulu, it does appear to be consistent with what appears in 
the paragraph which follows the title because it says you did, 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 120 of 219 
 
dated 6 November 2013: 
“...for appointment of professional resource teams 
(plural) 
to 
a 
departmental 
panel 
has 
been 
accepted...”   
 
And then I skip a line.   
“...has been accepted by the Department of Human 
Settlements...”   
 
So it seems that what you say about this being a 
national arrangement is correct. 
MR ZULU:  Yes.  Yes, it is correct Chair. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you.  The contractual 
arrangements relating to the appointment of this particular 
panel, and I am talking about the panel and not any 
instruction to perform work which might have emanated from 
the appointment to a panel, those would be available, I 
presume, in the national department.  The records in relation 
to this, not in the Gauteng department. 
MR ZULU:  Chair, it will depend.  At national level it will be a 
different system that we use for this and for provincial 
departments.  Again, they have their own authorities.  So we 
20 
appear at that level as well.  So this is only for national 
purposes.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  But of course, provincial departments may have 
an access to that information. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 121 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, they may have access to it but 
the questions simple is that the records would ordinarily be 
kept in relation to national arrangements in the national 
office. 
MR ZULU:  Correct.  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Okay.  If I could you take please to 
another document in FS1.  Sorry, you are going to have to 
put that away and refer to FS1.  And if you would go please 
to page 214.9.   
MR ZULU:  Sorry, what page? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  2149, did you say? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair, if you would bear with me a 
moment, please? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Because these documents have been 
added to the bundle and I am not sure whether they have 
been filed in your bundle.  So I may just have to just 
...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, that is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  ...look for them elsewhere.  Chair, 
the copy I have it may be repeated elsewhere in the 
documentation.  So if you could just give me a moment, 
please? 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 122 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  [No audible reply]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Chair, can I... may I ask if you have 
pages 214.1 to page 214... well, it goes onto 214.19. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [No audible reply]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  This document is the settlement 
affidavit of Mr Zulu, yet another copy...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I have got ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  ...but it has all the annexures, the 
documents that were presented to Mr Zulu as part of the 
questions placed to him by the Commission. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I have got pages 214.1 to 2.1, 4.19.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, and they are not very legible I 
am afraid.  I tried to get more legible copies because they 
are all in .doc on the background. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, on the whole I think I am able to... 
well, maybe those that have got numbers or figures might 
be... but a lot of them that are somewhere in the first half of 
the document appear to be legible to me.  But as you move 
further then some are maybe difficult to read. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.  We may be able to help Chair.  
20 
We have found another copy of that particular document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  If you would go please Mr Zulu to 
FS8 page 169. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was the page on FS8? 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 123 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  169 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Have you got that document Mr Zulu? 
MR ZULU:  Yes, I do. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That is the same document and you 
can check it if you wish, as Document 8 given to you in the 
questions by the Commission to which you answered in that 
document annexed to your affidavit.  That document appears 
at... under 1214.14.  It is the same document.  Are you 
happy to accept that? 
10 
MR ZULU:  Is it the same as the document that I 
...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Give us a moment, please. 
MR ZULU:  No, it does not look the same. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I might have been given the wrong 
document.  Let us just pause there, please.  In any event, let 
us deal with the document at 169 of Bundle 8.   
 
And I will just ask the legal team that are behind me to 
just find the document that was in the bundle given to you. 
 
This is a letter addressed to the CEO dated the 
20 
19t h of June 2014.  And it says... it is addressed to the CEO 
of Blackhead Consulting (Pty) Limited.   
 
It is dated the 19 t h of June 2014 and it is addressed to 
the CEO of Blackhead Consulting (Pty) Limited by Mr 
Mokhesi who we know is the Head of the Department Human 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 124 of 219 
 
Settlements, Free State at the time. 
 
And he says: 
“The above has reference to your proposal submitted 
to this department...” 
 
And we will get there if necessary. 
“...and your appointment by the National Department 
of Human Settlements...” 
 
So it seems what you say is consistent that the original 
appointment of Blackhead was a national appointment, not a 
provincial appointment. 
10 
MR ZULU:  [No audible reply]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It is consistent with your evidence. 
MR ZULU:  Yes, Chair.  But I would not know the context of 
the... of this letter.  So if you say it is consistent.  I am not 
sure in which context was this letter been written by 
...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well, it goes on to say in paragraph 
1, Mr Mokhesi says: 
“Your department...” 
 
And I presume he is referring to his own department: 
20 
“...wishes to extent your current contracts secured by 
the National Department of Human Settlements in 
line with Treasury Regulations 16A 6.6 of 2005...” 
 
Correct?  That is what it says. 
MR ZULU:  [No audible reply]  
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 125 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So we know from your evidence that, 
according to the correspondence at least, and I am not 
taking it further than what you have read, according to the 
correspondence in the documentation at least, Blackhead 
was appointed nationally as part of a panel.  So far, we are 
in agreement? 
MR ZULU:  Yes, Chair.  But let me contextualise it once 
again.  But when Blackhead was being considered by the 
Free State Department of Human Settlements to do the work 
for the asbestos, I did not use this appointment that was 
10 
done by the national department for the panel. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Forgive me.  I have not heard that. 
MR ZULU:  I want to give that context earlier so that there is 
no confusion because they have used the Gauteng process. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright. 
MR ZULU:  So I wanted to be clear.  So this would not have 
been applicable in the usage because the terms of reference 
for the panel and for asbestos were two different things.  I 
just want to give that clarity so that it is... the information is 
not misconstrued.   
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright. 
MR ZULU:  That is my understanding.  I did not write this 
letter but I am just trying to interpret what I said already. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  H’m? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No, we understand Mr Zulu. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 126 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am happy to do that Mr Zulu and we 
will go through it at a pace that I have been... we can all 
understand and it does not impose any pressure on you. 
MR ZULU:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But as I understand your answer.  
You say, “Yes, there was a national appointment but that was 
not the appointment relevant to the procurement process 
which followed”. 
MR ZULU:  Yes, as I have explained Chair.  The appointment 
that you are referring you is an appointment of different 
10 
service providers to a panel not to do any work by the 
national department, not any work.  It is to be appointed 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Just to get onto the panel. 
MR ZULU:  Just to get on... and it ends there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then you might be on the panel for a 
whole year, you get no work. 
MR ZULU:  Absolutely. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or you might get work. 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No but had this happen in relation to 
a later answer Mr Zulu.  When the letter at FS8 110 refers to 
a bid and a bid being accepted, and we are not talking about 
a contractual arrangement relevant to what happened later 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 127 of 219 
 
when the contract was transferred or when the Free State 
participated in the contract. 
MR ZULU:    So just help me, Mr Pretorius, which letter are 
you referring to that talks about a bid? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   8. 
MR ZULU:    The one that I sent? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   FS8, 110, the one you sent, you 
said it referred to a national procurement process. 
MR ZULU:    The one for the panel? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
10 
MR ZULU:    Yes, it refers to a panel appointed by the 
national department. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct, yes. 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And anything that is said in this 
letter about bids would apply to that national appointment. 
MR ZULU:    That is why I am saying, Chair, it depends n 
the writer, what was the contents of raising this in this 
fashion.  I would not be able to give context to that 
because I did not write that letter. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, that is fine, but you did say 
…[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:    But I am just …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You did say very clearly – sorry, I 
interrupted you and perhaps I should not have.  Do you 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 128 of 219 
 
want to finish your answer? 
MR ZULU:    Yes.  I was saying the bid that I referred to 
and the letters, not just one letter, that were written to 
different service providers to become the members of the 
panel, that was done by national department but they were 
not appointed to do any specific work for the national 
department until such time that there is a need for their 
services, a normal procurement process will follow. 
 
So, as far as I am concerned, that is where it ended 
with 
my 
responsibility 
at 
national 
level. 
 
Obviously, 
10 
accounting when they do their work they check certain 
things, they do certain things, I am not aware of that 
because that is outside my scope.  I am talking about 
something that has fallen within my scope in terms of the 
letter that you are referring to. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, but you did answer further to 
say that the contract in which Free State participated was 
a Gauteng contract and not a national contract. 
MR 
ZULU: 
 
 
 
That 
was 
my 
understanding. 
 
My 
understanding was …[intervenes] 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, okay, that is fine, we are on 
the same page so far, perhaps. 
MR ZULU:    But the point I am trying to clarify, Chair, so 
that we are not lost, the application of 16.A it has nothing 
to do with the national department, I just want to make that 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 129 of 219 
 
point clear. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So anything that is said in this 
letter in relation to bids and procurement processes does 
not apply to the 16A process that we will talk about later. 
MR ZULU:    Which letter are you talking about now? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am sorry? 
MR ZULU:    There are two letters, which one are you 
talking about? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The one on page 110 of FS8. 
MR ZULU:    The one that I personally did? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    That one was only for the panel, it has 
nothing to do with appointing a service provider to do the 
work on this project. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now when you appoint a panel do 
you go through a competitive bidding process? 
MR ZULU:    Correct but you are in a panel, you are not 
appointed to do any specific work. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So the appointment to the panel 
referred to in 110 is not the contractual arrangement in 
20 
which Free State participated, that was another Gauteng 
appointment. 
MR ZULU:    The panel, the letter that I have written to 
service providers was to appoint them to a panel at 
national level it has nothing to do with any work that the 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 130 of 219 
 
province is doing, any province [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That would include Gauteng and 
would include the Free State. 
MR ZULU:    It includes all departments. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And they are unrelated. 
MR ZULU:    Excuse me? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   They are unrelated. 
MR ZULU:    Which project is unrelated? 
CHAIRPERSON:   In other words, are you saying it 
10 
includes all departments even those that have got nothing 
to do with human settlements? 
MR ZULU:    No, the panel that we appointed, Chairperson, 
had to do with national department of human settlements. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:   To have service providers within the panel. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    That is outside the scope.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Of the provinces. 
MR ZULU:    Of the provincial departments. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    They can even have their own panels 
[indistinct – dropping voice] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    This one that I did was specifically for the 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 131 of 219 
 
national department of Human Settlements. 
CHAIRPERSON:   They would be service providers from 
which you would pick those to give work from time to time. 
MR ZULU:    Through a procurement process. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Through a proper procurement process. 
MR ZULU:    As and when [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Even within the panel. 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In other words, when you want to create 
10 
a panel you have a bidding process. 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then when there is actual work to be 
done you are generally restricted to this panel. 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But even with this panel there would be 
…[intervenes]\ 
MR ZULU:    A process to be …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   A bidding process. 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay and once there is work to be done 
that must be allocated where there must be a bidding 
process someone who is not on this panel would not be 
eligible to put in a bid. 
MR ZULU:    If you are outside this panel, yes. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 132 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, only on the panel. 
MR ZULU:    Because you would have not qualified to be 
on the panel. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    Yes, correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, because if you wanted to come 
onto the panel there was a time earlier. 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When it was open and if you were 
interested you would have tried and then you did not 
10 
succeed. 
MR ZULU:    Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, before we get to the next 
letter let me just understand one of the answers you gave 
previously.  You were aware of the fact that in the Free 
State that Department of Human Settlements participated 
in a contract that had been entered into, correct? 
MR ZULU:    I was aware of the fact that? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You are aware from your last 
20 
answer, because you have made it very clear in your 
answer, that the Department of Human Settlements in the 
Free State participated – you know what that means – in a 
contract entered into elsewhere.   
MR ZULU:    For a [indistinct – dropping voice] submission 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 133 of 219 
 
[inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And as I understood your answer 
…[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:    Yes, as per the submission that made and 
giving the affidavit of Mr Mokhesi, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  And as I understood your 
answer 
you 
said 
that 
the 
contract, 
the 
participation 
contract was the Gauteng contract, not the national one. 
MR ZULU:    No, that is my understanding, Chair, that it 
has got nothing to do with the national department as far 
10 
as I am concerned. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It had to do with the Gauteng. 
MR ZULU:    Correct because of the specifications, that is 
how I have learnt or understood the …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So when Mr Mokhesi says in the 
letter at 8.169, if you would just look at it please? 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think the 8 will cause confusion, you 
said …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   FS8.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   On 169. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Bundle FS8, page 169. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, FS8, okay.  No, that is fine.  FS8. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 169. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Page 169, okay, alright. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 134 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Paragraph 1.  Well, let us go to the 
title first.  Mokhesi says to Blackhead: 
“Appointment of professional resource team to a 
departmental panel and municipal planning and 
implementation 
support 
to 
Human 
Settlements 
departments 
and 
municipalities 
within 
specific 
regional areas.” 
He says: 
“The 
above 
has 
reference 
to 
your 
proposal 
submitted to this department and your appointment 
10 
by the National Department of Human Settlements.” 
Then paragraph 1 says: 
“That the department wishes to extent your current 
contract secured by the National Department of 
Human Settlements in line with Treasury regulations 
16A 6.6 of 2005.” 
Is that a correct statement? 
CHAIRPERSON:   One second, Mr Pretorius, just to make 
clear what the letter says.  I think one has got to read it on 
the basis of bold line above it.  He says: 
20 
“Note has been taken of the above and we wish to 
request your approval as for…” 
So one of the – the approval that he is asking for includes 
approval that the department wishes to extend.  So I just 
wanted to say it is important to tie it to that. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 135 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, just by way of background, I 
not sure everybody will follow as far as the public watching 
my excuse, but Mr Zulu will know that when you extend a 
contract from let us say for example Gauteng to Free State 
you need the approval of the service provider as well, is 
that correct? 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So basically, Mr Mokhesi seems to 
10 
be …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I am sorry, I am sorry. 
MR ZULU:    That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The answer was correct? 
MR ZULU:    It is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR ZULU:    If you are using this provision, there are 
certain parties that must give consent. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    Amongst those parties it is your service 
20 
provider. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But the point I want to make is in 
paragraph 1 that Mr Mokhesi is saying to Blackhead 
Consulting (Pty) Ltd, in seeking that approval that you 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 136 of 219 
 
have referred to, the department - Free State department,  
“…wishes to extent your current contract secured by 
the National Department of Human Settlements in 
like with Treasury regulations 16(a)(6)(6) of 2005.” 
Now, as I understand it, quite simply that cannot be 
consistent with what you have said, Mr Mokhesi must be 
wrong or you must be wrong. 
MR ZULU:    Chair, I will prefer that at least the actually 
can give context to the letter because …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but we do want to …[intervenes] 
10 
MR ZULU:    As I have been explaining …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   We do want to benefit from your 
knowledge as well. 
MR ZULU:    Yes, as I have been explaining, Chair, 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, hang on, would you want to 
benefit from your knowledge and experience, you are the 
Director General of the Human Settlements department. 
MR ZULU:    Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are dealing with a project in the 
20 
Provisional Human Settlements Department. 
MR ZULU:    Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You, as an accounting officer, you 
understand 
the 
workings 
of 
government 
and 
its 
departments in regard to certain matters.  So now here we 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 137 of 219 
 
get the HOD 
of the Free State Human Settlements 
Department writing to Blackhead Consulting (Pty) Ltd on 
the subject indicated there and he says he is seeking the 
approval of the CEO Blackhead Consulting (Pty) Ltd that 
his department extend Blackhead Consulting (Pty) Ltd’s 
current contract secured by National Department of Human 
Settlements in line with Treasury regulation number that, 
that, that.   
 
Now we know that – or rather, I think when he 
refers 
to 
a 
current 
contract 
secured 
by 
National 
10 
Department of Human Settlements, I take it he is referring 
to the subject of your letter that we have dealt with. 
MR ZULU:    I would think so, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Now on the understanding that that 
is what he is talking about, could he be correct to want to 
use that contract in this way? 
MR ZULU:    That is why I was saying, Chair, it depends in 
which context was the HOD referring to, to make reference 
into that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR ZULU:    How would he know that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  To your knowledge …[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:     He may have done some research to check 
the validity. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 138 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:    Of the existence of this company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    And which service centres exist, whether 
National 
Treasury 
or 
in 
the 
department 
where 
this 
particular company is a vendor.  I am not sure of the 
contents. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    But under normal circumstances. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    Because this is not a contract that exists 
10 
between National Department …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   To give work, h’m. 
MR ZULU:    And the Blackhead doing any work. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR ZULU:    Then you would not piggyback on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR ZULU:    Because this company is only on a panel. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    It is not having an existing contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR ZULU:    That contract, my understanding after reading 
all the documents that were sent to me, was that it existed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    Between the Gauteng Department of Human 
Settlements and the service provider. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 139 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    But not with the national department. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, that is fine.  You see, most 
of the time what Mr Pretorius is asking for is just your own 
understanding of the position and somebody else might 
come and say no, no, Mr Zulu was wrong, he did not 
understand but what he was looking for is your own 
understanding. 
MR ZULU:    Thank you, Chair, I always avoid interpreting 
other people’s letters. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, but …[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:    Because you never know the context within 
which a particular letter is written. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, that …[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:    And then you start making allegations of 
saying 
somebody 
is 
wrong 
as 
an 
accounting 
officer 
whereas there could have been a reason to contextualise it 
in this fashion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no. 
MR ZULU:    Which I am not privy to, so it is in that 
20 
context, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is a fair point but as long as 
everybody 
understands 
you 
are 
giving 
your 
own 
understanding. 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 140 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That that should not be a problem. 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So all we are doing as the Chair 
says, Mr Zulu, is asking for – how you understand the 
words of a particular document and if those words are clear 
then they are clear.  If they are not clear they are not clear 
but I do not think that I put anything to you where the 
words are not clear but if they are not clear you can 
certainly answer as you feel you should and I am going to 
10 
come to another letter. 
But two things arise out of your recent answers, as 
I understand it.  The first is, the contract that was 
extended – or, to put it another way more correctly, the 
contract in which the Free State Human Settlements 
Department participated originated in Gauteng and not 
nationally, is that correct? 
MR ZULU:    Having read the documents that were 
forwarded to me, that would be my understanding, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, okay, so far so good. 
20 
MR ZULU:    And also, having understood the request that 
was put to me as the accounting officer at the time to 
revise the plan, it was in that context. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Okay, the second …[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:    Not at national. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 141 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The second point is that it seems 
from your answers, which appear to coincide with persons 
we have consulted in Treasury that you cannot participate 
in a panel appointment, you have got to participate in a 
particular contract.  Is that fair? 
MR ZULU:    I think in terms of PFMA that would be 
correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  In any event, let us just put 
aside then the document at 8.169 but summarise the 
position to say that where state organ B wishes to 
10 
participate in a contract entered into between a service 
provider and state organ A, the Regulation 16A requires 
the consent of both the service provider and the state 
organ which accepts the contract, am I correct? 
MR ZULU:    I will say basically all affected parties, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But at least two of the affected 
parties and we can go to the regulation if necessary but 
what Mr Mokhesi appears to be doing here is precisely 
that.  He is asking the CEO for his consent. 
MR ZULU:    I see so, Chair. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes.  But let us put that aside 
because the document says what it says and you are not a 
party to that communication but if you would look please at 
page 214.9. 
MR ZULU:   In the same pack?   
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 142 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just repeat the page? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Bundle 1, FS1, 214.9.  It is one of 
those unfortunately almost legible documents against the 
dark background. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You have 214.9? 
MR ZULU:    I am getting there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   This is another letter written by 
Mokhesi to yourself on the same day.  The heading – it is 
10 
dated the – it appears to have been signed on the 19 June 
2014 
and 
it 
is 
addressed 
to 
the 
Director 
General 
Department of Human Settlements, attention Mr P W Zulu, 
yourself.  Its heading reads: 
“Appointment of professional resource team to a 
departmental panel and municipal planning and 
implementation support to the Human Settlements 
Departments 
and 
municipalities 
with 
specific 
regional areas.” 
And you nod your head.  I am afraid you have to say yes 
20 
because …[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:    No, I was just waiting before you finish your 
statements, I was not nodding because …[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, we have not got anywhere 
yet but the first paragraph reads: 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 143 of 219 
 
“The 
above 
has 
reference 
to 
your 
letter 
of 
notification dated 7 April 2014.” 
Do you remember that letter? 
MR ZULU:    Yes, it is the letter we spoke about earlier. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, we spoke about it earlier. 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   With the reference number and it 
gives a reference number.  The second paragraph is the 
one I would like you please to comment on if you would. 
“The Free State Department of Human Settlements 
10 
hereby request your department to extent…” 
Should read extend. 
“…the services of Blackhead Consulting (Pty) Ltd in 
line with Treasury regulation 16A 6.6 of March 
2005.” 
Do you see what Mr Mokhesi is asking you? 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   He is saying please extend the 
national contract, correct? 
MR ZULU:    Yes, that is what it is saying here, Chair, 
20 
…[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I know that that does not accord 
with your recollection of events firstly, and secondly, you 
cannot extend a panel appointment. 
MR ZULU:    Again, sir, it depends what is it that a 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 144 of 219 
 
particular accounting officer is looking for. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but …[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:    So it all depends.  If he was looking for my 
confirmation that this particular service provider is part of 
the national panel resource team that I have in a particular 
context and I have asked for that.  But if he was asking for 
an existing …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But we know what he is asking, it is in a 
letter. 
MR ZULU:    But he is asking for a contract …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   For your approval. 
MR ZULU:    [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But you see, Mr Mokhesi  - I am 
sorry, if I may just explain what the Chair is saying and 
what we are asking from this side of the room, is the words 
are clear, the words do not require a context to assist their 
interpretation and we are simply asking you for your 
comment on those words.  The words are clear, they say: 
The Free State Department of Human Settlement 
hereby request your department to extend the 
20 
services of Blackhead Consulting (Pty) Ltd in line 
with Treasury regulation 16A 6.6.” 
Now no context can change those words. 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 145 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Simply he is asking you to extend 
the national contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Actually, he is not even asking for 
approval, he is asking you to extend …[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:    This is what I am trying to …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Obviously you cannot extend if you do 
not approve the extension. 
MR ZULU:    But this is what I am saying, Chair, I do not 
have a contract with Blackhead at national level with my 
accounting officer at the time. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but let us go step by step. 
MR ZULU:    yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You accept that he was asking you to 
extend the services of Blackhead Consulting (Pty) Ltd in 
line with this Treasury regulation.  You accept that is what 
he is asking? 
MR ZULU:    That could be what he is asking, Chair, 
depending on what he meant. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What else could it be? 
MR ZULU:    It could be wanting to confirm if there is a 
20 
contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But he does not say that.  He writes on 
the basis that he knows that there is a contract and he is 
asking you to extend it, whether he is right or wrong is 
another matter but he says in effect please extend the 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 146 of 219 
 
services of Blackhead Consulting in line with Treasury 
regulation, blah, blah, blah, blah. 
MR ZULU:    Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what he is asking.  Whether he is 
right or justified in making that request, that is another 
matter but factually that is what he is asking you to do. 
MR ZULU:    Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Pretorius, take it from there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, lest there be any doubt, Mr 
Zulu, let us look at the next paragraph.  He says: 
10 
“It is therefore in this regard that approval is hereby 
sought that you provide written confirmation to 
extend same in line with your approved terms and 
conditions 
as 
contained 
in 
your 
instruction 
to 
perform.  Kindly take notice that the concurrent 
approval has also been sought from the service 
provider, see attached request.” 
And that is the concurrent document also dated 19 June 
2014.  Is there any doubt as to what Mr Mokhesi is saying?  
Whether it is correct or not, as the Chair says, is another 
20 
question and he can explain but what he is saying to you is 
your approval is hereby sought, you provide written 
confirmation to extend the same in line with your approved 
terms and conditions. 
MR ZULU:    Chair, I can only assume against this, I can 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 147 of 219 
 
only assume that the reference being made here is in 
reference to the panel because there was no existing 
contract at the time between the company and the national 
department in a contractual arrangement.   So I will have 
no 
powers 
to 
[inaudible 
– 
speaking 
simultaneously] 
contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well …[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:    Again, I am assuming, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us leave out assuming. 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   A letter is written to you and you are 
being asked to provide approval, obviously you must 
understand what the request is about. 
MR ZULU:    Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You must understand – you must 
interrogate the document to see whether this is the 
situation 
where 
your 
approval 
can 
be 
given 
or 
is 
necessary. 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Now is there any other way in 
20 
which you understand this request other than that he was 
asking you to extend the only contract or the only basis or 
connection your department had with Blackhead namely 
Blackhead is on the panel? 
MR ZULU:    Correct, Chair. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 148 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That that is the only way you could 
understand it? 
MR ZULU:    Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Then, Mr Zulu, quite frankly it 
seems 
from 
the 
documentation 
at 
least 
that 
your 
observation given to the Chair is entirely correct, you 
cannot 
ask 
national 
department 
to 
extend 
mere 
appointment to a panel because there are no terms and 
conditions of contract to do work. 
10 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   That is correct. Let us then go on 
please to the same bundle, FS8, at page 181.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Page 181?  Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   FS8, 181. 
CHAIRPERSON:   181? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, Chair. 
MR ZULU:    8181. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, 181, I think he says.  
MR ZULU:    Which one? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   FS8, 181. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just check whether you have got the 
right bundle, Mr Zulu. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So that is a letter addressed to Mr 
Mokhesi, Department of Human Settlements dated 13 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 149 of 219 
 
August 2014, apparently signed by yourself, and you say 
under 
the 
heading 
appointment, 
same 
heading 
coincidentally, the appointment of a professional resource 
team to a departmental panel and municipal planning and 
implementation 
support 
to 
the 
Human 
Settlements 
Departments and Municipalities with specific [interference 
on audio] refers. 
“Please be informed that in terms of Treasury 
Regulation 16[a] 6.6 it is allowed for the Free State 
Department of Human Settlements to participate in 
10 
the contract arranged by the process from the 
database of the Gauteng Department of Human 
Settlements 
for 
Professional 
Resource 
Teams 
Consulting Pty Limited was appointed from.” 
Do you have any comment? 
MR ZULU:   Yes, Chair I was writing to the SOD advising 
him on this letter and I’m sure I would have been 
responding to one of the correspondences that has made 
enquiries with my Department, I’ll assume. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
It 
seems 
that 
prior 
20 
correspondence, 
including 
correspondence 
from 
Mr 
Mokhesi has referred to a National appointment but this 
letter that you send on the 13 t h of August relates to an 
appointment in the Gauteng Department, am I correct? 
MR ZULU:    That’s why I’m saying, most probably Chair, I 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 150 of 219 
 
was responding to an enquiry that has been made with my 
office and I was providing the necessary advice, based on 
that enquiry which I’m not sure, it could even have been a 
telephone conversation or it could have been any other 
form of communication but surely when I was putting this, 
clearly I was responding to something. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So, do I understand it correctly, Mr 
Zulu, you would have made enquiries, you would have 
responded to some form of communication, but here, quite 
differently to the correspondence that preceded it, as far 
10 
as you’re concerned, you clarified that this was a Gauteng 
appointment that was being dealt with, correct? 
MR ZULU:    Yes, and I will assume Chair, that the enquiry 
was in line with the intended purpose of what the 
Accounting Officers wanted to do and obviously you cannot 
use 
the 
National 
Department 
because 
there 
was 
no 
contractual obligation exist between National Department 
and Blackhead which is the issue, maybe, I was trying to 
clarify but as I’m saying I was probably responding to a 
particular enquiry, which form it took, I may not be sure of. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well in fairness, and as you’ve 
said, they can come and explain why they were seeking to 
extend the provisions of a National panel appointment and 
not what you’ve pointed out here, a Gauteng one.  They 
may have changed their minds, there may have been other 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 151 of 219 
 
communications, they can explain but I’d like to ask you, 
from your knowledge then, what Gauteng was being 
extended? 
MR ZULU:  Gauteng contract?    
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, what was being participated 
in, and I want, just to explain for those who might find it 
difficult to follow us.  A contract is entered into with State 
organ A. 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Gauteng Province, correct? 
10 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The law allows another organ of 
State, 
Free 
State 
Department 
to 
participate 
in 
that 
contract, quite what that means we can talk about in due 
course if we have time or we will make submissions to the 
Chair in that regard. 
MR ZULU:    Alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But to put it in another way, 
loosely and incorrectly as it turns out, you transfer the 
provisions of one contract from – with one State organ to 
20 
another contract or the same contact to another State 
organ, do I have it, more or less correct? 
MR ZULU:    Yes, I think in the context of this situation 
because I don’t think you want me to give a lecture, how 
this works, I think we all know how it works but in the 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 152 of 219 
 
context of this letter, Chair, I think the advice being given 
here 
is 
the 
fact 
that 
the 
State 
organ, 
that 
has 
a 
contractual, existing  obligation, is Gauteng Province, it’s 
not the National Department, it’s got a panel and that’s the 
only State organ that you can apply this provision that is 
being sought here but not the National Department and 
therefore if you need this to be processed correctly and 
procedurally 
you’ll 
have 
to 
deal 
with 
the 
Gauteng 
Department of Human Settlements which is a State organ 
that has similar terms of reference for the intended 
10 
assignment, in this context. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Understood Mr Zulu, thank you for 
that explanation.  The point I want to make, however, is 
what I’d like you to clarify for us, is something different but 
before we get there, let’s just confirm that one of the 
reasons you couldn’t extend the National Contract is 
because it was merely appointment to a panel with no 
terms and conditions for work attached? 
MR ZULU:    Absolutely, Chair, there was no existing 
contractual arrangement between…[intervenes]. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct. 
MR ZULU:    Except for being a panellist. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And of course, if you want to 
extend or participate in a contract, it’s obvious that 
contract must say what work must be done, what price, how 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 153 of 219 
 
it must be done by when, that sort of thing, correct? 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But let’s get back to this letter at 
181 please. Do you know – you signed this letter, do you 
know what contract, which is a subject matter of a 
participation process in terms of Treasury Regulations 
16(A) 66 has been referred to, you know what they’re 
talking about here? 
MR ZULU:    Which letter are you referring to, is it not this 
one? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   1-8-1 your letter. 
MR ZULU:    Oh 181 yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, something is going to 
move…[intervenes]. 
MR ZULU:    I missed your question, sorry. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Alright, let me put it again please, 
as fairly as I can.  There is an arrangement or contract in 
the Gauteng Department, correct? 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Free State want to participate in it 
20 
and that’s the purpose of all this correspondence we’re 
dealing with, correct? 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What is it that exists in Gauteng in 
which the Free State wants to participate, what is it?  In 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 154 of 219 
 
other words, look at your language, Mr Zulu, if you will, 
“Please be informed in terms of Treasury Regulation 
16(A) 66 it is allowed for the Free State Department 
of Human Settlements to participate in the contract, 
 
What contract? 
MR ZULU:    Well this is the point – and Chair, I hate to 
make 
assumptions 
and 
I’ve 
noticed 
that 
you 
don’t 
appreciate it and I apologise for that because I could have 
been trying to clarify a point here and again – because this 
is as far back as 2014 so I could have been clarifying the 
10 
point that if you have an intention to participate on an 
existing 
contract, 
clearly 
there 
isn’t 
one 
that 
exists 
between the Department of National Human Settlement and 
Blackhead.  The only Department that, will only have an 
existing contract will be the Gauteng and clearly, therefore, 
I could not be the Accounting Officer that will have the 
powers vested with him to actually approve even the 
participation of Blackhead in a contract because there isn’t 
a contract that exists between National Department.  So, I 
think I was trying to provide clarity to a point of, even 
20 
indicating that financial obligations for this will still be 
squarely with the Free State Department which want to 
participate in that.  So that’s a contract that exist with 
Gauteng that does not exist with National Department 
of…[intervenes]. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 155 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you know what that contract was for, 
the Gauteng contract…[intervenes]? 
MR ZULU:    Chair I would, Chair, assume that the HOD 
would have shared that with me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR ZULU:    Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Alright. 
MR ZULU:    Because this was a communication that was 
happening between the HOD and myself.  So, probably he 
would have shared that with me and I would have then 
10 
been expected to provide clarity in terms of Treasury 
Regulations. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But you could help us, to a certain 
extent as a matter of general principle, Mr Zulu, as I 
understand your evidence you can’t extend membership of 
a panel or an arrangement to be a member of a panel 
because there are no contractual terms and conditions, you 
can only extend a particular contract between a service 
provider and the department which includes duties and 
20 
price and the rest. 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Correct, well at least we know what 
can be participated and made subject to 16(A)66 and what 
can’t, thank you for that.  We can move on…[intervenes]. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 156 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:    Again, I must indicate Chair, that, again this 
is also on interpretation basis, some people interpret 
statutes differently. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    I’m only providing what…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Your own understanding? 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that’s fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well in fairness, Mr Zulu, we are 
asking you to interpret your words. 
10 
MR ZULU:    Absolutely and I am informed by the statutes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Bear with me a moment Chair.  If 
you would go, please, to page 88 of FS8.  This is a 
memorandum addressed to the acting Head of Department, 
Ms Margaret-Ann Diedericks dated 13 March 2014 by the 
Directorate Special Projects in Gauteng Province, Human 
Settlements Department.  It’s a memorandum that results 
in the appointment of eight PRT’s, Professional Resource 
Teams for 
assessment of asbestos identification and 
removal.  Now we will ask the relevant people about this 
20 
document but if I can just ask you, to assume for the 
moment that this is the source document, as it appears to 
be, for the appointment of eight PRT’s in Gauteng and take 
you please to page 90 of this memorandum.  It’s headed, 
Asbestos 
Roof 
Eradication, 
terms 
of 
reference 
and 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 157 of 219 
 
implementation plan, it says, in the second last paragraph, 
on page 90, 
“The assessment phase is envisaged to be carried 
out in March and April 2014. The expiration of the 
PRT’s contracts at the end of March should not 
have an effect on the assessment and is to be 
viewed as work in progress”.  
 
This seems to be an indication that, whatever PRT 
contracts existed in Gauteng were to expire at the end of 
March but I presume you wouldn’t have any knowledge of 
10 
that? 
MR ZULU:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But if – let us just go then to the 
next page, page 91 of FS8, the third last paragraph reads, 
“Professional rates for assessment will be applied 
in line with the Departments IPW fee structure at 
R650 per house.  This will be a fixed rate and the 
Department will not accept any deviations from 
this”.  
 
Right, and then the recommendations, over the 
20 
page are that the memo should be taken account of, 2) that 
the attached terms of reference should be proved and the 
appointment of eight PRT’s for the assessment of asbestos 
in Gauteng should be approved.  If these recommendations 
and the terms of reference which resulted, and I’ll go to 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 158 of 219 
 
them in a moment, constituted the basis of the Gauteng 
appointment of the service providers for asbestos removal, 
including the appointment of Blackhead, then those terms 
and conditions would be reflected in the contractual 
arrangement with the service provider, is that a fair 
assumption to make? 
MR ZULU:    I guess. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, it does seem obvious, thank 
you but if one needs any further confirmation, the terms of 
reference for the eradication of asbestos roofs on houses 
10 
in Gauteng appears at page 94, a few pages on. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Just repeat the page please? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 94, FS8. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And if you go through please to the 
scope of works.  Now, you very fairly said, Mr Zulu, that 
you can’t extend or participate in something that has no 
substance, you’ve got to have terms and conditions.  We 
see here, terms and conditions, under scope of works, 5.1, 
the scope of assessments is as follows – as follows: 
20 
 
“5.1a 
The 
identification 
and 
quantification 
of 
affected houses…[intervenes]. 
MR ZULU:    Sorry Mr Pretorius, which page is that? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Are you at page 98 of FS8? 
MR ZULU:    Sorry about that, please proceed. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 159 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   5.1 are you there?  
“5.1a the scope of the assessments is as follows:  
a) the identification a quantification of affected 
houses. b)  assessment of structural integrity of 
load bearing walls in each house by a competent 
person for possible added loads with new roof 
cover.  c)  measurement of the size of affected 
houses 
by 
a 
competent 
person 
for 
new 
roof 
designs”, 
 
That is what is required by the scope of works in 
10 
terms of the Gauteng contract, correct? 
MR ZULU:     Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It goes on an deals with an 
implementation planning stage at 5.2, it seems there are 
three 
phases 
here, 
1) 
an 
assessment 
phase, 
2) 
implementation planning phase, which involves priorities 
and phasing and appointment of competent persons for 
detailed designs and builds a quantity compilation, I don’t 
want to get too complex here, this is really just what is set 
out in this document, as being what is required as the 
20 
scope of works and then 5.3 is the construction phase.  So, 
to the extent that the terms and conditions in these 
documents, Mr Zulu, were the terms and conditions which 
bound the Gauteng service providers.  If this contract was 
to be participated in, in the Free State it would be bound 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 160 of 219 
 
by the same terms and conditions.  If you’re going to 
extend a contract it must be the same contract, correct? 
MR ZULU:    Yes, Chair, under normal circumstances that’s 
how it’s done, that’s why you participate on an existing 
contract, so the terms and conditions and financials are 
normally expected to be seen.  If there’s a deviation for 
that, surely there should be a reason for that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Right. 
MR ZULU:    Chair, may I please request a comfort break? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry – a comfort break. 
10 
MR ZULU:    Please may I request a comfort break for two 
minutes? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay.  Mr Pretorius let’s take a 
comfort break, ten minutes? 
MR ZULU:    Two minutes, it’s fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Two minutes, well let’s not make it two 
minutes because by the time you’ve reached the door, two 
minutes might be over, we’ll make it ten minutes, we’ll 
return at half past.  Or maybe before you go, Mr Pretorius, 
in terms of planning the afternoon, what’s your suggestion? 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, Chair, there is a witness who, 
perhaps should be excused, the question is whether the – 
Mr Manyeke of Ori, the second sub-contractor should give 
evidence tomorrow or Mr Sodi who’s been summoned for 
tomorrow.  From the legal team’s point of view, we would 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 161 of 219 
 
prefer Mr Sodi to give evidence because is evidence is 
more substantial for this project.  Chair, it may be, that we 
can cut the questions to Mr Manyeke to the minimum but 
then I’d need time to pay attention to that task.  So, if 
possible, I wouldn’t like to sit too late tonight, I’ll try get 
through as much as possible before 4 o’clock. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Ja, well from my point of view, I can sit 
till late it’s just that I have a planned zoom conference at 
six which I can move to seven and so on.  So, I’m just 
wanting to check whether – what your own thinking is then 
10 
of course we’ll check with Mr Zulu as well. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, I was to participate in that 
zoom conference Chair for a short time at least. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Oh yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  With your leave.  
CHAIRPERSON:    Oh, no, no I may be double booked, the 
one I’m thinking about doesn’t involve you and it’s not 
Commission work. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, if that’s the case I’m very 
happy Chair, we can cancel the other one or postpone it at 
20 
least. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay – okay, maybe let’s take the 
adjournment so that Mr Zulu can have some comfort then 
when we come back, we can finalise in terms of how long 
we can sit this afternoon.  Let’s take the adjournment, I’d 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 162 of 219 
 
say let’s return at twenty-five to four, we adjourn.  
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us talk about our planning for the rest 
of the afternoon and if need be into the evening.  I have 
been given some information that makes me understand what 
Zoom Conference you were talking about Mr Pretorius.  I 
think my understanding was that the member of the legal 
team was organising that was to come back to me and 
confirm whether all the people that were supposed to be 
10 
involved in it had confirmed their availability.  That had not 
happened that is why I did not remember. 
 
But I have given a message to my Registrar to 
communicate with him with a view that if everybody is 
available, we could look at seven or half past seven but 
when we come out of here there would be communication.  If 
they are not available then we can fix another time. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Perhaps I will address you about that 
separately. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No, no that is fine.  I just wanted to – 
20 
it is just that I want to know how far we can go this 
afternoon.  I can make adjustments and I am quite prepared 
to sit beyond four o’clock, beyond five o’clock if. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  Chair it is not… 
CHAIRPERSON:  If everybody is fine with that. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 163 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  There is not much time that is 
necessary now in relation to Mr Zulu.  Mr Zulu has expressed 
the – the desire to complete today so if we may complete 
today, I do not think we will go much beyond four. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then what we can do is call Mr 
Manyike early tomorrow he will be very brief. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And then complete Mr Sodi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay then that is fine.  I just wanted 
10 
to have an idea. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then – then – then in that event even if – 
we will talk separately about this Zoom Conference in which 
you – you would be involved if you are available. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes Chair.  I – I will be available for a 
short time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  By your leave Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  And it should not take long it is a 
20 
very practical issue that is to be discussed. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Thank you.  Mr Zulu then the 
question now involves certain benefits received by you and 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 164 of 219 
 
let us not debate for the moment whether they were 
legitimate or not.  We can come to that at a later stage.  Let 
us simply try and establish the facts.  Because I think the 
facts are largely common cause including your explanation 
for what occurred.  Chair the references here the evidence 
has been summarised.  And if I may refer you to Bundle FS8 
at page 39 and following.  What the investigators have done 
is they have examined the bank accounts of Mr Sodi and 
arising out of Mr Sodi’s bank accounts they have traced 
certain payments which involve a motor dealer and I must 
10 
apologise to the owner of the institution it is in Ballito not 
Pietermaritzburg.  So there can be no passing off as a result 
of the re-advertisements in this session.  The evidence 
involves two transactions.  One involving the payment of R1 
million and the other involving the payment of R600 000.00.  
But if we may go to FS8 39 please.   
CHAIRPERSON:  What page on F – on Bundle FS? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  FS8 page 39.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh.  I have been given FS9.  There must 
have been a misunderstanding. 
20 
MR ZULU:  FS8. 
CHAIRPERSON:  FS8 page 39. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes please.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja that is where I was before I was given 
that one.  I thought you might have changed your mind.  Yes. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 165 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  The product of the investigations Mr 
Zulu for the present appears at page 39 at paragraph 9.3.1.  
And what the investigators have established is that the 
amount of R1 million was transferred on the 26 May 2015 
from Blackhead and the ABSA account number is given to 
SMD Trading Group and the ABSA account number is given.  
SMD Trading Group is a car dealership in Ballito.  As I 
understand it there is no dispute from you in that regard.  
You do not have any information to contradict those things. 
MR ZULU:  Contradict what? 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Let me go through it again.  R1 
million was transferred on 26 May 2015 from Blackhead to 
SMD Trading Group a car dealership in Ballito. 
MR ZULU:  Chair that I have no clue of that and it has got 
nothing to do with me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR ZULU:  The R1 million one I have no clue about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  But the R600 000.00 yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  No I understand but I need to 
20 
put it to you anyway. 
MR ZULU:  Okay that is why I wanted to make sure that I do 
not agree on something that combines both yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well it is not that you do not agree 
with it it is just that you have no comment in relation to it. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 166 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:  Oh okay especially to R1 million.  But to 
R600.000.00 yes I do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes the R600 000.00 we will come to.  
What is interesting about it though in Sodi’s records the 
transaction was marked TZ.  He explains it later but he 
marks it TZ.  And perhaps I better put the full sequence to 
you to make it easier.  In SMD records the transaction is 
referred to as Thabani Zulu right.  But according to Mr 
Duminy he says that although Thabani Zulu is referenced in 
10 
the bank statement this payment went toward the sale of a 
Maserati to Mr Mabheleni Ntuli and he has not been 
interviewed by the investigators.  So it seems to me that 
Sodi makes a payment of R1 million to SMD.  In his records 
he marks it TZ.  In the recipient’s records SMD records he 
references Thabani Zulu.  But that payment is used to buy a 
Maserati for Mr Ntuli.  Now do you know of those facts?  Is 
there anything in those facts that you can contest? 
MR ZULU:  No. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What is interesting however is Mr 
20 
Sodi’s explanation for this which we will ask him about.  He 
says oh he just associated you with Mr Ntuli and that is why 
he put the TZ reference.  Have you any comment to make in 
regard to that?  Is there any reason why Mr Sodi would 
associate you with Mr Ntuli to put the incorrect reference in 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 167 of 219 
 
his payment according to him? 
MR ZULU:  If I may Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR ZULU:  I can only speculate that it could be that Mr Ntuli 
was introduced to Sodi by myself.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR ZULU:  In my business that I do in Pietermaritzburg. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR ZULU:  So that could be the reason but other than that I 
would not know but I have no benefit whatsoever that was 
10 
associated with that payment personally. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you know it is written here Maklene I 
suspect that there must be a misspelling.  It might be 
Mabheleni Ntuli. 
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do you know anybody that might be called 
Mabheleni Ntuli? 
MR ZULU:  That is the person that I am referring to Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Mabheleni. 
MR ZULU:  Mabheleni yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and that would be spelt M-a-b-h-e-l-e-
n-i that would be Mabheleni, is that correct?  That would be 
the correct spelling. 
MR ZULU:  I presume so in terms of the spelling yes indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In terms of spelling that would be correct 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 168 of 219 
 
ja. 
MR ZULU:  I think that would be correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Mabheleni.   
MR ZULU:  Yes.  Point that the Chair is making that the way 
the name is spelt might be incorrect that is the point he is 
trying to make. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Oh I see. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes so what I am saying is when I look at it 
here it is spelt in a way that seems to me to be unlikely to be 
10 
correct.  Because he say it is an Isi-Zulu word/name so it is 
likely to be Mabheleni and Mr Zulu does say he does know a 
Mr Mabheleni Ntuli. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And do you know the spelling of the 
first name? 
MR ZULU:  No I would not know the spelling but I think the 
Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well let us call him Mr Ntuli I think 
that [loud laughter]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I have said that in Isi-Zulu if you say 
20 
Mabheleni it would be M-a-b-h-e-l-e-n-I but you could have 
other people writing it as M-a-b-e-l-e-n-i. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In any event Mr Ntuli you say your 
introduced him to Mr Sodi? 
MR ZULU:  I am saying that could be the reason. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 169 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That could be the explanation. 
MR ZULU:  Mr Sodi yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And Mr Sodi says well he just knew 
you were associated so therefore he put his head on the 
pavement – payment reference.  But let us leave that aside 
for the moment.  Mr Ntuli is a businessman in KwaZulu Natal 
if I am not mistaken. 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And Mr Sodi expressed the desire to 
get involved… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry – I am sorry that answer might 
not have been captured just repeat it.  The question was… 
MR ZULU:  The question was… 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Whether 
Mr 
Mabheleni 
Ntuli 
is 
a 
businessman in KwaZulu Natal? 
MR ZULU:  Yes I think that is how I have – that is how I have 
known him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ja. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And Mr Sodi apparently expressed 
the desire to extend his businesses into KwaZulu Natal? 
20 
MR ZULU:  I would not know that. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  You would not know that. 
MR ZULU:  No. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  In any event that sequence of events 
that I have just described to you is admitted by Mr Sodi in 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 170 of 219 
 
paragraph 65.6 of his new affidavit dated the 26 May 2015.  
He says he used TZ because he associated TZ with Mr Ntuli.  
It appears that on the recipient side SMD knew who TZ was 
because they recorded it as Thabani Zulu.  You cannot 
comment on that? 
MR ZULU:  No. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:    That would be a question for… 
MR ZULU:  It is because those transactions I do not get 
involved 
with. 
 
When 
people 
used 
references 
Chair 
especially for this particular thing, I have no comment to 
10 
make on those transactions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  So are you saying to the extent that 
Mr Sodi may have paid R1 million into the account of SMD 
Trading Group and wrote TZ. 
MR ZULU:  For his own … 
CHAIRPERSON:  But that was in regard to a car that went to 
Mr Ntuli you say you do not know anything about the 
transaction of the car. 
MR ZULU:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you do know that there is a Mr Ntuli. 
20 
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That you introduced to Mr Sodi? 
MR ZULU:  Yes correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To Mr Sodi. 
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 171 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And that is Mr Mabheleni Ntuli. 
MR ZULU:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
MR ZULU:  And I was not a beneficiary of that transaction. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja you were not a beneficiary of anything. 
MR ZULU:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In their transactions. 
MR ZULU:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And in fairness to Mr Zulu that is as 
10 
far as the investigators can take it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
Let 
us 
deal 
then 
with 
the 
R600 000.00 payment which is on a different footing.  It 
seems that on the 22 December 2015 an amount of R6… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe I am sorry Mr Pretorius.  Maybe you 
can share with me Mr Zulu the context in which you 
introduced Mr Ntuli to Mr Sodi? 
MR ZULU:  Well Chair I come from KwaZulu Natal born and 
bred in Pietermaritzburg so I also run businesses myself in 
20 
Pietermaritzburg which at the time I have declared.  And one 
of the businesses is the hospitality industry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just raise your voice. 
MR ZULU:  One of the businesses in hospitality industry 
which is called Teza Lounge which I have declared.  So this 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 172 of 219 
 
is where I have met Mr Ntuli visiting my place but also Mr 
Sodi was also a customer of my place as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR ZULU:  So I have known them in the business social 
circles. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR ZULU:  And I could confirm that I actually introduced 
Ntuli to Mr Sodi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You actually? 
MR ZULU:  Introduced Mduli to Sodi. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR ZULU:  So I wanted to show this from Gauteng. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  But he has got... his homestead is well in KZN. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  The introduction happened at your 
business in Pietermaritzburg or did it happen in Gauteng? 
MR ZULU:  It happened in Gauteng. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In Gauteng? 
MR ZULU:  Yes, I would think so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  How long had you known Mr Mduli at 
20 
the time ...[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:  Shu, Chair it was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  ...you have introduced him to Mr Sodi if 
you are able to remember?  For many years or for a short 
time? 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 173 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:  I cannot remember but I have known him for 
quite some time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  But I cannot remember exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you able to remember when it was in 
terms of year when you introduced Mr Mduli to Mr Sodi? 
MR ZULU:  I would not remember Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You would not remember? 
MR ZULU:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  And the context was because of 
10 
business or just because you happen to be ...[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:  Social contact. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...in the company of one of them and the 
other one came? 
MR ZULU:  Social contacts Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It seems that in respect of the 
payment of R 600 000,00, apart from one aspect that may 
20 
arise later, there is also not much in dispute, that on the 
22n d of December 2015, an amount of R 600 000,00 was paid 
to SMD? 
MR ZULU:  Correct Chair.  Correct Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  That was paid by Mr Sodi under the 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 174 of 219 
 
reference SMD. 
MR ZULU:  I would think so Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not know but you ...[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:  I do not know ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  If he says that is what happened you would 
accept that? 
MR ZULU:  Yes, but I can assure that it was in relation to...   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So according to the documentation... 
you can go through it if you wish. 
MR ZULU:  No, I am... 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  According to the documentation, SMD 
received this amount of R 600 000,00 and placed the 
reference TZ next to that receipt.  That is what... or was 
SMD’s reference TZ. 
MR ZULU:  Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And you do not take issue of that, I 
presume, because of what follows. 
20 
MR ZULU:  I am called by a different name.  So.  Otherwise, 
they call me TZ.  Otherwise, they called me Tamari.  Or as 
they called me Digi.  So people used different names that 
relate to me in their own rights.  I do not really choose how 
to do it Chair. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 175 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But TZ is one of them? 
MR ZULU:  It is one of them.  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR ZULU:  That is even my Lounge. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, okay.   
MR ZULU:  Yes.  They even called me Lounge, my business, 
TZ. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your lounge is called TZ Lounge? 
MR ZULU:  Correct.  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes.  And then Mr Zulu, according to 
Mr Duminy that amount of R 600 000,00 went towards the 
purchase of a Range Rover for yourself. 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And that is correct? 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Right.   
MR ZULU:  So much correct so Chair, if I may add, at the 
balance of eight... I have to go to the bank to ask for a loan 
but also to confirm that at the time I was an accounting 
20 
officer.  I had an obligation to declare the vehicle which I 
did. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What is curious Mr Zulu is that on the 
23rd of March 2016, that is some three months later, SMD 
sent an invoice to you for R 690 000,00 reflecting a cash 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 176 of 219 
 
deposit of R 690 000,00.  Do you know anything about that? 
MR ZULU:  Yes, that was for the deposit of the car that is 
under questioning. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  And who paid that? 
MR ZULU:  That R 600 000,00? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  No.  The SMD invoice to Mr Zulu for 
R 690 000,00 also reflected a cash deposit of R 690 000,00.  
Who paid that cash deposit? 
MR ZULU:  I do not want to discuss cash deposits.  My 
understanding, if I may explain, was that a deposit for the 
10 
car was R 690 000,00.  R 600 000,00 is the amount that was 
paid on the 21 s t. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That was paid by Sodi? 
MR ZULU:  By Sodi, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR ZULU:  And then the R 90 000,00 was for the wheels 
which I did not change later.  So I never paid R 90 000,00. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay maybe it is the mask.  I am not 
hearing the part about R 90 000,00.  Just repeat that. 
MR ZULU:  The total deposit for the car was R 690 000,00 
20 
but R 90 000,00 was to cover the wheels which I did not 
change which I intended to do on the car.  So the 
R 600 000,00 was paid to Sodi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  So the cash deposits, I do not know how their 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 177 of 219 
 
bookings are done. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  The cash deposits that he is referring to, Mr 
Pretorius, is the same deposit that was paid. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The R 600 000,00? 
MR ZULU:  The R 690 000,00. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  That is how I understood it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I think he is ...[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:  I do wish that Duminy can explain that 
10 
how...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, he is just asking... I think he knows 
that the R 600 000,00 was paid by Mr Sodi.  I think he is 
asking about whether you paid the R 90 000,00 or not? 
MR ZULU:  No.  Oh, no.  I did not pay the R 90 000,00.  It 
fell off because I did not change the wheels. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR ZULU:  I thought he is referring to cash deposits. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  Like someone went and pay the cash deposits.  
20 
It is still transferred by Mr Sodi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  So what is common cause, 
leaving aside the various references and the initials, is that 
R 600 000,00 
was 
paid 
to 
SMD 
on 
the 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 178 of 219 
 
22n d of December 2015 could have been subject to your 
explanations. 
MR ZULU:  If one... I am not sure.  I would say for my 
benefit. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  But maybe ...[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:  Let us contextualise it because ...[intervenes]  
[Parties are intervening each other and cannot be heard 
clearly.] 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No, you can say whether you accept 
for your benefit part or not but he wants you to just confirm. 
10 
MR ZULU:  It was paid as an amount of money that was 
owed to me which I directed to the dealership Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR ZULU:  So if that is what you mean by benefit 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR ZULU:  ...then I can say yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  But it was not like as a benefit that... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
MR ZULU:  It came all through my businesses. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay. 
MR ZULU:  Yes, Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Well, even on your own version, one 
can debate whether discharge of a debt arising out monies 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 179 of 219 
 
from whether it arises a benefit or not. 
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But I am not going to have that 
argument with you.  That is a legal argument.  But for the 
present, I do need to put to you your explanation for that 
transaction. 
 
You say, “Yes, Sodi made such payment to SMD on my 
instructions in discharge of a debt due by him to one of my 
business, TZ Lounge...” 
 
Correct? 
10 
MR ZULU:  [No audible reply]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   
“...for 
goods 
sold 
and 
delivered 
and 
services 
rendered during 2015...” 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  First question, if I may Mr Zulu.  Is 
there any documentation by way of a letter, an invoice, a 
record of expenditure that substantiates that statement. 
MR ZULU:  Thank you, Chair.  Yes, there will be documents 
because... of course, the debt is far back as 2015.  So I am 
20 
sure if the investigators, which I was hoping Chair, they 
would 
have 
done, 
to 
consult 
with 
me 
to 
check 
any 
information to that effect.   
 
Unfortunately, that was not done.  But if the Commission 
were to ask for me to... it goes as far back as 2015.  If there 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 180 of 219 
 
is any information that one could find that I could do.   
 
I was hoping, actually, all the questions, that the 
investigators would come to me and go and dig deep in 
terms of the question that Mr Pretorius is asking. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  But unfortunately, that did not happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay I certainly would like you today 
to give me as much information about that R 600 000,00.  
How it originated?  What was the whole thing about?  As 
possible.   
10 
 
And if there are documents that support what you are 
telling me in regard to that amount, telling me about, then 
they can be provided in due course but I would like to know 
as much as possible about it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Yes, I was going to... if I may just 
take it step-by-step? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Yes.  No, Mr Pretorius will ask 
question aimed at giving... you giving me that information. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Let us start Mr Zulu with your 
statement:  “Sodi made such payment to SMD on my 
20 
instruction”.  What form did those instruction take? 
MR ZULU:  It was a verbal instruction. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  A verbal instruction? 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  What did you do?  Did you telephone 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 181 of 219 
 
Mr Sodi and say, “Pay me what you owe me”. 
MR ZULU:  We normally do stocktaking in my business 
Chair.  As you will understand that township business, you 
normally write down things.  And during this period, I was 
doing the same thing with my team.   
 
And instead of taking the money, I decided to just start 
and go and deliver the money where I wanted them to deliver 
it upon my instruction. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m.  Okay maybe Mr Pretorius, you must 
start a little earlier.  Tell me about this business that you 
10 
have talked about, TZ Lounge?  What does it do?  What is 
done? 
MR ZULU:  We do events Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
MR ZULU:  We sell food. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You sell...? 
MR ZULU:  Food.  Catering. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR ZULU:  We also sell liquor. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MR ZULU:  We also have a sports bar in it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  But mainly, we are more strong on events on 
special days. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 182 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:  Where we host different people to come and 
present themselves by singing or doing different events and 
pay them for those activities. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  And then also sell the stuff that we have. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  So it is... that is how busy it gets in terms of its 
overall... 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Yes. 
 
Is 
it 
based 
in 
town 
in 
Pietermaritzburg 
or 
is 
it 
in 
one 
of 
the 
township 
in 
10 
Pietermaritzburg? 
MR ZULU:  It is based in township just before you get out of 
the township called Sobanto. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that Imbali Township or...? 
MR ZULU:  No, It is Sobanto. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sobanto Township? 
MR ZULU:  Sobanto Township, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is where it is based? 
MR ZULU:  That is where it has been, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Alright. 
20 
MR ZULU:  And it is declared... I did declare it as part of the 
record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did declare it, yes. 
MR ZULU:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 183 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  So a customer would come and poor 
the liquor or participate in an event or the food.  Is that 
correct? 
MR ZULU:  Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  How would payment be made? 
MR ZULU:  We had a machine to swipe, which was FNB.  
And again, Chair.  These are the questions ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  I am sorry.  I did not hear that. 
MR ZULU:  I am saying we had the machine, FNB machine to 
swipe the card. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Oh, you had a card machine. 
MR ZULU:  That was one option. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  The other option was cash.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  So you would pay... a 
customer would pay cash or swipe the card? 
MR ZULU:  Or you write down ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Would it be normal for you to allow 
someone to run up a tap?  I think it is the word.  Or run up a 
debt of R 600 000,00? 
20 
MR ZULU:  A tap? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Alright.  Sorry.   
MR ZULU:  [laughs]  I am very careful about the... [laughs] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  It can be something that is used in 
different parts. [laughs] 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 184 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:  [laughs]  I knew he will get into that questions Mr 
Pretorius. 
CHAIRPERSON:  [laughs] 
MR ZULU:  That is why you be careful.  You cannot run a tap 
of R 600 000,00. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  But Mr Sodi appears, on your 
version, 
that 
you 
run 
up 
a 
debt 
to 
your 
lounge 
of 
R 600 000,00. 
MR ZULU:  Mr Sodi... it is not a tap.  You place an order... 
we also deliver alcohol to different people you place an 
10 
order, we deliver it to you.   
 
At times, you do not have to pay on the spot but we put 
our system in place to make sure that at the right time, you 
must pay what is required of you to pay for. 
 
If you want to swipe, you also swipe.  As I am saying 
Chair, there is an FNB machine inside the lounge that we are 
using if you want to swipe.  So we use different forms of 
payments. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV PRETORIUS SC:  Over here... ja. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...the debt, tell me about it because you 
said Mr Sodi was paying an amount that he owed you when 
he paid this R 600 000,00 into SMD’s account.   
MR ZULU:  Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  What had he done... what was the debt 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 185 of 219 
 
about? 
MR ZULU:  At that time Chair, it will be mainly the orders 
that he will place. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of what?  Of liquor? 
MR ZULU:  Of liquor in particular. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  Because he used to be at KZN to host different 
dignitaries ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  He used to be...? 
MR ZULU:  At KZN. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  He used to be at KZN? 
MR ZULU:  Yes, to host different dignitaries at his own 
homestead. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR ZULU:  And he will ask me to buy stuff for him and give 
it to him on his arrival. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  Such as ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  What was he running?  What was his 
business for which he needed... he would have needed liquor 
20 
or did he have a function? 
MR ZULU:  I am sure he will explain better on that Chair.  
But mainly it was for him to host his guests. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To...? 
MR ZULU:  At his own house. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 186 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh, to entertain his own guests? 
MR ZULU:  To entertain his own guests.  That was my 
understanding. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Would this have been... would this 
have been liquor that he had got from your business over a 
certain period or would this have been one order, like for one 
function? 
MR ZULU:  Over a certain period Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It would have been over a certain period? 
MR ZULU:  Correct, correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  And are you able to remember roundabout 
when it was that he had ordered liquor? 
MR ZULU:  It was mainly in 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m? 
MR ZULU:  It was mainly in 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mainly in 2015? 
MR ZULU:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  By that time, you had known him for 
a long time? 
MR ZULU:  I think almost for about three years or so. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You had known him for about three years 
or so? 
MR ZULU:  If I am not mistaken. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR ZULU:  Ja.  I cannot be specific Chair. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 187 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And did he have an arrangement with your 
business in terms of which you could deliver liquor to... your 
business could deliver liquor to his... to him and he would 
pay later? 
MR ZULU:  Yes, Chair.  And at times, he can treat himself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR ZULU:  Correct, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And was that a written arrangement or are 
there documents about the arrangements? 
MR ZULU:  Ja, at times there will be written documents. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  There will be, yes. 
MR ZULU:  There will be diaries where the order is written 
down and the amounts of money, all are written down. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes. 
MR ZULU:  There would be those kind of things to make sure 
that I track down my customers.  He was not the only 
customer with the same arrangement. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Yes, 
there 
were 
other 
customers 
...[intervenes]  
MR ZULU:  There were other customers. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  ...who might have run up big amount of 
debts? 
MR ZULU:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  So the whole amount at the 
time that he made this payment of R 600 000,00, was that 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 188 of 219 
 
the last amount he owed you or was there still some that he 
was going to pay? 
MR ZULU:  There was still some Chair.  It was... there was 
more.  I think it was about six hundred and four, if I am not 
mistaken. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Six hundred and...? 
MR ZULU:  Four.  If I am not mistaken. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And four thousand? 
MR ZULU:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
10 
MR ZULU:  But this is the amount I needed to do the deposit 
which I directed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair, if I may interrupt? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I have just got a message that the 
stenographers are struggling to hear Mr Zulu. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Ja, I think… 
MR ZULU:    Chair, I am loud now? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, I think that is better.  So he owed 
20 
you R604 000. 
MR ZULU:     At the time, I think, if I am not mistaken now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At the time you gave the instruction. 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That he must pay R600 000 to SMD 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 189 of 219 
 
account. 
MR ZULU:    Correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just seems strange that he – if he owes 
you R604 000 you do not ask for him put in R604 000? 
MR ZULU:    No, I would not have, Chair, because that was 
my arrangement with the dealership. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, in terms of the …[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:    That was informed by the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, the R4 000 he could pay directly to 
you? 
10 
MR 
ZULU: 
 
 
 Yes, 
yes, 
he 
[inaudible 
– 
speaking 
simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the R600 000 could go that side. 
MR ZULU:    Yes, exactly, correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did he pay you the R4 000 afterwards? 
MR ZULU:    Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Into your account? 
MR ZULU:    Via cash. 
CHAIRPERSON:   With cash? 
MR ZULU:    Yes, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  So you say there were 
other businesses or there were other people who also 
would have had a similar arrangement with your business 
in terms of which they could owe you quite large sums of 
money for liquor. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 190 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:    Across the board, some small, I mean 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    You will understand, Chair, the township 
business, you have got different clientele.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.   
MR ZULU:    So my clientele was of different calibre. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    Because of the provision of service. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR ZULU:    That I was providing, so I have a special 
clientele that I have targeted for my business for obvious 
reasons. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    So there will be different categories of people 
at different levels of their income level. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And the documentation that you 
say you do have in support of your version that this was a 
debt or loan, I think said a debt, what documentation do 
you remember as documentation that you have that you 
20 
could make available to the Commission. 
MR ZULU:    Chair, I could check the log books that have 
been used by myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR ZULU:    But I can also check the diaries, if they still 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 191 of 219 
 
exist, which they used to keep. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MR ZULU:    This is what I thought maybe the investigators 
will be interested upon them having gone into my account. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    But unfortunately they never did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Mr Pretorius? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you, Chair.  If I understand 
your evidence, Mr Zulu, during 2015 Mr Sodi became 
indicated to your business, that business is T Z Lounge, 
10 
correct? 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Please, I was just going to 
interrupt your voice.   The indebtedness of R600 000, did 
he come into your premises occasionally? 
MR ZULU:    Occasionally, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And was it the debt that – or the 
expenses that he would have incurred on that occasion, did 
that form part of the R600 000? 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you say there were times when 
you delivered alcohol as well? 
MR ZULU:    Yes, at times I would deliver alcohol to him at 
…[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   This was during 2015? 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 192 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:    2015, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you say that when customers 
come, they can use a credit card? 
MR ZULU:    At the time, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Or – and the credit card would be 
that payment by credit card? 
MR ZULU:    Yes, by swiping. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   They would not have to draw 
money elsewhere; they would just swipe the credit card on 
your credit card machine? 
10 
MR ZULU:    Yes, as I have said, they will use different 
payments, those who want to pay via credit cards, they use 
credits cards, those who want to pay …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So there is a credit card facility 
and there was a credit card facility in 2015? 
MR ZULU:    Chair, I am not sure, I can double-check that.  
There was a time when the credit card system that we were 
using was not functioning but I can assure that there was a 
point when that facility was fully functional but I can 
double check that. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Now this money is owed to your 
business? 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is there any reason why you would 
have said to Sodi pay it for my personal benefit and not 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 193 of 219 
 
pay it to the business? 
MR ZULU:    Just repeat the question? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You see, what you did was you did 
not say to Sodi pay it to my business. 
MR ZULU:    Yes? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You said pay it to the garage 
dealer for my personal benefit. 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Is that correct? 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is your business a company, a CC or 
when you say T Z Lounge or is it a sole proprietor 
business, you own it as a person and it is not a legal entity 
on its own? 
MR ZULU:    No, it is not a legal entity on its own, I was 
trading it as T Z Lounge. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MR ZULU:    I was trading it as T Z Lounge. 
CHAIRPERSON:   T Z Lounge. 
MR ZULU:    Correct.  That is a trade name. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it was you trading as T Z Lounge? 
MR ZULU:    Correct, correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And you are the sole owner? 
MR ZULU:    Correct, at that time together with my wife, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At that time together with your wife? 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 194 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, our investigations show that 
there is an entity with the letters T Z that is owned by 
someone else in Pietermaritzburg.  Do you know of that 
entity? 
MR ZULU:    And entity …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you say – are you the sole 
owner of T Z Lounge? 
MR ZULU:    Yes, at the time, yes, together with my wife. 
10 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, then you cannot be the sole 
owner.  Are you and your wife joint owners of T Z Lounge? 
MR ZULU:    Yes, correct.  Alright, let us put it like that, it 
is the way the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, you did mention earlier together 
with your wife, ja. 
MR ZULU:    Yes, yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And the business is registered in 
the names of both you and our wife?    
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
20 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And by what name is your wife 
registered in that business?  
MR ZULU:    I think it is Brooding, if I am not mistaken. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Surname? 
MR ZULU:    Brooding, if I am not mistaken. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 195 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Spell that please? 
MR ZULU:    B-r-o-o-d-i-n-g. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Brooding? 
MR ZULU:    Yes.  I am not sure what your investigators 
did found though, Chair, that is why will say I would have 
preferred that such level of detail was being sought rather 
than… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    If you hear what I am saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, I understand, ja. 
10 
MR ZULU:    That is the cry I have always had because I 
availed myself to give all the information as required and I 
do not think, Chair, with all due respect, that to make 
reference to my wife when I have not been given that 
opportunity as well because …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I am just asking who owned the 
business, there is nothing sinister in that question. 
MR ZULU:    No, okay, in your view, if that is your view, 
that is fine. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Because what happens is that a 
20 
debt owed to the business is paid to you in your personal 
capacity but that may be something that can be debated. 
MR 
ZULU: 
 
 
 
I 
am 
just 
[inaudible 
– 
speaking 
simultaneously] Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   At a later stage. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 196 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, sorry, sorry. 
MR ZULU:    I am saying, Chair, the questions are already 
provided, all the answers to investigators, anything even 
when they wanted that information and I have never been 
given that opportunity to say come and tell us about this 
detail.  Now one of the reason I was asking myself why am 
I just brought into the Commission, having not answered 
the questions and I knew at the back of my mind the type 
of the questions that Mr Pretorius would be asking in a 
public platform whereas all that information is available 
10 
and 
I 
have 
no 
intention 
whatsoever 
to 
hide 
that 
information. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, I do have a note from the 
investigators here that …[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:    You were saying something about a certain 
company, Mr Pretorius, you were saying something about a 
certain other company under my name in Pietermaritzburg. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, I am just saying do you know 
of any other entity with the letters T Z that is a similar 
20 
business to yours? 
MR ZULU:    I would not know.  How would I know that? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You do not know, alright, well I 
would imagine you would know of your competitors in 
Pietermaritzburg, particularly competitors with the name of 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 197 of 219 
 
T Z. 
MR ZULU:    I know all the competitors in my space.  I 
know all of them in my space that is why I am saying I 
need to get a …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But you have no competitors who 
trade under the initials T Z? 
MR ZULU:    Not that I know of. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And you would know, obviously, if 
10 
there was another T Z Lounge in Pietermaritzburg not 
owned by you, but be that as it may, I have a question here 
as to did you offer the documentation that you now talk 
about when you were asked to give evidence as to the 
payment of R600 000?  You could have said look, I have 
got documentation. 
MR ZULU:    Did I offer? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Did you offer documentation? 
MR ZULU:    I was never asked to offer any documentation, 
Chair.  No one has asked me to offer any documentation 
20 
and no one has ever even called me into a meeting and 
asked me about this.  It is the first time that I am here and 
answer those questions., 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   One of the other features of the 
way this money was paid to you is that nothing would 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 198 of 219 
 
appear in your bank accounts. 
MR ZULU:    Because nobody has asked me about my bank 
accounts, people just went into my bank account.  Nobody 
has asked me about my bank account.  This is one of the  
reasons, Chair, that to some extent I did not appreciate the 
way investigators have dealt with me.  I offered to provide 
all the information in my first affidavit. I offered for my own 
banking 
statements 
to 
be 
made 
available 
for 
any 
transaction.  I offered that myself on the affidavit.  That 
never happened.  So I am just trying to say, Chair, the 
10 
information that Mr Pretorius is referring to, no one has 
even asked me for that documentation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you know, Mr Zulu, I have got to put 
this to you in order to be fair to you so that you can deal 
with it.  You came last year, was it August, or your lawyers 
came, you put up an affidavit.  Arising out of Mr Dukwana’s 
evidence, as I recall, which had – in which he sought to 
link you, I think, or maybe I am being unfair to him but 
…[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:    I think he was just using the book, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, he was using a certain …[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:    Let us put it like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, a spreadsheet. 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And on his understanding to say at least 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 199 of 219 
 
there was a possibility that certain initials there were 
referring to you.  There was a possibility on his thinking 
and in that context – I mean, if that – the amount reflected 
there in that spreadsheet against the initials that we are 
talking about, if that amount – if those initials represented 
you and if that amount was paid to the person represented 
by those initials would be you, that would be in your 
account if it was paid into your accounts, okay?   
 
So the context in which you were saying the 
investigators can come and I will cooperate, I will show 
10 
them my accounts, they can look at my accounts, I was not 
paid any money.  That was the context.  But for me here is 
the point.  I would have expected that if you knew that 
there was money that came from Mr Sodi’s business or 
from my Sodi that was paid, I will say for argument’s sake, 
for your benefit or was paid to you even if via a car dealer, 
that I would have expected that you would say you people, 
I can tell you that I never got any X million rand that is 
written there and those initials do not represent me, my 
accounts, you can come and have a look but what I can 
20 
disclose that there is a some money that Sodi paid that I 
instructed him to pay.  He did not pay it into my accounts, 
this is where he paid it for, this is what it was about.  That 
is all I can tell you.  You do not even have to come and 
investigate; I can tell you there is money that I got from 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 200 of 219 
 
him but these are the circumstances under which I got 
them.  But you did not say that.  You just said you can 
come and have a look at my accounts, I will cooperate, so 
somebody can say you are able to say that because you 
knew that no money went into your account, the money 
went into SMD’s account.  Do you understand what I am 
saying?  So I thought I must just put that to you so that 
you can deal with it. 
MR ZULU:    No, I hear you, Chair, and I hear the angle 
that you are coming from.  I think, Chair, maybe it is 
10 
because this transaction, from where I am sitting, was 
above board transaction.  So much so that the product in 
question, it is a product that I have declared.  So it is 
above board, so much so that the balance of it appears in 
financial statements.  So if you go to the financial 
institution that provide that loan for it, so it is the product 
that is above board.  So there was no secrecy around it.  
There was no way I was going to hide it and I have no 
intention.   
Maybe it was in that context that I was saying if 
20 
anybody wants me to cooperate and provide any form of 
information on 
anything that is suspicious of, I am 
available and this particular product in particular, it is a 
product that I declared.  So I have an obligation at that 
time to declare my business and to declare any property 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 201 of 219 
 
that I own, which I did.  But even if I did not want to 
declare it, there is a bank that confirms that you get money 
to buy the product and I am still paying for that loan for 
that matter. 
 
So maybe it is because of that context that the 
investigators 
were 
going 
to 
in 
any 
event 
find 
the 
information that I have declared as required, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes. 
MR ZULU:    Maybe it is in that context that I never 
bothered that much because I said I am available to 
10 
provide the information. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The proposition that I would want 
to put to you, Mr Zulu, is not a difficult proposition.  The 
transaction involving the payment of R600 000 for your 
benefit or in discharge of a debt to SMD Motors would not 
appear in your personal bank accounts, correct? 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And that would enable Mr Sodi too 
to say, as he does, FS1 page 519, paragraph 81, it is a 
20 
straightforward statement, it says …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry what page? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 519 of FS1, paragraph 81. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am afraid you will have t repeat the 
page number now that I have got the bundle. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 202 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Page 519. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Page 519? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:    Page 159? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   519 towards the end, right towards the 
end. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you have it there, Mr Zulu? 
MR ZULU:    Yes, yes, I do, 519. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Do you have it, Chair? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I have got it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Paragraph 81 he says: 
“I have not in my personal capacity nor has 
Blackhead made any payments to the personal 
accounts of any government officials.” 
That may be correct. 
MR ZULU:    Well, it is general, so …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Because he says he has not made 
…[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:    He says government officials, but I am talking 
20 
about …[intervenes] 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well, insofar as you are a 
government official, he is correct, he has not made any 
payment into your personal account, correct? 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 203 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   But he has made a payment of 
R600 000 to you through a payment to SMD Motors.  He 
has discharged the debt to you and paid that to SMD 
Motors.  The point I am making …[intervenes] 
MR ZULU:    I heard you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   …is the construction of the 
transaction to SMD Motors ensures that it does not appear 
in your personal account to enable Mr Sodi to say: 
“I have not in my personal capacity nor has 
Blackhead made any payments to the personal 
10 
accounts of any government officials.” 
MR ZULU:    Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   And there is no but after.  But 
anyway, let me just go, if I may, by way of summary to your 
own statements.  Your first affidavit appears in bundle FS1 
at page 152. 
CHAIRPERSON:   152 you said, hey?  Well, there is an 
affidavit of Mr Zulu’s that starts at page 150.   
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   If you would bear with me a 
moment, Chair, if I could just get it?  Your affidavit appears 
20 
– your first affidavit, EXHIBIT TT5.1 appears in bundle FS1 
at 150.  I do not want - to take you, if I may, briefly to page 
152. 
MR ZULU:    Yes, Chair, I am there. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You say at paragraph 7.2 in the 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 204 of 219 
 
last sentence: 
“I unequivocally tender to the Commission with the 
necessity for any sums to provide my banking 
details 
and 
those 
of 
my 
wife 
or 
any 
other 
information that the Commission may require of me 
to substantiate the fact that I received no money 
whatsoever from the aforesaid project, or at all.” 
That’s a very wide statement. 
MR ZULU:   Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We know that you knew and you do 
10 
know that you did receive money subject to an explanation 
in relation to the legitimacy of the payment, correct? 
MR ZULU:   No, Chair, that’s not correct, the statement 
here says, and I’ll read it myself, and I won’t read the last 
paragraph because the last paragraph is preceded by the 
statement, that appears to be – or let me just read the 
whole paragraph, Chair, so that the context is not lost. 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR ZULU: “I deny emphatically that insofar as the  
Annexure, which includes the initials TZ, if the 
20 
Annexure is real, I will deal with this later, however, 
the abovementioned minute appears to be that I 
received R10million, part of the Free State asbestos 
eradication 
project 
for 
no 
justifiable 
reason 
whatsoever 
and 
apparently 
there’s 
a 
corrupt 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 205 of 219 
 
reason.” 
That I still deny, as I’m sitting here in this Commission, I 
still deny Chair, I did not get any money of R10million as 
was appearing on the spreadsheet of Mr Dukwana as a 
beneficiary.  So, I will put it to Mr Pretorius that I still 
remain with the statement that I did not get any money as 
it appears on this spreadsheet, as a beneficiary.   So, as 
you are putting it to me, I’m not sure from which context Mr 
Pretorius is saying he’s putting it to me that I did get the 
money, I find that to be quite offensive…[intervenes]. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you may be misunderstanding 
what he’s saying. 
MR ZULU:   Please let him explain to me…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think he’s talking about the R600 000. 
MR ZULU:   But I’ve already explained, Chair how that 
money…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, hang on, hang on, he’s saying – he 
refers to this paragraph and in particular he refers to that 
last sentence which says, 
 
“I 
unequivocally 
tendered 
to 
the 
Commission 
20 
without the necessity for any summons to provide my 
banking details and those of my wife or any other 
information that the Commission may require of Mr – to 
substantiate the fact that I received no money whatsoever 
from the aforesaid project at all”. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 206 of 219 
 
 
I think what he wants to say, and maybe I’m wrong 
but let me put this to you…[intervenes]. 
MR ZULU:   It is in that context, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, hang on let me finish, I’ll give you a 
chance, I’ll give you a chance. 
MR ZULU:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The R600 000 that you instructed Mr 
Sodi to pay to SMD, do you relate it to the asbestos project 
or not? 
MR ZULU:   Not at all. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   You don’t? 
MR ZULU:   Not at all Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, but do you accept that the 
payment of that amount was to your benefit.  Now I’m 
raising that deliberately because earlier on Mr Pretorius 
said, we can discuss later because maybe you’ll say, no 
it’s not a benefit, but I want to put this to you. If somebody 
pays back money that they owe you, is that not a good 
thing for you, that your money is back? 
MR ZULU:   Chair, when you run a business, for your 
20 
monies to be paid to you that are owed to you, you use 
different methodologies. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Yes, 
but 
when 
people 
don’t 
pay…[intervenes]. 
MR ZULU:   Amongst of those is to use the banking 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 207 of 219 
 
systems which I have also alluded to.  We have used with a 
machine inside the business.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no I’m not sure, we might be talking 
at cross-purposes.  I’m just testing our understanding of 
benefit in this context.  So, I would be inclined to think that 
the R600 000 that was paid by Mr Sodi, to you was to your 
benefit, simply because when somebody who owes you 
doesn’t pay back what they owe you, that’s prejudicial to 
you but when they pay back that must be good for you and 
therefore I’m thinking, to say that it’s for your benefit it’s 
10 
fine, leave out the question about whether it was from the 
project or from what but just say, somebody pays back 
money that they owe you, it’s to your benefit, you agree? 
MR ZULU:   Yes, I agree Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, Mr Pretorius? 
MR ZULU:   But the point I was making, Chair, which is the 
reference that is being made to my affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR 
ZULU: 
 
 
It’s 
in 
relation 
to 
the 
spreadsheet…[intervenes]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   The spreadsheet, no, no it’s fine. 
MR ZULU:   Which is the issue, Chair, that I think, earlier 
on you deliberated on with the Senior Counsel. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR ZULU:   Because that’s a – that’s is where we are 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 208 of 219 
 
today because of that spreadsheet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR ZULU:   And I’d like to say to this Commission, Chair, 
I’m not a beneficiary of that spreadsheet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, yes. 
MR ZULU:   I’d like to state it, as I did it on my affidavit I 
am not that’s why I had an interest to talk to Mr Dukwana 
myself to get a sense, why did he concluded on that but I 
was, 
further, 
hoping 
that 
when 
investigations 
are 
happening, this point will come out clear. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Let me make it clear, and this is 
why your issue with Mr Dukwana isn’t directly relevant to 
today’s proceedings, Mr Zulu, is that we are not putting to 
you that you are the recipient of R10million from the 
asbestos project, it’s not being put.  What is being put to 
you is something entirely different.  I’d like to make one 
more point which is a point…[intervenes]. 
MR ZULU:   But with all due respect, Chair, with all due 
respect, Chair, it cannot be that today I’m sitting here 
20 
because of that allegation made by Mr Dukwana and when 
I’m here today, I’m told that’s why – I wouldn’t be here 
today if it was not for the statement made by Mr Dukwana 
in that affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you’d be here for the R600 000. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 209 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Mr Zulu you are here because of 
the investigations that have been done by the Commission 
which have been put to you today, that is why you are 
here.  You are not here to answer to an allegation made by 
Mr Dukwana. 
MR ZULU:   I’ll respect your position, I wouldn’t like to 
argue further, I’ll respect your position. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no that’s fine but you are not 
being suppressed from expressing what you feel but as you 
say, between counsel in the morning, myself and your 
10 
counsel and Mr Pretorius, Mr Pretorius made certain 
undertakings which he, I think seeks to hear but I think you 
have made it clear that, to the extent that Mr Dukwana may 
have linked you to any benefit in the spreadsheet that you 
are not – you are denying any such link, that you have 
made clear. 
MR ZULU:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay, thank you. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The further point that I want to put 
to you, is had you given all your bank accounts, your bank 
20 
accounts and those of the – your wife to the investigators 
they would not have picked up this payment to SMD. 
MR ZULU:    Chair I don’t want to sound repetitive, I 
offered, I was not asked. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja I think you make a legitimate point Mr 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 210 of 219 
 
Zulu about the fact that you offered to cooperate and if the 
investigators did not ask you, that must be noted. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In paragraph 8 of your statement 
or your first affidavit at page 154 of FS1 you say, 
“I would have expected the Commission to have 
investigated my bank accounts by virtue of the 
subpoena powers or summons powers that they 
have at their disposal.  Had they done that, they 
wouldn’t have picked up the payment to SMD 
Motors”, 
10 
 
Correct? 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   So, what, by summary we have 
established then is that you played some role as an official 
in 
the 
establishment 
of 
the 
asbestos 
scheme, 
whether…[intervenes]. 
MR ZULU:    Sorry just repeat the first sentence, I played 
what? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   You played some role in your 
official 
capacity 
in 
the 
establishment 
of 
the 
20 
scheme…[intervenes]. 
MR ZULU:    Accounting role. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Accounting role yes. 
MR ZULU:    Yes, let’s qualify it. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Official role, in your official 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 211 of 219 
 
capacity, let’s stress that, I’m happy to stress that. 
MR ZULU:    Okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   In the – what became, ultimately, 
the asbestos scheme.  You did receive money from Mr 
Sodi, you’ve explained it as to why you’ve received it, 
correct? 
MR ZULU:    Correct. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   The initials TZ appear frequently in 
these transactions, correct? 
MR ZULU:    Correct, I’m not sure about frequently, though 
10 
Chair. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Don’t worry we’ll deal with that in 
due course with other witnesses you certainly haven’t 
shied away, at least in these proceedings from your initials 
Mr Zulu.  We don’t have further questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’ve said to Mr Zulu that a note must be 
taken of the fact that you did offer your cooperation. 
MR ZULU:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I said just a few minutes ago, if the 
investigators did not come to you and ask you questions, a 
20 
note must be taken of that. 
MR ZULU:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But isn’t the fact that they did ask you 
about this R600 000? 
MR ZULU:   Correct Chair. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 212 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that not a fact? 
MR ZULU:   It’s a fact Chair and I responded. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it not a fact that you did respond to 
that question. 
MR ZULU:   I did Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you had an opportunity to tell them 
more about this transaction if you wanted to but you didn’t 
and they didn’t ask you further questions, is that right? 
MR ZULU:   Chair, I think, if I may comment on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
10 
MR ZULU:   I think there has been a communication gap I 
picked up. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you may be right about that. 
MR ZULU:  Between the investigators and my legal team. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:   Which affected negatively. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:   The work of the investigators together with 
myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR ZULU:   As a result of that, I cannot say I had that 
opportunity. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:   Up until I had to respond in writing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 213 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:   If you read all the documents, you’ll see the 
gaps that have been happening in communication and then 
there are breaks, at times of almost five months. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR ZULU:   And then I’m caught between my legal team 
and the investigators. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:   And I couldn’t go directly to investigators when 
there are protocols that have been established. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR ZULU:   Within which one wanted to respect them.  I 
think, Chair, when you read those communications, you’ll 
see that has also contributed to some extent, negatively in 
making sure that opportunities used and that’s a comment I 
will make sure but you’ll see it in all correspondence.  That 
has been the mishap. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you may be right that the 
communication may not have been the best at all times and 
maybe partly because of that, certain things might not have 
happened the way they should have, I’m not sure.  I just 
20 
wanted to make the point to acknowledge that, certainly, 
they did put the question to you and you answered, maybe 
they should have followed up but it may be that from your 
side too, you should have said, here is more to clarify this 
or whatever but it may be that, as you put it, there was a 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 214 of 219 
 
challenge with the communication and that resulted in the 
situation. 
MR ZULU:   Chair, I want to assure you, in my personal 
capacity, that I’ve never had an option of not working with 
the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MR ZULU:   I’ve always made it a point, in all my 
affidavits, both of them, that at any given moment I’m here 
to work and cooperate at the Commission and I’d like to 
state it on record, that commitment remain. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   That remains yes, no thank you very 
much. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Well I’ve just been passed a note, 
which perhaps contains a question I should ask but I think 
it’s clear already but before we go there, any further 
information that you had in relation to the R600 000, you 
could have volunteered, correct, you could have, had you 
wanted to. 
MR ZULU:    This is the point, Chair, again we are going 
back to the protocols…[intervenes]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   About the gap in communication. 
MR ZULU:   This is the protocols I’m talking about Mr 
Pretorius, that we had different lines of communication and 
each time investigators would come to me, I’ll speak to 
them and then I’ll ask them, do we start a new process, 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 215 of 219 
 
should I deal with you directly or you want to go through 
via my legal team and then they will agree, they’ll go via 
my 
legal 
team, 
then 
there 
will 
be 
breakdown 
of 
communication.  Then I will continue with life, so, honestly 
speaking, Mr Pretorius, the information that investigators 
may have wanted, exactly the same way that you have 
requested it, it would have been provided to them.  You 
can talk to Ettienne, I will speak to him, I will commit 
myself, I will respond to him via email, myself, I won’t even 
refer him to my lawyers, I will do it myself.  So, it’s 
10 
unfortunate, Chair, that those protocols for me – at some 
point I even asked him, how does this work because I can’t 
break protocol with my legal team. At the same time, he is 
coming to me directly and I’ll commit myself.  So, there 
was that challenge but that was not a sense of no 
cooperation from my side. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   We’ll be very quick, if you would 
just hear the question, maybe I could put it again, to be 
clear. 
MR ZULU:    Yes. 
20 
ADV 
PRETORIUS 
SC: 
 
 
Regardless 
of 
what 
the 
investigators did or didn’t do, it was within your power and 
capacity to volunteer the information in regard to the 
R600 000, correct? 
MR ZULU:    Correct, via the legal team. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 216 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Yes, alright what is…[intervenes]. 
MR ZULU:    Via the legal team. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   What is interesting is that, it was 
only 
after 
the 
investigators 
had 
discovered 
these 
transactions with SMD Motors that all this came out. It 
could have come out before as the Chair points out. 
MR ZULU:    But Chair, that’s what I was saying, 
Chairperson, the information about R600 000 it’s an open 
secret, there was no way I was going to be able to hide 
that payment.  It forms part of – the current car that I have 
10 
I’ve declared.  So, there was no intention, whatsoever, 
Chair, if they had come to me to say, we want the 
following, even my legal team, I would have volunteered 
the information because it’s in the public domain.  I don’t 
know if you hear what I’m saying, Chair, the financial 
situation, one gets there…[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   It’s not in the public domain not is 
it in your bank accounts, nor is it in your record. 
MR ZULU:    Chair, it is in the financial statement of my 
car, an amount of R600 000 was paid, it is available, it is 
20 
there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was paid by Sodi. 
MR ZULU:   Exactly Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:   So, you can’t hide it. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 217 of 219 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR ZULU:   That’s the point I’m trying to make Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hmm, okay. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that its Mr Pretorius?  Mr Zulu, thank 
you very much for coming to give evidence and thank you 
very much for re-committing yourself to assisting the 
Commission 
and 
even 
personally 
dealing 
with 
the 
investigators for any further information that they – that 
relates to this amount or any other thing that, you know, 
10 
you may think is relevant or they may pick up, thank you 
very much. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Sorry Chair, I did receive a note 
and it’s not worth my while to ignore it, from the team.  
When did your relationship and friendship with Mr Sodi 
begin, what year can you remember? 
MR ZULU:    I can’t remember exactly but…[intervenes]. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Was it before 2014? 
MR ZULU:    Yes, correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, no – and maybe I can ask 
20 
this, I know I was also – I had started to thank you so that 
you can be excused.  Your relationship with him, that Mr 
Sodi, is it on the basis of him being a friend or not really?  
MR ZULU:   He’s been a customer for my business. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 218 of 219 
 
MR ZULU:   Obviously in the process with a customer like 
that we developed a friendship yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And Mr Mthuli also, is not a friend, he 
was just a customer.   
MR ZULU:   Just an associate that visited. 
CHAIRPERSON:   An association? 
MR ZULU:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Thank you very much Mr 
Zulu for coming to assist the Commission, we appreciate it. 
MR ZULU:   Thank you Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   The investigators will communicate in 
order – so that we can get whatever documentation is 
relevant, thank you very much you are excused. 
MR ZULU:   Thank you Chair, thank you Mr Pretorius. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Mr Pretorius, you talked 
about the other witness being excused or what is the 
position? 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   Chair it would be best if we began 
tomorrow if we may, we will attempt to finish two witnesses 
tomorrow. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   I don’t envisage – well who can 
say, I don’t envisage any interlocutory rule. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, do we need to start a little earlier 
than normal or not really? 
06 AUGUST 2020 – DAY 246 
 
Page 219 of 219 
 
ADV PRETORIUS SC:   No, no Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Okay we are going to 
adjourn them until tomorrow morning at ten, we adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 7 AUGUST 2020    
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
  
