 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
 
DAY 347 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 301 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 3 of 301 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 22 FEBRUARY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you not wish me a good morning this 
morning? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I always wish you a good morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughs]  Yes, are we ready? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, we are. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, for the first few days of 
this week, it will probably be ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but remember to speak up a bit.  I 
10 
know your voice is soft.  So...  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It needs to carry, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, for the first few days of 
the week, we will be leading PRASA related evidence.  And 
just to give you a roadmap for the week and then I will tell 
you what is going to happen today. 
 
We are first going to lead evidence relating to 
the response of the former Minister Dipuo Peters to 
matters raised by Mr Molefe when he gave evidence and in 
20 
his affidavit.  Ms Peters will be our first witness. 
 
The second issue that we will be dealt with this 
week Chairperson, would be concern raised about the 
contract as implemented by Werksmans.  Oh, there have 
been 
– 
we 
have 
got 
many 
affidavits, 
we 
have 
got 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 4 of 301 
 
memorandums and so on.   
 
And it is a concern that has been expressed and 
the Commission is of the view – well, the Investigating 
Team is of the view that those should be aired whatever 
the evidence is in regard to that so that a decision can be 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I remember because there have 
been all kinds of issues raised about whether Werksmans 
appointment 
to 
conduct 
the 
investigation, 
that 
they 
conducted in PRASA, was legal. 
10 
 
And after Mr Montana had been given us his 
affidavit that, as far as I understand, still does not have 
correctly completed or marked annexures.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He has raised that issue again and I 
said that that issue should be investigated. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that once and for all it is known 
whether that appointment was legal or not and that is what 
the investigators have done. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And Chairperson, in fairness, I need 
to record that Werksmans itself has filed a comprehensive 
affidavit dealing with these and I will make that affidavit 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 5 of 301 
 
and its contents available to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  No, that is fine.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   From what I have read, it looks on the 
question on the legality of the appointment; there might not 
be much in dispute in terms of facts. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That is... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And Werksmans in its affidavit looks 
at the law and says ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   ...that look at PRASA’s SCM policy, 
they believe that it was within the policy and accordingly 
lawful in terms of Section 216... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes.  Well, the latest affidavit 
that – or the affidavit that I read, as far as Werksmans is 
concerned, seems to suggest that the appointment was 
lawful.  I have question marks about that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But we will look at it.  But it looks like in 
20 
terms of facts that there is not much in dispute. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is a question of whether, if an 
appointment such as the one that was given to Werksmans, 
was done in the manner in which it seems everybody 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 6 of 301 
 
agrees it was done. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Whether that is lawful or not. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That is the second area that we will 
be exploring.  The third area that we will be exploring 
Chairperson is.  You might remember and you will see from 
the evidence that we lead today that the Swifambo 
Contract which was both locomotives for a contract price of 
10 
R 3.5 billion. 
 
There are two reports.  One is a preliminary 
report done in 2017 and handed to the police at the 
request of the police prepared for by PRASA and saying 
that these persons who are named in this report, probably 
need to be investigated and here is all the information. 
 
They were then told, the forensic investigator 
was told that his next brief would be in respect of 
Siyangena and that is R 2.8 billion contract.  After he filed 
his report on Swifambo, he never heard from the police 
20 
again. 
 
In other words, there is not an equivalent report 
to Siyangena but the report that he presents will be 
presented to you through the investigator who will be one 
of the witnesses. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 7 of 301 
 
 
We also have the end product of that being the 
report of the liquidator, the final report of the liquidator 
and he will to a large extent confirm that what he found 
three years later is more or less what had been found by 
the investigator in two, one, seven.   
 
And the question we will be asking at some 
stage Chairperson and the Commission would need to ask 
is.  Why is that when the police knew in 2017 that there 
were 
people 
who 
probably 
received 
these 
monies 
unlawfully, why are they still at large? 
10 
 
And the disturbing thing Chairperson, and it is a 
point that would be raised by Ms Ngoye when she gives 
evidence, they are using those very funds to fight the 
liquidators in an attempt to get those monies but that is the 
– those are the concerns that we would be raising 
Mr Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay.  No, that is fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, then we will deal today 
at this point with the evidence of Ms Peters.  And again for 
your benefit Chairperson and for Ms Peters’ benefit, I did 
20 
explain to the legal representatives that there in fact four 
issues relating to her evidence.   
 
She has given an affidavit.  There are four 
issues that arise.  One is.  You will recall there was a 
meeting, 
and 
there 
is 
no 
dispute 
about 
it, 
on 
the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 8 of 301 
 
26 t h of August 2015 with the President. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it not 20 August? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It is...  Oh, sorry it is the 20 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  And that meeting was between 
the President on Minister Peters, Mr Molefe, former 
Minister Gadebe and later on Mr Montana.  We will explore 
what 
happened 
at 
that 
meeting 
in 
relation 
to 
what 
Ms Peters says. 
 
And then there are three related issues.  One is 
10 
the appointment of the acting CEO or the appointment of 
Mr Letsoalo as the acting CEO of PRASA which Mr Molefe 
complained about.  Then the concerns that Ms Peters 
raised about the Werksmans contract, and finally, the 
dismissal of the board.   
 
Now I have told Ms Peters’ representatives that 
there are two different versions on those matters.  The 
facts may be the same but as to what moved people.  And 
what I am going to do Chairperson in this evidence that 
only came up before the Commission in the last two weeks.   
20 
 
So when the persons you heard the concerns 
about parliamentary oversight, I will look at what was said 
in Parliament to the developments at PRASA and at some 
stage would want to make submissions as to whether there 
was a relationship between what Mr Molefe said where the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 9 of 301 
 
cause is or what Ms Peters says were the reasons for the 
appointment of Mr Letsoalo and also for the dismissal but 
those are the issues we will be dealing with. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.  One of the issues, I 
thought Ms Peters would also address is the question of 
and the delay in the appointment of Group CEO. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I am very keen to hear what she has 
to say about that because – of course, I cannot remember 
how long she stayed as Minister when there was no 
10 
permanent Group CEO but we know that it has taken years 
for a Group CEO of PRASA to be appointed. 
 
And as I say that, I am not even sure whether in 
fact, as I speak one, there is one but maybe there is on 
who is – whom may have been recently appointed but for a 
number of years the evidence has revealed there was no 
permanent Group CEO. 
 
So for the time that she was Minister, I will be 
interested in knowing why there was a delay in filling that 
position. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I did omit to mention to you 
Chairperson that one of the issues I will raise with 
Ms Peters is that fact that there were no appointments in 
senior positions at PRASA was raised by the Auditor-
General, the then Auditor-General as a reason for what 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 10 of 301 
 
was called the shambolic state in which PRASA found itself 
eventually. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  Okay.  No, that is fine.  You 
mention that there are legal representatives ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...who may need to place themselves on 
record. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let them sanitise before you go there.  
We do not want lawyers to sue the Commission because 
10 
they got Covid in the Commission. 
ADV MAJAVU:   A very good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning. 
ADV MAJAVU:   And I hope the Chair is strong and well? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I am strong and very well. 
ADV MAJAVU:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not have to ask you.  I can see you 
are very strong and well.  [laughs]  Yes? 
ADV MAJAVU:   And I went to church yesterday.  That is 
why I look strong. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  [laughs]   
ADV MAJAVU:   Chair, for the record.  I am Zola Majavu.  I 
appear on behalf of Ms Peters.  And I have been instructed 
to place some comments on record or rather make some 
submissions on instructions of Ms Peters, just purely as 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 11 of 301 
 
her own observations. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV MAJAVU:   And the starting point is that her 
preparedness and determination to be of assistance for the 
Commission remains unshaken and she wanted that out of 
the way for the reasons that will follow. 
 
Just in terms of chronology Chair.  She was the 
Minister of Transport at the time and within her span of 
control reposed 12 entities of which PRASA is one.  And 
the relevance of this very brief submission is as follows.   
10 
 
Chair would remember that in the early stages of 
the Commission, some evidence was led by other people in 
relation to SA Express and the Mafikeng International 
Airport. 
 
And in respect of which she received a formal 
Rule 3.3, and she intends to reciprocate that formally.  And 
then later there was a further 3.3 in relation to the current 
Premier 
of 
the 
North 
West 
Province 
to 
which 
she 
reciprocated. 
 
And then there was a further testimony arising 
20 
from the evidence of Mr Molefe and she reciprocated fully, 
I think on or about October last year.   
 
And 
later 
there 
was 
another 
affidavit 
by 
Mr Montana to which she also formally responded.  There 
may be some disputes regarding the status of the Montana 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 12 of 301 
 
affidavit but as matters stand, she has played open cards 
to 
the 
Commission 
and 
indicated 
her 
preparedness, 
wanting to testify and to her desire on application and if so 
granted, to cross-examine both these effected persons who 
have implicated her. 
 
And 
none 
of 
these 
other 
than 
being 
acknowledged have ever come to a point where Chair we 
have been enrolled and we have made a submission and 
whether or not we are successful.  A ruling has been made. 
 
But what had happened a week and a half ago is 
10 
that we received a notice of enrolment in respect of today’s 
proceedings.  And we took the stance or rather I gave 
advice which advice was accepted, that let us go to the 
Commission and deal with that which you are called upon 
to meet and then express your concerns so that the 
Commission can take that into account when we prepare 
for your subsequent returns in the fulness of the time. 
 
So 
that 
at 
least 
we 
do 
not 
squander 
an 
opportunity as it currently stands.  However, I would be 
failing in my duty if I do not state that she feels aggrieved 
20 
by the fact that we are standing here today on allegations 
that appeared much later in terms of the continual.  But be 
that as it may. 
 
We understand that the scheduling has its own 
challenges.  But I explained from my own understanding as 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 13 of 301 
 
a lawyer that I am acting on instructions and she said:  
Look, in as much as I wanted to be of assistance to the 
Commission, I believe that there must be a balancing act 
to avoid what we call a piecemeal approach. 
 
With 
that 
understanding, 
she 
is 
happy 
to 
proceed.  She came literally on her own because we have 
been pushing.  So to the extent that she might not be able 
to deal infinitely with specific detail, it must be seen in that 
context. 
 
Because what we then did, and I am indebted to 
10 
my elder and my learned brother, to say of our own, we did 
have extra discussions to find means and ways to make 
sure that we structure her testimony notwithstanding these 
challenges, in a manner that will be beneficial for the 
Commission but at least gives us some of ground to say 
what she has to say. 
 
Because she has a fear that the Commission is 
fast running out of time and therefore if she does not get a 
chance 
to 
cross-examine 
those 
who 
implicated 
here 
previously, she may have this thing hanging over her head 
20 
like a sword. 
 
So that is the really the nub of the concern.  We 
are not taking a swipe at anybody.  We accept that it is 
what it is.  And from my view Chair, I did indicate to have 
that when I appeared here on a previous occasion.  We 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 14 of 301 
 
debated with the Chair and we agreed without holding each 
other to any respective positions that as far as possible 
time must be made to deal with issues holistically. 
 
But I have come to learn that there are different 
workstreams and sometimes it might not be possible to 
reconcile.  But from my discussion that my learned friend 
and I had, we then agreed that he would broadly cover 
those topics that he had so eloquently explained. 
 
We also anticipate that the Chair may also throw 
one or two issues and she is more than ready to deal with 
10 
those but what I thought that that context needed to be 
given so that if she does come back on the next occasion, 
could we please try and accommodate that request as far 
as possible but that is really how I would mark off the 
submission. 
 
Lastly Chair.  With regard to the issue that the 
Chair indicated that she would want to hear her own, the 
delay with the appointment.  It is something that she is 
perfectly capable to deal with unrestrained to the best of 
her ability.   
20 
 
So she will be able to deal with the PMG report 
even though that was sent to us late.  We understand that 
those issues that are been raised in there are not have 
been happened in line.   
 
So she has indicated that she will also be able 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 15 of 301 
 
to deal with that and so she will with all these other topics 
that my learned friend has indicated.  And of course, 
depending on the question and answer session, she is 
more than willing to deal with other issues. 
 
The only qualification might be.  She does not 
know 
the 
current 
standing 
of 
the 
Montana 
affidavit.  
However, she has filed a substantive affidavit in relation 
thereto.  So if the need arises, she may want to refer to 
that as she engages on these whole issues around PRASA. 
 
So she is not asking to be treated with gloves.  
10 
She is simply saying:  I am here.  I am coming in an 
unstructured manner but we have tried with the evidence 
leader to try and make it as structured as possible.   
 
And I think with that out of the way, I am more 
than happy to go and sit and watch as she engages with 
the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:   Those were the instructions that I was 
pertinently asked to place on record Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no.  Before you go and sit.  I 
20 
think that what you have said in terms of your instructions 
from Ms Peters is very constructive.  She places on record 
her concerns, that she is very prepared to cooperate and 
do the best she can to be of assistance to the Commission 
and answer whatever questions. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 16 of 301 
 
 
She accepts also that there may be challenges 
in terms of the Commission hearing everything that she 
would like to deal with at once.   
 
And you were right in explaining to her that the 
Commission has got different workstreams.  You will find 
that witnesses hwo have given evidence on different 
workstreams have maybe implicated you and you have 
received 3.3. Notices but one workstream is ready to hear 
your evidence but another one is not ready yet. 
 
So that is why quite often a number of witnesses 
10 
have had to come back to the Commission a number of 
times.  So one accepts that the best way would be where 
one would come and deal with everything but it just has not 
been possible because of the way the Commission started 
working. 
 
You know, if you start by investigating and 
finalising your investigations and then start hearings, it is 
easy to do it that way but the Commission in 2018 was 
quite under pressure to start hearing evidence and... 
 
So 
as 
investigators 
continue 
with 
the 
20 
investigations, the Commission was hearing witnesses who 
were ready and that is why we have the situation.   
 
I am aware that there is or is an application or 
there may be more than one application that she has filed.  
I think one that came to my desk recently is where she was 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 17 of 301 
 
reserving the right to apply for leave to cross-examine but 
she wanted to place her version before the Commission. 
 
There are a number of application for leave to 
cross-examine and application for leave to just adduce 
evidence or place one’s version before the Commission 
without asking to cross-examine anybody that are being 
dealt with right now. 
 
So soon all concern, including her, she will know 
what the outcome thereof is.  So they have not been 
forgotten.   
10 
ADV MAJAVU:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But it might be helpful if you were to 
send a note maybe to Mr Vas Soni just to say in terms of 
your instructions these are the ones on which you have not 
heard from the Commission in terms of outcome so that we 
make sure we have got all of them. 
 
If something has falling through the cracks we 
can pick it up.  So if you could do that that would be 
helpful but we appreciate the spirit of operation. 
ADV MAJAVU:   Chair, thanks.  From my side, we have 
20 
already anticipated and that I have done exactly that and 
between the two of us, we will be able to find each other. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Okay. 
ADV MAJAVU:   And yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 18 of 301 
 
ADV MAJAVU:   So it is not something that I am raising for 
the first time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:   My learned brother is fully aware of it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that is ...[intervenes]  
ADV MAJAVU:   And we are quite confident that we do not 
need to detain ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:   ...this hearing any longer about than the 
logistical arrangements. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.  Because then Mr Soni 
can be in touch with evidence leaders in other workstreams 
such as the matter relating to North West would have fallen 
under Advocate Hofmeyr for example.   
ADV MAJAVU:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So he can be in touch with them so that 
we make sure that nothing has fallen through the cracks. 
ADV MAJAVU:   Yes.  Then as a parting part Chair.  That 
part is firmly under control.  I think there was also – we did 
indicate to the Commission that insofar as Professor 
20 
Mokgoro is concerned, having perused the supplementary 
affidavit. 
 
He simply says what are recorded is basically 
what was passed on to me and on that it will be silly of us 
to persist with an application to cross-examine him.  In any 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 19 of 301 
 
event, he is simply reporting as an official.   
 
The 
two 
applications 
that 
I 
can 
tell 
the 
Commission right now and that she feels very strongly 
about that she will wish to persist with her application to 
cross-examine.  It is with reference to Messrs Montana and 
Molefe.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MAJAVU:   The others, we – before the next 
enrolment, would have resolved before we start. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV MAJAVU:   We thought, she is here it may well be 
after she has testified today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV 
MAJAVU: 
 
 
She 
might 
recalibrate 
instructions 
differently. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:   And I will convey that similarly to my 
brother. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV MAJAVU:   So that we can proceed on that basis. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.  That is fine. 
ADV MAJAVU:   Thank you.  Those are my submissions 
Chair.  If I may now be excused? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much.  You may sit.  
Thank you very much. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 20 of 301 
 
ADV MAJAVU:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Yes, Mr Soni.  Would this be 
the right time for the registrar to administer the oath? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Ms Peters.  
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The registrar will administer the oath or 
affirmation to you now. 
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You can switch on your mic. 
10 
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record. 
WITNESS:   It is Elizabeth Dipuo Peters. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection in taking the 
prescribed oath? 
WITNESS:   No. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
WITNESS:   Yes. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you swear that the evidence you are 
20 
about to give, shall be the truth, the whole truth and 
nothing but the truth?  If so, please raise up your right 
hand and say, so help me God. 
WITNESS:   So help me God. 
ELIZABETH DIPUO PETERS:  (d.s.s.) 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 21 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Thank you very much.  You 
may be seated.  If we can hear you well with the mask on, 
it will be fine.  If we cannot hear you, we will ask you if you 
mind taking it off because there is sufficient social 
distance.   
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
MS PETERS:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you for coming to give evidence 
Ms Peters. 
10 
MS PETERS:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni. 
EXAMINATION BY ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please 
Chairperson.  Ms Peters, it is correct that you have made 
two affidavits in relation to PRASA related matters.  Is that 
correct? 
MS PETERS:   It is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Soni.  Just make sure you 
are not too far from the mic. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The mic. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because your voice is naturally very 
soft.  So if you are far we will not hear.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The first affidavit Ms Peter is the one 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 22 of 301 
 
you have made on the 16 t h of October.  And if you look at 
Bundle L, it is Exhibit SS-22. 
MS PETERS:   SS-22.  Yes? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I would like you to look at that 
affidavit Ms Peters.  Is that your affidavit?  
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson, this is my affidavit. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And if you look at page 13 of the 
affidavit, page 16 of that bundle you will see a signature.  
Is that your signature there as the deponent?  
MS PETERS:   Page 18. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   If you look at the right hand side it is 
page 13 but the bundle number is on the left hand side, it 
is page 16.  Is that your signature? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, Mr Soni, we normally use the 
black numbers, are we going to follow that, are we going 
to...? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, we follow the black numbers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, then Ms Peters, whenever he 
refers to any page you only look at the black numbers on 
the left hand corner at the top of each page.  Forget about 
20 
the red numbers on the right hand side. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Are you happy with that? 
MS PETERS:   I can see the page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the page he has referred you to is – 
we just refer to it as page 16, we will not say PRASA 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 23 of 301 
 
bundle L-016, we just say 16. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  You have confirmed that 
signature that appears before the word deponent is your 
signature? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, hundred percent, Chairperson, that is 
my signature. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Do you confirm that what is contained 
in this affidavit is true and correct? 
10 
MS PETERS:   I can confirm, Chairperson, that it is true 
and correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now you have made a second 
affidavit and that is in relation to allegations made by Mr 
Montana.  We do not need to look at that for the time 
being, I am just trying to orientate you.  We are not going 
to deal with that matter today. 
MS PETERS:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So we are now going to deal with 
20 
your affidavit of the 16 October 2020.  Now can I – I just 
want to allow you to say what you want in relation to this 
affidavit, but before I do that, would I be correct in saying 
that there are four main issues you address in this affidavit 
responding to what Mr Molefe said in his affidavit to which 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 24 of 301 
 
you respond and I just name for the four for you, one 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or maybe before you do that, Mr Soni, 
do you ask me to admit this affidavit as an exhibit? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, sorry, I ask, Chairperson, that it 
be admitted as EXHIBIT SS22. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say FS? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   SS, S for Soni. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  The supplementary affidavit of Ms 
Elizabeth Dipuo Peters which starts at page 4 of PRASA 
10 
bundle L is admitted – does it have annexures?  It does, 
together with its annexures as EXHIBIT SS22. 
SUPPLEMENTARY 
AFFIDAVIT 
OF 
ELIZABETH 
DIPUO 
PETERS TOGETHER WITH ANNEXURES HANDED IN AS 
EXHIBIT SS22. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chairperson.  Now, 
Ms Peters, is it correct it addresses four matters?  The one 
is the meeting on the 20 August 2015 that Mr Molefe refers 
to at the presidential guesthouse.  That is the first main 
issue that you address, is that correct? 
20 
MS PETERS:   It is correct, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then there are three related issues 
and related because Mr Molefe says that they are probably 
related and that is the appointment of Mr Letsaolo as the 
Acting Group CEO.  Then there were concerns you raised 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 25 of 301 
 
about Werksmans’ investigation and then the fact that you 
then dismissed the board.  Those are the four main issues 
that we deal with. 
MS PETERS:   Yes.  Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now I just want to – and I want to 
move as expeditiously as possible.  In paragraph 6 of your 
affidavit you give the background to the affidavit.  You 
briefly summarise with the Chairperson what you want, so I 
do not want to deprive you of the opportunity of setting out 
the context that you regard as important. 
10 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I think if I have to start off 
from 
the 
statement 
that 
was 
issued 
by 
my 
legal 
representative 
with 
regards 
to 
my 
preparedness 
and 
readiness to cooperate and work with the Commission to 
be able to unravel some of the challenges that have been 
raised with regard to PRASA, I should, through you, 
Chairperson, probably start by indicating that I was 
deployed to PRASA by former President Zuma on the 9 
July 2013, it was exactly on a Monday like this and I had 
the opportunity to apprise myself with the workings of all 
20 
the entities, 12 of them, and two councils.  The one is 
called the Licensing Council and the Regulating Councils 
that deals with aviation and, Chairperson, I would want to 
put before the Commission that PRASA, being as big as it 
is, was one of the biggest actually because of the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 26 of 301 
 
importance of the service that it was providing to the 
people of South Africa. 
 
It is not easy to be a mass carrier and PRASA had 
to transport commuters who were going to work, going to 
look for work and at the same time transport students who 
were going to school, some people who are new qualified 
people who went to look for jobs.  So it was a very 
important institution that I found under the stable under 
transport. 
 
When I arrived in transport, Chairperson, transport 
10 
was regarded as a family and taking into the consideration 
the challenges that you would find in a family, I then said 
to the team of men and women that we were working with, 
being those in the department of transport and equally 
those who were in the 12 entities plus those who were in 
the councils and together with those who were external 
stakeholders like the taxi industry and others, like the 
Road Freight Associations and all those.   
 
I said to them let us work like a team because in a 
team 
everybody 
has 
got 
a 
functional 
role 
to 
play, 
20 
everybody 
has 
got 
a 
particular 
responsibility 
that 
contributes to the whole and that is what informed our work 
in PRASA – I mean, in the transport stable. 
 
In engaging with PRASA one realised that we were 
busy with an organisation that was faced with massive 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 27 of 301 
 
responsibility or modernization.  They were looking at the 
new rolling stock, they were looking at building stations 
and making sure that signalling is being addressed.  And, 
Chairperson, we would know the important of signalling 
because of the challenges that we have also seen in the 
past with the trains derailing, the train crashes and all 
those and many others. 
 
One of the other things that we were busy with 
under the transport stable was to say how do we make it 
possible based on the President’s SOE Review Commission 
10 
Report.  How do we look at trying to be able to make sure 
that we bring these entities together. 
 
I will make an example, Chairperson.  In the roads 
branch you had entities that were dealing with road traffic 
management, entities dealing with road accident, entities 
dealing with traffic infringements and all those and all of 
them were reporting to one branch, one DDG and it did not 
make sense to have this fragmentation and that is why 
there was a need to put all this together. 
 
Equally so, Chairperson, in my engagements with 
20 
PRASA we looked at the issues that were happening and I 
am 
happy 
to 
indicate 
to 
you 
that 
because 
of 
the 
contribution of PRASA to an important draft policy that was 
before government since 2005, the rail policy, we could be 
able to finalise that rail policy and today we have in the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 28 of 301 
 
Department of Transport a rail policy that speaks to the 
challenges of a hundred years back and also futuristically 
looking at where do we take rail in this instance. 
 
So, Chairperson, in dealing with the issues under 
PRASA you need to really have a more bigger picture of a 
company, PRASA itself, which had subsidiaries, Autopax, 
Intersite, PRASA Cres which was dealing with properties 
and all those, quite a number of others.  The others was 
dealing with buffers(?) because they were transporting 
passengers on the road as well as on the rail.  So we were 
10 
very excited at that particular stage that we are entering 
an important, important phase in the passenger rail space 
and PRASA was that catalyst, that instrument in the hands 
of the African National Congress government to make it 
possible that we can then be able to achieve that. 
 
So I wanted to put that into that particular context, 
Chairperson, that we were already at another plane ready 
for probably taking off, I would want to say.  Equally, the 
rail policy was going to address the challenges of a 
situation  that exist in our country where part of the 
20 
network that PRASA trains are running on belongs to 
Transnet and part of the other network belongs to – which 
is our 20% of the network belongs to PRASA and about 
80% of the network belongs to Transnet. 
 
Chairperson, I would advise you that as part of the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 29 of 301 
 
process of evaluating the challenged PRASA faced, look at 
what happened in Braamfontein in the morning when goods 
trains 
gets 
preference 
to 
passenger 
trains 
and 
the 
rationale for the rail policy was to being these two together 
and I am happy to say there was conventions, there was 
working 
together, 
PRASA 
and 
Transnet 
was 
working 
together.  But if – well, it is so, President Zuma had a 
responsibility to be the National – the AU champion for the 
North South corridor, looking at the network from Mombasa 
to Durban.   
10 
 
And, Chairperson, if you look at the challenges that 
happened recently, that Minister [indistinct] 13.04 was 
talking about, the kilometres and kilometres of trucks that 
were waiting at Beit Bridge, you would also understand 
that it was one of those things that led to us to review 
these institutions or these parastatals of SOEs that were 
operating under Transport where we took a decision that 
CBRTA must join the BMA.  CBRTA, Chairperson, is the 
Cross Border Road Transport Agency to join this thing so 
that we can look at a way in which we reduce the trucks 
20 
from the road and put the trucks - and put the goods on the 
rail.   
So I am bringing this background so that I can help 
even myself to take you to the point of the issues that we 
are raising here because if we just look at these issues in 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 30 of 301 
 
isolation we do not get the full picture of what it was that 
we are dealing with.  I acknowledge, Chairperson, that the 
issues that are being raised here under paragraph 6 as 
indicated by Advocate Soni is exactly what I said in 
response to the matters that were deposed by Ntata Molefe 
and I thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now you emphasise – and I could 
just look at paragraph 6.4 on page 6, this is the black page 
6: 
“I wish to emphatically deny that I was used by 
10 
anybody to aid state capture in general and with 
specific reference to PRASA.” 
You say: 
“I was never involved myself in the award of 
tenders.” 
And at paragraph 6.6 you say: 
“I never protected or sought to protect anyone 
accused of wrongdoing from the rule of law or any 
other applicable process.” 
That is your position and that is what you have come to 
20 
say to the Chairperson. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson, that is my position. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, Ms Peters, I just want to ask 
you, you are saying all of that because you read into what 
Mr 
Molefe 
said 
in 
his 
affidavit 
that 
these 
are 
the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 31 of 301 
 
accusations he made [indistinct – dropping voice].  Is that 
– I am just trying to understand why you would say that. 
MS PETERS:   I am saying this because in his affidavit he 
does mention individuals, institutions of government that 
he believes were responsible or were intending to be 
instruments for state capture.  So I want to indicate – and 
even 
today 
here, 
indicate 
that 
I 
have 
never 
been 
influenced by anybody to be – to either determine tenders.  
Both Mr Molefe and later on probably Mr Montana would 
indicate that I have never ever participated in processes, 
10 
in tenders, in any of their establishments or even in PRASA 
itself and, Chairperson, I would also want to vouch that the 
12 entities that I spoke to can also vouch for that, that it 
was not culture, it was not my style of work and fortunately 
for me, as a deployee of the African National Congress, I 
had an opportunity to be deployed in various areas of 
responsibility, Chairperson, and anyway, in those areas of 
responsibility, I have never been a person that determines 
because it was the ANC government that consciously  
resolved that politicians should not participate in tender 
20 
processes.  So why would I, being a politician, want to be 
in that particular space? 
 
But 
also, 
Chairperson, 
if 
I, 
as 
a 
politician, 
participate 
in 
tendering 
processes, 
if 
there 
are 
any 
comebacks, what recourse would be – would those who are 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 32 of 301 
 
aggrieved have if I have already been implicated or – I do 
not know, or what to say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, implicated is the right word.  
MS PETERS:   If I have already ingemeng in die hele storie 
in.  I am sorry for the Afrikaans. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ms Peters, I want to be fair to you 
but I also need to be fair Mr Molefe, forget Mr Montana for 
the time being.  I have read his affidavit very carefully, he 
has never made those allegations.  His allegations are of a 
10 
different nuance.  These allegations and I am going to take 
you through there are that by some of your acts – this is 
what he alleges, you allowed people to stop matters that 
person concerned about corruption at PRASA would not.  
Now I just want to place that in context so that we do not – 
we do not deal with matters that are not before this 
Commission. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, that is the view of Mr Molefe 
and unfortunately, he had not crossed facts with me on 
those particular issues.  So in my response I was 
20 
responding to what was in the document before me, not 
something that I was sitting and discussing with Mr Molefe. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So just against that background, want 
to deal with firstly is the meeting with President Zuma on 
the 20 August 2016.  You have set out in paragraph 8, that 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 33 of 301 
 
is paragraph 8.1 to 8.6 your response to what Mr Molefe 
said, is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson, that is correct, I confirm I 
was invited to the meeting of the 20 August. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, I am asking a different question, 
I am asking that in paragraph 8, the whole of paragraph 8, 
you respond to what Mr Molefe said happened at that 
meeting, is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now I tell you why I …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, before you proceed, Mr Soni, 
have I got Mr Molefe’s affidavit here in this bundle that Ms 
Peters is responding to here because I would like to go 
there. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do I have it in this bundle or is it 
somewhere else? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It is bundle D, EXHIBIT SS6.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   We did give your registrar the... 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I would like to so one can compare. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, Ms Peters, can I just say to you 
that when you look at the affidavit of Mr Molefe starting at 
paragraph 74 and ending at paragraph 92 on page 24 of 
his affidavit, he deals very fully with what happened at the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 34 of 301 
 
meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said it starts at paragraph...? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Paragraph 74, Chairperson, at page 
20 on the right hand side of bundle D, SS6.  You will see 
the heading at the bottom of that page, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It says: 
“Former President Zuma’s attempt to intervene.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, that is where it starts. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That is where it starts. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, Ms Peters, I want to again ask 
so that we are not at odds with each other.  Mr Molefe 
goes into some detail in what happens at this meeting.  
Your response is a general response.  Now let me just say 
so that you are not taken by surprise and we have a 
roadmap for we are going.  This is what Mr Molefe’s 
concern was about the meeting as expressed in the 
affidavit and as expressed when he gave evidence.  So I 
am going to give you that context and then ask you to 
20 
respond to each of the allegations.  This is what he says – 
the background to the attempt by former President Zuma to 
intervene is this.  Mr Lucky Montana had resigned.  The 
board had accepted his resignation and there appeared to 
be unhappiness about the fact that the resignation had 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 35 of 301 
 
been effected and Mr Molefe saw this as a meeting by Mr 
Zuma to cause the board to revisit its position.  I am telling 
you what Mr Molefe’s stance is.   
 
And the importance of that in respect of these 
proceedings, Ms Peters, is this and I am going to ask, why 
does a president intervene in a decision of a board to 
accept a resignation of that board’s or that SOE’s – that 
was his question and he raises it, he says he raised it at 
the meeting.  So that is the context in which I am going to 
ask you to respond to this and at the end, Ms Peters, if it 
10 
does not emerge from them, I am going to ask you whether 
you shared the same concerns. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I had an opportunity during the 
period after the resignation of Mr Montana and the 
acceptance of the board of the resignation of Mr Montana 
as a member of the executive responsible for transport, out 
of courtesy I informed the president but I also said to the 
president, I have made a request to both Mr Montana and 
Mr Molefe to stop their public spats because they were 
going back and forth in the public. 
20 
 
Mr President Zuma said to me he cannot speak 
directly to Montana but he knows somebody who is very 
close to Montana and he then said if you can speak to 
Minister Jeff Radebe he can then opt to Lucky to stop.  
That is the context, Chairperson. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 36 of 301 
 
 
With regard to the meeting, yes, there was a 
meeting on the 20 t h and at that meeting I never got the 
impression that there is a conscious decision by President 
Zuma that Lucky Montana or Mr Lucky Montana must return 
to his position which he had resigned from.  In - Lucky 
Montana’s input in that meeting, he makes a statement 
which might have given Mr Molefe an impression that 
probably somewhere, where I was not part of, there might 
have been a discussion to the fact that Lucky will come 
back because in his reply to what Mr Molefe had said, he 
10 
then said if I go back.  Which was something that I 
dispelled in that particular meeting.   
Unfortunately, honourable Chairperson, even in Mr 
Molefe’s affidavit he does indicate that that meeting was 
inconclusive because the President was exhausted and we 
left without any conclusion.   
So if you are in a particular space, everybody has 
got the right to draw his or her own impression of what the 
objective was.  Probably because of President calling Mr 
Montana into the meeting who was now an ex-CEO, he 
20 
might have then – Montana and Mr Molefe probably had the 
impression 
that 
the 
meeting 
would 
result 
in 
Lucky 
returning.  And if I am given an opportunity, I think, 
Chairperson, before the resignation – I just need to give 
context to this whole – before the resignation of Lucky 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 37 of 301 
 
Montana, I think it was the year before, towards the end of 
2014, Mr Molefe informally did tell me that the Group CEO 
indicated to them as a board that he will be leaving and 
they made a request to him that they have just arrived, I do 
not think it will be good for him to leave them at that 
particular time, if he can give them extra time and all those 
type of things.  And that is why, when the resignation, I 
was a bit taken aback because I knew that discussion, 
which was an informal discussion, I did not take it as a 
formal official decision on my part because Mr Molefe was 
10 
just briefing me that they had discussion.  And incidentally, 
Chairperson, it is not a very good thing which I subscribe 
to, Mr Molefe said it will be an injustice to the development 
of this country to lose some of these young black 
executives which is something that I subscribe to and me 
and him were at one with regard to that issue and the 
meeting of the 20 t h, incidentally the anniversary of the 
UDF, it was not intended on my part and I want to correct 
something, Chairperson, I was appointed by President 
Zuma, invited by him to serve in his cabinet and whether I 
20 
am called by the President to a meeting, I do not say why 
are you calling me?  Because the day he called me to 
appoint me I did not say why are you calling me and why 
are you appointing me?  So I did not see anything wrong 
because it was not the first time I was called by the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 38 of 301 
 
President to a meeting and in any case, Chairperson, there 
were various instances where I personally had made 
overtures to the President to request for his ear on matters 
of the areas of deployment I was at. 
So 
when 
the 
President 
gives 
you 
an 
opportunity  
sometimes you grab it because he was a busy man and 
when I got there – okay, according to the affidavit of Mr 
Molefe, he says when he went to the gents he saw Lucky 
Montana.  I did not see him – he – and so when he was 
invited to the meeting, I think Mr Molefe was aware that 
10 
Lucky is in the presence.  For, for me Chairperson, I, I 
think in that meeting I didn’t had the clear sense from the 
President that Lucky Montana should go back.  What I got 
was Lucky Montana indicating that if I go back, so it means 
it was his wish.  He, he wished that the board should – 
maybe he should have been upfront to say, my resignation 
was a bluff.  He tried to rescind his resignation, but the 
board then said no, you have resigned and that is it.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  Mr Soni you may proceed.  
But I think that you know these are important matters and 
20 
they 
affect 
people 
in 
different 
ways, 
and 
then 
an 
opportunity such as this making as Ms Peters has been 
looking forward to for quite some time. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  She might tend to say quite a lot in 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 39 of 301 
 
relation to a brief question, though Ms Peters Mr Soni will 
try and limit you to answering specific questions.  At the 
end if there are matters that you might feel are important 
that were not covered properly, he might give you a 
chance, I might give you a chance.  But your counsel is 
here too, he will be noting and he knows your version.  He 
knows your fury, he will know if you – there are aspects 
that have not been covered properly.  So I don’t want you 
to say you are being stopped from having your say, but we 
just have to strike a balance in order to use the time 
10 
properly, but at the same time be fair to you.  Okay, alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As it pleases. 
MS PETERS:  My apologies Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And, and … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Soni before you proceed, I wondered 
whether there would be any good that will be served by 
establishing 
exactly 
where, 
where 
the 
diversions 
is 
between Ms Peters’ version of what occurred or what was 
said in that meeting and what Mr Popo Molefe says, it may 
20 
be that you are planning to deal with it in a certain way.  I 
see as you said that Mr Molefe goes into quite a lot of 
details. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  As to what happened.   
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 40 of 301 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And he did say that it was a meeting that 
took again over six hours. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Hours. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Something like that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And Ms Peters’ version is much more 
shorter. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But it is important to know which aspects 
10 
of, of Mr Molefe she might be taking issue with. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That are important. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is what I intended to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Because if there is an – it will affect if 
what he has said is not disputed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  By Ms Peters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then it will accept the inference.  I 
mean it will influence the inferences that can be drawn as 
he drew it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, ja.  No, no, that’s, that’s fine.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay.  Ms Peters and mindful of what 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 41 of 301 
 
the Chairperson has rightfully pointed out, we must stick to 
the main issues.  You have dealt with paragraph 76 where 
Mr Molefe says he was told that Mr Montana and Mr Roy 
Moodley were there and what Minister Radebe said.  Is 
there anything in relation to paragraph 77, 78 and 79 and 
80 that you disagree with? 
MS PETERS:  79 Of which?  Of … 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Of Mr Molefe’s affidavit. 
MS PETERS:  Can I be given a chance Chairperson to go 
through that? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, you can have a look.   
MS PETERS:  78. 
CHAIRPERSON:  78.  What do you say 78 Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes, 78, 79, 80 and sorry and 80. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it might be helpful Mr Soni if you 
just tell her what’s … 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Just tell her what’s … 
CHAIRPERSON:  What the letter says, also it will benefit 
the public then they know because they do not have an 
affidavit to look at. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes, yes.  Well Mr Molefe says that an 
impression was being created by Mr Radebe that he was 
playing golf and he regarded golf as more important than 
meeting the President.  Is, is that what happened that Mr 
Molefe – sorry Mr Radebe said, I tried to call you but I was 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 42 of 301 
 
told you were playing golf.  Can you recall whether that 
happened or not?  That’s at paragraph … 
MS PETERS:  77. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  77 Yes. 
MS PETERS:  Hey, I don’t understand this because it does 
seem the person like Mr Molefe recalling exchanges 
between his office and that of the office of Mr Radebe.  
And that Mr Radebe got the impression that playing golf 
was more important.  I can’t offer an answer for what 
happened between the two of them ...[indistinct]. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay, can we then go to paragraph 
83. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe before you do that Mr Soni, I think 
what Mr Soni is asking you do to, I think what he is asking 
is that, according to Mr Molefe at the meeting Minister 
Radebe said certain things about that had happened 
before, interaction that had happened before between Mr 
Radebe’s office and Mr Molefe’s office or Mr Molefe 
relating to arrangements for the meeting.  So as I 
understand it Mr Soni is saying, Mr Molefe says Mr Radebe 
20 
said that the things that are mentioned here and created 
the impression that Mr Molefe regarded playing golf as 
more 
important 
than 
coming 
to 
a 
meeting 
with 
the 
President.  Well the question would be whether you have 
any recollection of Minister Radebe giving the background 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 43 of 301 
 
about the interactions that may have happened between 
his office and Mr Molefe’s office in the context of the 
indication to for Mr Molefe to come to this meeting.  And 
whether it, it’s as far as you are concerned it just right to 
say an impression was created by Mr Radebe that Molefe 
thought playing golf was more important than going to a 
meeting with the President.   
MS PETERS:  Chairperson, before that meeting that there 
were a lot of pleasantries that happened between the 
gentlemen that were there.  I am saying the gentlemen, 
10 
because I was the only lady.  The gentlemen that were 
there, and some of those are things that I would not recall 
now and it was – they usually make their own jokes there.  
In fact at one statement Mr Radebe said to Mr Molefe that 
there are people who think that I am closer to Lucky than 
you, and yet I am closer to you than Lucky because ub 
unkhongi wam(?).   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS PETERS:  I had to go and ask what is umkhongi and 
then I was told what is umkhongi. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS PETERS:  So I, I mean for me those were not the 
things that were said in the meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS PETERS:  When the meeting had started.  So … 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 44 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
MS PETERS:  I, I don’t recall some of those. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS PETERS:  Because if people stand there and chit chat 
and then they go there and they laugh and they do all 
those, and by nature President Zuma likes making jokes 
before he starts a formal engagement.  So it was all those 
types of things.  For me I really, sometimes [speaking in 
vernacular]  [09:25]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Were you told that Umkhongi is 
10 
somebody that the Holmes family sends to the Wrights 
family for purposes of negotiations of lobolo?  
MS PETERS:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that what you were told? 
MS PETERS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Umkhongi, for the transcribers will 
be umkhongi.  Okay.  Proceed.  
MS PETERS:  I am just giving a gist that, that the nature of 
the meeting before it started.  So I would not recall this 
one of the correspondence between the secretaries, the – I 
20 
did not have sight of that and I don’t remember hearing Mr 
Radebe making reference to that exchange. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Right, then I ask you to look at 
paragraph 83 …[indistinct] where Mr Molefe says that you 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 45 of 301 
 
had told the meeting that Mr Montana was fighting the 
board.  Is that what you told the meeting? 
MS PETERS:  Ja.  I agree Chairperson.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay, alright.  And then paragraph 84.  
That she then asked Mr Zuma to explain the protocol that 
was being applied where he said that the protocol would 
have been for him to invite the Minister and the Minister t 
invite him as the chairperson of the board.  Did that 
happen?   
MS PETERS:  I don’t recall, but I think there was reference 
10 
to a procedure of him called to the meeting. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh.  And then Mr Zuma then said that 
he had invited Mr Montana to the meeting.  Is that correct?  
Ma’am did Mr Zuma tell the meeting that he had invited Mr 
Montana? 
MS PETERS:  Yes, he did say that because we were in his 
premises and he, he convened the meeting. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Then he says that, at paragraph 
88, Mr Zuma said that Mr Montana was very knowledgeable 
about rail transportation and he should not be lost to the 
20 
country that we, meaning the I take it Mr Montana, yourself 
and Mr Molefe, would sort out our differences and bring Mr 
Montana back as Group CEO.  
MS PETERS:  Chairperson I, I don’t recollect.  You will 
remember this meeting happened on the 20 t h of August and 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 46 of 301 
 
we never had minutes of the meeting, so I don’t recollect 
this. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  You see, that is the real issue, but 
can you say it did not happen?   
MS PETERS:  I say, I did not – Chairperson I cannot 
recollect … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS PETERS:  The exact statement of bring back Montana 
as the Group Chief Executive Officer.  At a later stage I will 
give a context of a discussion with regards to Montana. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay.  I think that it is important to 
just explain to you that as you answer the questions, 
remember that they will be, there is a difference between I 
don’t remember, because that means that I don’t remember 
whether it happened or it didn’t happen.  Or I don’t 
remember whether so and so said that or not, and saying 
no, it did not happen.  I deny that and so and so did not 
say that.  So it will be important that we know when it is a 
situation where you cannot remember whether it was said 
or whether it happened, or were you say no, no, I am clear 
20 
it did not happen, or it was not said.  Okay, alright.  You 
say that in the context of this you can’t remember. 
MS PETERS:  I can’t remember well whether that was said. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  And I think Mr Mashaba 
wants to say something.  Let them sanitise first.   
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 47 of 301 
 
MR MASHABA:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MASHABA:  I do not wish to interrupt my learned 
friend Ndluli.  But there is an observation that I have made 
and I think I would be failing in my duty if I do not place it 
on record.  And seek a way in which to assist the 
Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MASHABA:  You see in some instances my learned 
friend puts a proposition which by its nature is open ended.  
10 
And dealing with the political animal like my client, it 
invites her also to go south. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MASHABA:  When it is not necessary.  And I say this 
with the greatest of respect. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MASHABA:  In other instances she is invited to 
comment on paragraph 40 this and that and that, which 
forces 
her 
then 
to 
read 
the 
paragraph 
in 
order 
to 
understand what it is that her attention has been drawn to.  
20 
And it is not assisting the proceedings.  And my request 
would be without being prescriptive on how my learned 
friend wishes to conduct or rather led the evidence.  If a 
comparison is drawn between what Mr Molefe said and her 
response, then she must be pointed to that as opposed to 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 48 of 301 
 
reading the one version.  Because what happens is that 
she then takes time to read what she would have said.  
This is natural because she does not want to be seen as 
contradicting her own version.  And I am simply asking that 
perhaps it could be, this is what Montana or this is what 
Molefe said in relation to you.  And this is what you said in 
your, in your affidavit.  You stand by that response so that 
if we are reading through affidavit by affidavit, let’s 
compare apples with apples.  Because otherwise at the 
rate that we should be going I am afraid you are not going 
10 
to make progress.  And, and I feel the Chair was quite right 
in one instance, they summarise what is said, and even for 
the benefit of the public.  This is a public official, whose 
delay might send a different message from the body 
language point of view.  So I am simply making that plea to 
say, how do you ask this witness to explain why would a 
President do something?  Perhaps it could have been, this 
is what he said, the President did, do you subscribe to that 
view or not.  Then we get to hear what she has to say on 
that particular point.  I just wanted to put that on record … 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MASHABA:  Chair.  And my apologies for interrupting 
my learned friend. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  Thank you.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson, let me explain the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 49 of 301 
 
particular 
difficulty 
with 
what 
my 
learned 
friend 
is 
...[indistinct].  Ms Peters was given the affidavit.  She 
knew what Mr Molefe’s version is.  She has given a general 
response and that is why I asked her right at the outset 
this is your general response, I want to ask you specific 
things.  The matter that I am asking her are about matters 
she didn’t address in her affidavit.  And I am going to 
submit Mr Chairperson that those are all vital matters.  
Having regard to the context I have described, namely that 
Mr Mont – for example where at page 86 he said that he 
10 
specific, Mr Molefe says, the President, specifically said 
he wants them to sort it out so that Mr Montana is brought 
back.  Now the context is important because the witness 
says she did not get that impression.  Now if she, if this is 
what was said, then clearly Mr Molefe was quite correct in 
drawing that inference.  And that is why one needs her 
version about each of the matters that I am trying raise 
and I am trying to limit them to get to the crux of the 
matter.  But the one observation I accept the person 
knows, instead of referring to a particular paragraph I 
20 
should set out the gist of what that paragraph is about. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But your, your response to Mr Mashaba’s 
concern is simply that you can’t put her, you can’t tell her 
what her version is or on her affidavit in regard to the 
matters you are focussing on … 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 50 of 301 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because she has not responded. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  She has not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is the point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright.  Okay, alright.  I think Mr 
Mashaba will understand.  Ja, ja.  Thank you.  Let’s take 
the … 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The tea adjournment. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As the Chair pleases. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then we will continue.  It is 20 past, 
we are going to resume at 11:35.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   I wonder whether Mr Soni it might not be 
a better way of dealing with this matter to proceed from the 
premise that Ms Peters read Mr Molefe’s affidavit and when 
she responded in her affidavit she was fully aware of the 
full version that Mr Molefe put up. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And if there are certain matters that you 
believe she did not respond to you can ask her whatever 
you might wish to ask arising out of that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 51 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because she has provided a certain 
response and she obviously had Mr Molefe’s affidavit but 
obviously there may be specific matters that you want to 
raise but the position is that just given a certain answer to 
this, okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ms Peters, you have heard what the 
Chairperson has said that effectively this is your response 
to what Mr Molefe said you heard in his affidavit, you have 
studied it, and you responded to it.  So this is your 
response? 
10 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   We can accept that as this? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Right, I just want then ask you in 
relation to the following issue which is not addressed in 
your affidavit whether you …[indistinct – no audio] 
MS PETERS:   But he went further to indicate that they are 
to look at the different developments that were happening. 
In fact, at that particular time, there was also a process 
that I had initiated to invite the President on a site visit to 
20 
some of the projects, in particular, the modernisation.  
So, I took it in that context that, obviously, when 
the President visit because the President was busy at that 
time, visiting different SOE’s, and PRASA was not visited 
yet so I took it in that way. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 52 of 301 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But let me ask you this, Mr Molefe 
says: 
“I invited Mr Zuma to address the Board.” 
That did happen. 
MS PETERS:   To visit the Board and address the Board 
and see some of the projects. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And explain why he had a problem 
with the decision to release Mr Montana. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I do not have a recollection 
whether it was instructive in that manner but the invitation 
10 
was sent out. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   To address the Board? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I am sorry Mr Soni. Your 
recollection is that indeed, Mr Molefe did invite Mr Zuma, 
and I think you go one step further and say and the 
Minister, was he referring to yourself?  Oh, okay he did 
ask, invite the President and yourself to revisit PRASA and 
address the Board.  But your recollection is that in addition 
to that, he also spoke about the Minister and or the 
President seeing for himself certain developments.  Is that 
20 
correct?  
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, as to the part of the paragraph 
where Mr Molefe says, he asked Mr Zuma to address the 
Board, so that he could explain why he had a problem with 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 53 of 301 
 
the Board's decision of releasing Mr Montana or accepting 
his resignation.  Do you remember that part having been 
said, or what is the position? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, remember, Mr Montana was – 
his contract was going to end in November, if I am right 
and the Board then released him earlier, and it was at that 
point, where Mr Molefe said that because Mr Montana had 
resigned, and a he was -  he had requested here now 
himself Mr Montana, that instead of giving in November, he 
would then leave the end of the financial the next year, 
10 
which was going to be around March. 
So the President then said, but why did you release 
him earlier then that March?  So Mr Molefe then said, he 
will invite the President to go an address - to be informed 
by the Board on what their rationale was, because I think 
Mr Molefe to his credit during that period, there was a view 
that he is running this show himself alone, it is Molefe 
show.  So he wanted to spell that that it is not a Molefe 
show but a Board show.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, Mr Soni continue. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So Ms Peters I - what we know is 
that Mr Molefe and Mr Zuma discussed the Board's 
acceptance of Mr Montana’s resignation that was discussed 
at the meeting. 
MS PETERS:   Mr Molefe informed the President of the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 54 of 301 
 
process that led to the end. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   At the meeting? 
MS PETERS:   At that meeting, he gave - remember 
Chairperson, can I give a context? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe before you give that context, 
please do not forget what you wanted to say.  I wanted to 
say earlier on, as I recall the evidence Mr Montana wished 
to leave PRASA, I do not know whether it is March or 
thereabouts. 
MS PETERS:   Yes. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   March is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the Board asked him to stay on for a 
period of six months, I think it was going to be, but 
ultimately the Board released him around July 15 or June 
15.  And my understanding of Mr Molefe’s evidence is that 
it was this release of Mr Montana by the Board that was 
being, this part of what was being discussed at the 
meeting.  Is that your recollection as well? 
MS PETERS:   Can I just give an indication Chairperson 
that we were all given an opportunity to say our thing, and 
20 
the President had not arrived at his response when 
exhaustion took over. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but my question is whether it 
accords with your recollection, to say part of what was 
discussed at the meeting, was the Board's decision to 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 55 of 301 
 
release Mr Montana around the 15 t h.  The rationale for 
releasing him. 
MS PETERS:   The rationale for releasing him earlier than 
they intended date of release, and then Chairperson, also 
the public spats.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay alright Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, I just want to leave this with - 
put this proposition to you.  It is the last sentence of 
paragraph 92 where Mr Molefe says: 
“I left the meeting deeply concerned that the 
10 
President of the country was personally interfering 
in the operations of PRASA when the issue at hand, 
clearly fell within the purview of the Board.” 
MS PETERS:   Number? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Paragraph 92, it is the last sentence 
of that paragraph.  Did you entertain such concerns? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, like I indicated that everybody 
raised their issues and then, if this is the impression that 
Mr Molefe left the meeting, it is his impression.   
But like I indicated earlier on, there was not - that 
20 
indication in his input, when he closed after, I think like he 
had spoken, and when he was dispelling some of the things 
that like he had said, and then he then said at the end that 
him as the Chairperson would want to invite the President 
and the Minister to visit PRASA House and meet with the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 56 of 301 
 
Board and meet with the executives, and after that, go on a 
field visit or a site visit.  
And that is the end, if I have to recollect everything 
that happened in the meeting, and if Mr Molefe left the 
meeting deeply concerned, I think he should be correct, if 
that is the impression that he got. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So are you in a position to say or are 
you not in a position to say nothing happened in that 
meeting that should have given him that impression.  In 
other words, are you able to say, well, he says he got that 
10 
impression, but I think nothing happened or was that 
justified that impression, or are you going to say, look, I do 
not know it is the impression he got I am not able to say 
whether it was justified or not, or, well, I can understand 
his impression, you know that impression he got.  I just 
want to know what your own understanding is? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson I can understand his 
impression.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MS PETERS:   Because when Lucky was speaking, he gave 
20 
a litany of all the things that he did since deployment in 
the transport sector, and even up to where he left, and 
even in my own view, there was a statement that he made 
at the end, which created an impression that he is wishing 
to return to PRASA, and I am saying that based on other 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 57 of 301 
 
activities outside this particular meeting. 
There was even in my own view, an impression of a 
wish on the part of Mr Montana to return to PRASA 
because there was a statement that he made, that he says: 
“If I can be allowed back, this is what I can do to 
take this organisation further.” 
And it was at that point that I spoke and indicated that the 
Board has - he applied for his end of contract, the Board 
accepted it, and unfortunately, because of the relationship 
between him and the Board it was then fast tracked, and 
10 
that is it.  
But also, because there were lobbyists outside, 
outside, not necessarily in this meeting, outside, because 
the outside the external factors also have bearing in 
whatever we can think of. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The lobbying that you refer to that you 
say was happening outside, and therefore not necessarily 
in the meeting, but outside.  Was it a lobbying for his 
return to PRASA or what lobbying was it? 
MS PETERS:   There was lobbying for him to return to 
20 
PRASA and he was actively lobbying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   He himself he was actively lobbying to 
return to PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 58 of 301 
 
MS PETERS:   There were those that gave him a hearing, 
there were those that did not encourage him, and I think he 
was aggrieved by the many also who did not encourage him 
to return, who were not necessarily in favour.  
But he, in essence, my own impression was that he 
submitted his resignation, probably expecting a different 
outcome, maybe expecting the Board to say, oh, please do 
not go.  But unfortunately, the Board then accepted, and 
then said, we will - let us give us an additional six months, 
and before the end of the six months, the Board then - you 
10 
see 
my 
own 
view 
outside 
now 
outside 
the 
PRASA 
establishment, but as a Minister and seeing what was 
happening, I thought that because there were marches by 
people, and calls for him to return.  Others obviously 
saying his return is in their best interest and all those.  But 
in this particular meeting, that is why I am saying the 
external 
factors 
might 
have 
had 
a 
bearing 
on 
the 
impression that even at the meeting, because Lucky in his 
statement, made reference to the fact that if I am allowed 
to go back, and it is at that point that I then said, the 
20 
Board's decision must be respected. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please Chairperson, Ms 
Peters before I deal with the next set of issues.  That is 
the reappointment of Mr Colin Letsoala as the acting CEO. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 59 of 301 
 
MS 
PETERS: 
 
 
Just 
a 
corrections 
sir, 
Chairperson 
Letsoala.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, well I always say we must all try 
our best, I know I am not the best at…[intervene] 
MS PETERS:   Maybe for purposes of this process, we can 
allow Advocate Soni to say Colin. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No I am going to find my…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is not complicated, it is easy. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   Oh, okay thank you. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, that is the one issue.  The 
second 
issue 
is 
the 
concerns 
you 
raised 
about 
advertisements and the third issue is the dismissal of the 
Board. 
 
Now 
before 
I 
go 
into 
what 
Mr 
Molefe 
alleges…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I am sorry, Mr Soni are moving 
away from the meeting? 
MS PETERS:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright no let me ask some 
20 
questions on the meeting.   Mr Molefe says this was a 
meeting that took very long, I think he says about six 
hours. I think he says that it was meant to start at five but 
ended up - or at four or three I cannot remember but ended 
up starting at 6pm and dispersed around 2am because the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 60 of 301 
 
President fell asleep or as you put it, he was exhausted. 
Is that number of hours, does it accord with your 
recollection of how long the meeting took, more or less? 
MS PETERS:   I do not know what time we were called for 
the meeting but I remember that there was a stage where 
Mr Molefe said this meeting is taking too long to start I am 
leaving.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, he said that. 
MS PETERS:   I said to him Dada Molefe …[speaking in 
vernacular], we have been called and let us come and here 
10 
what we have been called for, and then when the meeting 
started unfortunately, I did not take time to record what the 
time was.  But the meeting did start late. Later than it was 
intended, and it did finish around that time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   2am. 
MS PETERS:   And unfortunately, like we say, exhaustion 
took over. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so you would not quarrel or would 
you with his estimate from six to 2am, 6pm to 2am? 
MS PETERS:   I would not quarrel with that because for 
20 
some of us who have been working in the government 
environment for some time.  There use to even be a joke 
made around that you know what time you start, but you 
never know what time, you finish. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 61 of 301 
 
MS PETERS:   So, yes Chairperson the meeting ended 
very late around 2am because I remember I arrived at my 
place of residence around past three. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright and he also said, which 
you probably whether it might not have been in the 
affidavit, but he also said in his evidence that Mr Montana 
was allowed quite a long time to address, he had a 
prepared speech or notes, and I asked him how long he 
thought Mr Montana spoke.  
If I recall correctly, he said he, his estimate is that 
10 
Mr Montana, took about two hours.  I hope Mr Soni I am 
right. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   He did, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, he said he thought Mr Montana took 
about two hours addressing the meeting, which I thought 
was quite a long time.  Is that, does that accord with your 
recollection or would you take issue with that? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson he spoke for a very long 
time.  He literally gave us the history and state of PRASA 
address.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, did anybody either prior to the 
meeting or at the meeting state what the purpose of the 
meeting was, thinking now the President maybe or maybe 
Minister Jeff Radebe, did anybody say why you were all 
assembled there?  What purpose was sought to be 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 62 of 301 
 
achieved by this meeting? 
MS PETERS:   I want to say there it was a very clear 
indication, because I had made this Minister Jeff Radebe 
about intervening with a talking and cautioning Lucky about 
this.  I did not know that we are going to be meeting with 
the former, Group CEO I knew that, there is going to be Mr 
Molefe, myself, the President and Minister Jeff Radebe 
there in his capacity as the Minister in the presidency 
responsible for performance monitoring and evaluation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I also believe that because I had 
then said to him, I would want him to caution Lucky to stop 
this public spats because I am speaking to Mr Molefe on 
the other side, then he would have succeeded in that and 
probably give us an indication on that.  But other than that, 
there was a lot of activities also, in the presidency, that 
Minister Jeff Radebe was easy with that involved work from 
PRASA and Transnet which was related, he was an envoy 
of the President on the AU North South Corridor Project.  
So I did not read a lot into - because the meeting did not 
20 
have a written agenda. It was a meeting with the President 
convened by the Minister and the President.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And the question of the public spats 
between Mr Molefe and Mr Montana was that discussed at 
the meeting as an issue, as opposed to he mentioned in 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 63 of 301 
 
passing? 
MS PETERS:   It was raised as an issue that they were 
weakening, they had weakened the organisation because 
these were two leaders from the institution.   
But now that the former Group CEO was no longer 
there it meant it was another matter that probably Minister 
Jeff Radebe and the President was dealing with him.  At 
that time, he was already out and in there, because it was 
- remember he left around mid-July, and it was already the 
20 t h of August. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you know the meeting took quite 
long and one is trying to understand what was really 
covered in such a long meeting, and the impression I get 
from Mr Molefe’s evidence, and maybe it is  more than an 
impression is that an important part of the purpose of the 
meeting appears to have been that the President wanted 
the Board to revisit its decision to release Mr Montana, or 
wanted the Board to rescind that decision, and Mr Molefe’s 
evidence is to the effect that that is why he made that 
invitation to the President to say, Mr President, you must 
20 
come to the Board yourself and address this issue because 
he was not prepared himself to say in that meeting, that 
the Board would rescind the decision.  
He says that is the context, that is how it came 
about, that he invited the President to come and address 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 64 of 301 
 
the Board, and that seems to me to tie up with your 
evidence that says at that meeting, there was an issue of - 
there was a discussion of what the rationale was, for the 
Board's decision to release Mr Molefe, what do you say to 
that? 
MS PETERS:   Come again Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am saying that Mr Molefe seems to 
suggest in his evidence that an important purpose for that 
meeting, seems to him to have been that the President 
wanted the Board to rescind or revisit its decision to 
10 
release Mr Montana, and Mr Molefe says it was because he 
was 
not 
prepared 
himself 
there, 
sitting 
there 
as 
Chairperson to say okay, we will do that.  
It was because he was not prepared to say that, 
that he then invited the President to say, the President 
should come and address the Board on this issue.  And I 
am suggesting to you that that evidence by Mr Molefe, that 
suggestion, seems to tie up with your evidence that one of 
the issues that was being discussed was the rationale for 
the Board's decision to release Mr Molefe early. 
20 
MS PETERS:   Mr Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What do you say to that? 
MS PETERS:   Mr Montana, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Montana, yes.  What do you say to 
that, I saying it gives me that impression that Mr Molefe’s 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 65 of 301 
 
evidence, may well be correct, the President to come and 
address the Court on the rational of the Court unless 
somebody wanted the board to revisit or rescind its 
decision. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson I am trying to page through the 
notes that I have made ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   That you made. 
MS PETERS:   ... at that particular meeting and because of 
time I am struggling to get – because also ...(indistinct) I 
have got lots of notebooks that I used to use. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes ...(intervenes). 
MS PETERS:   So in one of the notebooks I do have the 
actual notes that give an indication of that particular 
meeting 
and 
how 
– 
if 
you 
can 
give 
me 
just 
one 
...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   No we can give you a chance to get the 
notes that you wish to have. 
MS PETERS:   Thank you, 30 seconds.  Like I indicated 
Chairperson, Mr Moli – not Mr Molefe – Mr Montana gave 
us the history.  That is why he spoke so long.  The history 
20 
of his work in PRASA and before then in ...(indistinct) of 
PRASA and how he transformed it to be PRASA and before 
then his work in the department as the advisor of Minister 
Radebe and all that long history. 
 
And 
also 
he 
went 
into 
the 
history 
of 
the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 66 of 301 
 
modernisation program.  How he got involved and what it is 
that he was doing there.  And that in itself Chairperson, if 
you are sitting there listening, you would have realised that 
you are sitting with somebody who is building a case on 
why that organisation needs him. 
 
And if there is an impression on the part of Ntato(?) 
Molefe that probably before our meeting there might have 
been a discussion.  But in our meeting it was not there.  
But if the impression was created, I then came in after 
Montana spoke.  It is spelled there to say, you have 
10 
resigned and the board accepted your resignation. 
 
And I support the stance of the board on this 
matter.  It was a very short statement and I concluded on 
that.  And unfortunately for President Zuma as the person 
who – in whose premises we were, he had not had the 
chance to even reply and say anything with regard to these 
particular issues except for at the point where he was 
opening the meeting. 
 
So that meeting was inconclusive.  It did not have 
an agenda.  There was no minutes.  And there was no 
20 
follow up meeting to – of that nature.  Except the 
invitations that we did to the President to visit PRASA 
which he did do at a later stage. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the discussion that Mr Molefe talks 
about in his affidavit which he says or let me put it this 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 67 of 301 
 
way.  The discussion about the rational or the board’s 
decision to release Mr Montana, did it happen after Mr 
Montana had made his presentation or before?  The 
discussion about the rational or the board’s decision to 
release Mr Montana.  Did it happen after Mr Montana had 
addressed the meeting or before?  If you are able to recall. 
MS PETERS:   After Montana addressed the meeting I 
spoke and Mr Molefe spoke.  So I do not recall if the 
President 
– 
because 
the 
President 
was 
visibly 
...(indistinct).  And truly speaking at the end even Mr 
10 
Molefe was saying this is fruitless.  (Indistinct). 
CHAIRPERSON:   (Laughing). 
MS PETERS:   Yes you will laugh because ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Without 
saying 
goodbye 
to 
the 
President. 
MS PETERS:   Without saying goodbye to the President.  I 
did not know ...(indistinct) in terms of being in the 
organisation, they are my seniors.  They should have 
woken him up so and they did not do that.  So when they 
said 
the 
President 
he 
did 
not 
– 
we 
just 
quietly 
20 
...(indistinct). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright but just to make sure that 
you are able to say what you might wish to say.  I am 
making this proposition to you.  That on the face of it, it 
seems to me and it is a pity because President Zuma might 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 68 of 301 
 
never respond to this in – before the commission.  On the 
face of it, it seems to me that there might be credibility in 
Mr Molefe’s version with that the meeting did discuss Mr 
Montana’s possible return to PRASA.  And that President 
Zuma – Mr Zuma spoke in favour of the board, allowing Mr 
Montana coming back. 
I am saying on the face of it.  I have not made a 
decision.  I have not made a finding.  I am saying on the 
face of it because you have a situation where somebody 
who no longer has anything to do with PRASA – who has 
10 
left ...(indistinct).  Comes back and is allowed a lot of time 
to address the President two minutes ...(indistinct) and the 
chairperson of PRASA board. 
But he has nothing to do with PRASA anymore.  And 
as you say in his long address he in fact as I understand – 
both what Mr Molefe said and what you are saying, he 
seems to have been saying look how well I have done as a 
PRASA group CEO in the past.  You have certain problems 
at PRASA. 
I can – this is what I can do about those problems 
20 
and it seems he implies if he did not say so expressly, if I 
can be allowed to go back.  That seems to be the crux of – 
the purpose of his address.  And Mr Molefe says the 
President said at the meeting something to the affect that 
this is talent that should not be lost to the country. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 69 of 301 
 
And then there is – and he says the President 
wanted the board to revisit or rescind its decision to 
release Mr Montana.  And then both – and then you say the 
yes the domestic did discuss what the rational was for the 
board’s decision to release him. 
So if you look at all of that, it seems probable that 
somebody must have said you people – the board must 
revisit your decision to release this man.  It should not be 
lost ...(indistinct).  And then when you link that with Mr 
Molefe’s evidence that I invited mister – President Zuma to 
10 
come and address the board on the rational – on his 
rational or releasing Mr Montana. 
It seems quite probable that the position must have 
been that President Zuma wanted Mr Montana to be taken 
back on these facts.  Are you able to comment on that? 
MS PETERS:   If you allow me Chairperson I could 
probably belt onto what you are saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson when the board of PRASA - 
through the chairperson - Mr Molefe in informed me in 
20 
early 2015 about the eminent departure – that time they 
had not even discussed the dates of Lucky Montana.  They 
were couple of months as the board in office and he told 
me that he had a discussion with Lucky and Lucky 
indicated to him that he has been with PRASA with a very 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 70 of 301 
 
long time and he thinks it is about time that he goes. 
 
I then discussed with the political stakeholders 
because at that particular time chairperson they were four 
CEOs who were in the same position that Lucky and the 
PRASA institution or PRASA company was in.  Whose 
contracts were about to end and I then in my discussion 
with the political structures – I indicated to them that we 
are now at this point in the country where we have got – 
and I am happy to indicate to you Chairperson - the 
national transport master plan. 
10 
We have got the rail policy.  We are working on the 
...(indistinct) transport economic regulator which was going 
to consolidate regulation of the entire transport factor.  
And now we have got people with institutional memory, 
experience and expertise in this particular field.  It is 
important that as the African National Congress that has 
invested in these individuals, we should not lose them to 
the private sector. 
Where they would come back and be consultant at 
exorbitant amounts to Government.  I even said in my 
20 
history of deployment – in my experience of deployment I 
have realised that if you deploy people – like for example 
we have just concluded on the rail policy.  We concluded 
on the master plan. 
If we take new people who are clean slates, the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 71 of 301 
 
implementation will take very long.  And Chairperson you 
would have realised and transport – national transport 
master plan was under consideration for 2015.  And after 
10 years it was adopted by cabinet ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   From 2005? 
MS PETERS:   2005. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS PETERS:   And now it was 2015.  And now we had it in 
place.  The ...(indistinct) transport economic regulator 
equally so.  We were busy with different instruments to 
10 
make it possible that we can reform and transform the 
transport sector.  If Chairperson you would allow me I can 
submit 
some 
of 
those 
documents 
as 
supplementary 
evidence. 
 
I discussed with them.  I had discussed equally with 
the President of the Republic to say to him, Mr President 
you have got this expertise in the transport sector.  And 
you would not want to lose it.  In fact I even advised the 
President that in your advisory team some of these people 
can 
be 
considered 
for 
that. 
 
And 
I 
still 
maintain 
20 
Chairperson that the challenge we have with service 
delivery in the country is primarily because we chop and 
change. 
 
Today you do this.  Tomorrow it is Dipuo doing this 
and Dipuo does not know where you ended because 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 72 of 301 
 
sometimes our handover is not even amicable.  So it was 
for that reason that I spoke to the President.  I even 
advised him that as the Chair of the north south corridor, 
some of these people would be able to help you. 
 
One of them was the former CEO of the Cross-
Border Road Traffic Agency.  And incidentally my last in 
office I signed off some of the ...(indistinct) or RPMP as 
part 
of 
the 
...(indistinct). 
 
So 
that 
they 
can 
then 
concentrate on dealing with the challenges of bad breaks. 
We 
even 
signed an 
agreement with the 
Minister of 
10 
Zimbabwe on the 16 t h June.  Very important date because 
we believed that we talking about the future of the 
continent and the future of our region started. 
 
The country ...(indistinct), we complaining about the 
long of time – length of time that these countries that are 
landlocked struggle to get their goods to Durban because 
they 
have 
to 
pass 
through 
South Africa. 
 And 
the 
challenges they have with the attacks and the hijacks of 
the trucks on the M3. 
 
We are busy with part of that ...(indistinct).  So I 
20 
said and I can mention the agencies that we dealing with.  
It was Sanral.  If you look at the infrastructure in roads in 
Sanral.  We were communicating with provinces and 
municipalities that they give ...(indistinct) some of their 
roads to Sanral. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 73 of 301 
 
 
But 
the 
funding 
model 
we 
were 
working 
on 
...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am going to stop – just stop.  I am 
going to stop you.  But you might get a chance to deal with 
those issues.  But I understand you to be saying – to 
making response to the proposition I put to you based on 
Mr Molefe’s evidence.  I understand you to be saying, you 
understand what Mr Molefe is saying and you can add by 
saying even the discussions that you have had with the 
ANC – I think that is what you mean – and the President 
10 
about the need to retain some of the expertise. 
You would not be surprised if indeed the President 
wanted Mr Montana to be – wanted the board to consider 
reviewing its decision or revisiting its decision.  It is my 
understanding of what you are saying correct? 
MS PETERS:   It could be correct Chairperson but it could 
also be speculation.  Because Chairperson I had gave an 
indication, if there is anybody who at fault it is then me 
who went to the President to say we cannot lose these 
people. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   And in my saying we cannot lose – in fact 
there was no mention to the President about Lucky going 
back to – even that time he had not even left.  We were 
looking at him for other areas based on his experience and 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 74 of 301 
 
how do we utilise this experience, this capacity, this 
knowledge.  Some of them have even gone internationally 
to do benchmarking studies.  To do understudies on how 
we address some of these challenges in the country. 
 
And I believed that now we have rail policy.  You 
need this person called Lucky Montana with his knowledge 
and expertise in rail.  Even if it would ended – have ended 
up him being my advisor.  Incidentally Chairperson in 
conclusion, I once even joked with him – Mr Montana – and 
I said if you look at the country futuristically, one day you 
10 
will be the Minister of Transport. 
 
Does it mean that I was lobbying for him to be 
Minister of Transport?  I was saying it because I know that 
he knows the sector. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright I – can I – would it be fair 
to say you do not take issue with what Mr Molefe says in 
his evidence in this regard or can I say you do take issue? 
MS PETERS:   I do not take issue because it is him – his 
impression. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but he goes more than the 
20 
impression.  But also the – what I put to you.  You know 
the rational or the board’s decision being discussed.  Being 
...(indistinct) 
that 
the 
President 
should 
address 
...(indistinct).  You understand the logic around that. 
MS PETERS:   I understand Chair. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 75 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay.  Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It is matters concerned I want to 
raise with you.  I understand ...(indistinct).  While the 
Chairperson is asking you questions you were going 
through books you said constituted your notes you have 
made.  Now is your answer yes? 
MS PETERS:   Yes Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now you knew that you have those 
notes at the time you made this affidavit of yours in 
response to what ...(indistinct). 
10 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson in my affidavit I did say that 
there are documents that are all over that I am trying to 
locate.  And I even stand indicate here that I am prepared 
to give documentary – documents to the other information 
that has since come to the fore. 
 
The secretariat of the commission would remember 
that there are certain documents of cabinet that we even 
had to request cabinet to declassify before we could 
present them.  And I think Chairperson – you know 
Chairperson just to clarify this.  I left the office on the 30 t h 
20 
July – not July, March 2017. 
 
And now I have got to read through these as I pick 
them up and some of them then informs this particular 
...(indistinct).  So the recollection of the ...(indistinct), I 
even indicate that it would be from memory.  And now that 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 76 of 301 
 
even some of these notes, they are not official notes.  
They are just my notes as I scribble when the discussion is 
unfolding. 
 
So if the evidence leader believes that I should 
have attached those notes I would request the Chair - but I 
do not know whether they will make sense because 
...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no that is fine.  Any material 
that was not available to you when you prepared your 
affidavit which you believe is relevant or important for 
10 
either your version or somebody else’s version, feel free to 
– your counsel will talk to you ...(indistinct).  Affidavits can 
be made or supplementary affidavits where you can attach 
them. 
 
That will be the question of how important they are 
to be looked that.  Thank you. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ms Peters I am afraid I am making a 
different point ...(indistinct). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Bring the mic closer.  No it is on but you 
– your voice ...(intervenes). 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I am sorry Chairperson.  I will just 
repeat the proposition.  I am making a different point that I 
must make.  You see when I asked you about your 
response to Mr Molefe’s affidavit as it appears in your 
affidavit, the one we dealing with today.  I said to you that 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 77 of 301 
 
it is not in much detail and it does not contain a response 
to everything he said. 
 
Now the reason I am putting this proposition to you 
is, before you made your affidavit those notes were 
available to you and I only making the proposition, I am not 
going to ask you why.  You obviously did not consult those 
notes when you made your affidavit.  Is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson like I have indicated, some of 
these books they are in boxes and whatever.  I managed to 
get records that were relevant to the sections, the 
10 
commission ...(indistinct).  And at that time Chairperson I 
had not got an opportunity – in fact Chairperson I must 
give you an indication.  I had to put aside which – to just 
page through everything that is a paper. 
 
When I see a word PRASA and put it aside so that I 
can sift through it to be able to get to some of this 
information 
that 
I 
have. 
 
And 
that 
is 
why 
earlier 
Chairperson 
I 
said 
to 
you, 
I 
am 
prepared 
to 
file 
supplementary affidavit based on the information and 
incidentally some of the information I even got last night 
20 
from the Department of Transport. 
 
So it – in essence it shows that we get information 
as and when it is possible.  And also I want to give thanks 
to Honourable Minister Mbalula and his team for this 
helpfulness for them.  We even sitting on weekends to be 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 78 of 301 
 
able to sift through this information, who helped me to get 
some of the information. 
 
That is why my plea Chairperson is that I be 
allowed 
to 
give 
supplementary 
affidavit 
so 
that 
the 
information that is sought by the evidence leader can then 
be brought to your attention.  But I just want to upfront 
indicate, some of the notes like I indicated, if you do not 
sit with me it will not make sense to you. 
 
But they will make sense to me because I am make 
those notes. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   There is no request for the notes.  
You are more than welcome to file a supplementary 
affidavit based on notes.  We will accept the correctness of 
what you file.  It is just that I did not realise that there 
were those notes that might have been ...(indistinct).  But 
you have explained why you did not ...(indistinct).  Now I 
ask you, this meeting took place ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry I think Mr Madlovo wants to 
say something.  But if your mic – the ones attached to the 
desk does not work – that one.  Just press it on. 
20 
MR MADLOVO:   I am told this one works. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright you can use that one ja. 
MR MADLOVO:   Chair I think maybe we should not step 
off this point.  Because an aspersion intentional or 
otherwise seems to be cast and I feel quite strongly about 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 79 of 301 
 
it.  Chair would remember that the only time during which 
Ms Peters reached ...(indistinct) for her notes was when 
Chair ...(indistinct) and said, firstly would you quibble with 
Mr Molefe’s estimation of how long it took.  Six hours 
seems to be a lot of time. 
 
And then she explained that he gave us a full 
lecture about PRASA and, and, and.  And she reached to 
try and see to what extent was the issue of the rational 
discussed.  It is an issue that arose here.  And it was in 
that context that she was paging through.  I do not know 
10 
Chair if you observed. 
 
There was a time at which she asked you to repeat 
the proposition. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MADLOVO:   Because you may have thought that she 
is not listening but she was paging through her notes to be 
able to say to Chair, on my notes this particular aspect 
enjoyed some measure of attention or not.  I can state that 
the books that she is – she was referring to were not 
available at the time that the affidavit was compiled.  And I 
20 
just needed to make that point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no that is fine.  I certainly will 
not have any difficulty with the fact that she made 
reference to her notes which she says she did not – was 
not available at the time.  I do not have a ...(indistinct). 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 80 of 301 
 
MR MADLOVO:   I am happy then. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I did not understand Mr Soni to be 
casting any aspersions on her.  Maybe I did not understand 
but on the face of it I have no issues with what 
...(intervenes). 
MR MADLOVO:   I am happy ...(intervenes). 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the explanation she has given. 
MR MADLOVO:   Yes.  I think Chair it was only insofar as 
Mr Soni said, I am asking a different question and I repeat 
it, and then he said my concern is this.  So I was simply 
10 
trying to clarify that concern to the extent that it is a 
concern.  If we left it unattended it might have given a 
different impression.  I did not want to make assumptions 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja okay. 
MR MADLOVO:   But I am happy that we can accept it on 
that basis.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja ...(intervenes). 
MR MADLOVO:   Thanks Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson with respect you are 
absolutely 
right 
no 
aspersions. 
 
I 
am 
entitled 
to 
...(indistinct) that you may have had the ...(indistinct).  She 
has explained since, I acquired them recently. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 81 of 301 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But we can leave that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   May I Ms Peters go to the date of the 
meeting.  Now this meeting was on the 20 t h of August 
2015, am I right? 
MS PETERS:   Correct Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I want to ask you to please and this 
is evidence that chain before the commission in the last 
two to three weeks because it was given by witnesses who 
dealt with what had been happening around that period in 
10 
Parliament.  I would like you to – Mr Chairperson I am 
going to refer the witness to certain statements made by 
Mr De Freitas when he gave evidence. 
Not many of them –they provide a context which in 
my submission is an important context that what happened 
at the meeting should be considered against. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no that is fine.  Before you do 
that, there is just one, two more questions I want to raise 
with Ms Peters.  I am sorry Ms Peters I am taking you back 
to the meeting.  Do you recall whether at the time of that 
20 
meeting of the 20 t h August 2015 there were already 
allegations that were being made at against Mr Montana for 
- relating to the time when he was group CEO of PRASA, 
relating to allegations of corruption and 
so 
on and 
whatever other allegations of wrongdoing.  Do you know 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 82 of 301 
 
whether at – those allegations were there. 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chairperson they were there.  There 
were media reports.  At that particular time there was a 
call 
from 
myself 
to 
the 
Auditor 
General 
to 
do 
an 
investigation based on his audit outcome.  And the issues 
that he flagged as findings, even those that he saw as 
repeated findings in the audit outcome. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now President Zuma at the time, I am 
sure would have been aware of those allegations as well, 
wouldn’t you say?  They were in the public domain and 
10 
maybe they were in reports, maybe in your report back to 
him, you ...[indistinct] you would have raised them.  Are 
you able to say or you are not able to say whether he was 
aware of those allegations or would have been aware? 
MS PETERS:  I think he was aware because they were in 
the public space. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.   
MS PETERS:  Yes.  And there, there was a meeting before 
then where I had taken the President through some of the 
litigation and other so-called corruption cases in the, in the 
20 
department plus also in the entity.  So I gave, I gave him a 
report.  I did give him a report to that nature. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS PETERS:  In fact to his defence, he actually gave us a 
proclamation for the SIU on matters, some of the matters 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 83 of 301 
 
that were addressed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I know that you have given your 
evidence about where you stood on the issue of Mr 
Montana or on the issue of Mr Montana’s possible return to 
PRASA.  You have said that you made it clear at the 
meeting that you supported the decision of the board to 
release him.  Now to the extent that according to Mr 
Molefe, President Zuma wished or pushed for or argued in 
favour of the board revisiting its decision to release him.  
Or sought that the board should rescind that decision to 
10 
release him which obviously would have meant that he 
would come back as Minister of Transport.  I would have 
thought 
that 
you 
would 
have 
considered 
that 
not 
appropriate to return somebody to PRASA who had left and 
in 
against 
whom 
there 
were 
various 
allegations 
of 
corruption, or wrongdoing that had not been resolved as 
yet.  Would it be fair to say as Minister, that would be your 
attitude?   
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That would be your attitude.  Yes, okay.  
20 
Alright.  Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  I was getting to that point and I 
will, I will raise that question again. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But Ms Peters you have said to the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 84 of 301 
 
Chairperson yes these matters where in the public space 
and so on.  I just want to go raise with you what had been 
raised in parliament, and that is the evidence that was 
given in this Commission in the last two or three weeks 
ago.  None of us was present except the Chairperson, so 
he will remember the evidence.  And I just want to place it 
on record so when the Chairperson is looking at the 
different strands he is able to pull them together to the 
extent that they are connected.  May I ask you to look at 
Parliamentary Bundle 3 please? 
10 
MS PETERS:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Have you got it? 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Will you look at page 368?   
CHAIRPERSON:  Did you say Bundle G or 3. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Bundle 3 Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MS PETERS:  368. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Have you got page 368? 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chairperson. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The one on the left-hand side.   
CHAIRPERSON:  What is the page? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Page 368 Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson what I intend doing and I 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 85 of 301 
 
don’t intend being long, but it is important that one knows 
that it was not only happening in the newspapers, it was 
happening at one of the arms of Government.  So if you 
look right on top, the, there is a date which is the 4 t h of 
March 2015.  Do you see that Ms Peters? 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay.  I’ll just read this to you and 
ask you if you aware of it.  Is in the National Assembly 
Plenary of the 12 t h of March, I am and this is Mr De 
Freitas: 
10 
“Called on the House to debate how PRASA did not 
comply 
with 
the 
processes, 
processes 
and 
procedures in the ordering of the new locomotives, 
rolling stock and how this took place and the impact 
it had on the project and budget in this regard.” 
Now that was a matter that was raised in the 
assembly.  Were you aware of that?   
MS PETERS:  Yes I am aware of this Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Alright.  Then I am just placed that, 
that parliament, that Mr De Freitas had raised that in the 
20 
assembly.   
MS PETERS:  Yes Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay.  Then would you go to the next 
one which is the 7 t h of July 2015.  He says, this is Mr De 
Freitas says, that: 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 86 of 301 
 
“On the 7 t h of July I wrote to Minister Peters about 
replies to my question submitted under the name of 
my colleague Mr Imbubu about the dimension of the 
new locomotives.  Said I had received the replies 
from Minister Peters on the 6 t h of May and he then 
at the end of that paragraph says, Minister Peters’ 
in her reply stated the new locomotives are not 
different in any form.  The new locomotives are 
within the required scale.” 
Is, was that your response to Mr De Freitas? 
10 
MS PETERS:  Chairperson I will have to go back to the 
record, because this has now been sprung on me.  And I 
don’t remember.  There were a lot of questions that were 
raised in parliament.  And one needs to take this, because 
usually 
there 
is 
a 
response 
and 
then 
there 
is 
an 
explanation to the response.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No I understand.  Okay, so you … 
MS PETERS:  So I’ll go and check on this.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Let’s, let’s leave that now because 
this, his complaint relating to your response is based on a 
20 
newspaper report which appears on the next page.  If you 
page over to page 369, and I don’t want to read everything.  
I just want to read two sentences from there.  Right at the 
top it is said: 
“The Class Afro 4000 was the first new locomotive 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 87 of 301 
 
type to be acquired by PRASA. It was officially 
unveiled in Cape Town on the 1 s t of December 
2018.” 
 
That is what the report said.  Then if you go to the 
last paragraph it says: 
“The Euro 4000 locomotive was designed to operate 
throughout Europe and is 4,264 millimetres high 
above the railhead.” 
 
Can I ask you, were you aware of this?  
MS PETERS:  Of this? 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Of this allegation? 
MS PETERS:  Of this allegation. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chairperson.  I was aware of this 
allegation.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Alright. 
MS PETERS:  And there was a process that they embarked 
upon with RSR which is the Rail Safety Regulator to find 
out 
how 
we 
arrived 
at 
this 
particular 
point. 
 
And 
Chairperson incidentally I do even have a report, because 
20 
it was in the public space, that is what we usually do as a 
courtesy and as part of protocol of cabinet, to alert the 
President to this particular issue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay. 
MS 
PETERS: 
 
And 
if 
allowed, 
I 
can 
submit 
that 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 88 of 301 
 
documentation as documentary. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, you are more than welcome. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please face this side as you give those 
answers. 
MS PETERS:  [Indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Alright.  On the following page at 
page 370, you will see that right at the bottom it says, on 
the 7 t h of July under the heading Montana denies claims 
and aid in report story: 
10 
“On the 7 t h of July 2015 with 13 locomotives already 
delivered and following the huge press report about 
the excessive height of the Afro 4000 locomotive, 
PRASA’s CEO Lucky Montana denied that the 
locomotives height was too tall and insisted that 
PRASA 
had 
followed 
a 
strict 
design 
review 
process.” 
 
Now that was in the public space and it was what 
you knew about that as well. 
MS PETERS:  I knew about this.  That is part of the 
20 
investigation that RSR was dealing with. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay. 
MS PETERS:  But also equally Chairperson, this matter 
formed the basis of some of the issues that were put in the 
terms of reference for the forensic investigation by the AG.  
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 89 of 301 
 
And I can make that also available if allowed. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Then on the 8 t h of July, right at 
the bottom it says: 
 
“Mthimkulu qualifications found to be fake.” 
 
And he says on the 8 t h of July, now this is Mr De 
Freitas reporting.  Sorry giving his evidence or his 
affidavit, he says:   
“The media story broke that the head of PRASA 
Engineering Services, Daniel Mthimkulu had lied 
about his qualification.” 
10 
 
And he then alleges that the response from PRASA 
was to defend Mthimkulu without proving that he indeed 
had the prerequisite qualifications.  Now that is not a 
matter that concerns you.  I am just saying that in the 
public space, this contract now perhaps it is a good time to 
place on record, that this was a contract for 3,5 billion 
rand.  Is that correct?   
MS PETERS:  Yes.  Yes Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It is what then became known as the 
Swifambo contract. 
20 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And just again to put it in context.  
That contract was set aside by the High Court, set aside, 
which was confirmed by the Supreme Court of Appeal 
which found there was corruption in the, in the award of 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 90 of 301 
 
the tender.  And that Swifambo was a fronting company for 
Vossloh of Spain.  Is, is that correct?  
MS PETERS:  Part of that document that I was saying are 
available for the Commission. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then … 
MS PETERS:  What we did as a department with regard to 
this matter. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then on the 14 t h of July 2015, that 
the note in respect of that says, that: 
“Mr De Freitas on the 14 t h wrote a letter to the 
10 
chairperson of the Portfolio Committee.  The first 
was to request to summon Minister Peters before 
the Portfolio Committee.  And the second to request 
that Mtimkulu be summoned to appear before the 
Portfolio Committee.” 
 
I have raised all of this because these are not 
matters that were happening in our of the public glare, and 
they were not happening in unofficial circles.  They were 
happening in the house in which are laws are known. 
MS PETERS:  Chairperson, just a correction.  These 
20 
matters were deliberated on, between the chairperson and 
Mr De Freitas, as well as in the Portfolio Committee.  And 
Chairperson I would not want to respond for the Portfolio 
Committee, because as, as members of the executive we 
get invited to the Portfolio Committee.  So if the Portfolio 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 91 of 301 
 
Committee did not invite us to come and address this 
particular matters, I cannot address it yet Mr Chair.  And, 
oh let me leave it there. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Well then can I ask you in response to 
that, did the Portfolio Committee not invite you to address 
this issue as requested by Mr De Freitas? 
MS PETERS:  I don’t remember ever being invited by the 
Portfolio 
Committee. 
 
Chairperson, 
the 
parliamentary 
systems also operate on the basis that many stars have got 
what is called parliamentary license officers, who sit in, in 
10 
this committee meetings and would bring reports of what 
trans – what the decisions of the committee is.  So and at 
times they would have access to the minutes.  So if the 
decision is not made at the committee level, that the 
Minister must be invited, then it would then mean that the 
Minister would not be invited.  But at any given stage 
Ministers get invited to present the quarterly reports to 
support or sit and listen in on entities when they present 
their reports.  If the Minister is not there then the DG or 
the 
Deputy 
Minister 
or 
any 
other 
official 
from 
the 
20 
department who has got relevance in whatever is being 
discussed, he or she would then go and represent the 
department. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Then on the 30 t h if you look at page 
372, on the 30 t h of July, Mr De Freitas tabled a motion in 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 92 of 301 
 
the house of assembly, requiring, raising, raising questions 
about the answer you had given.  [Indistinct] and he then 
says, 
you, 
he 
alleges 
that 
you 
supplied 
incorrect 
information, which you did not correct.  And he asked that 
you be called before the Powers and Privileges Committee, 
or that they investigate you and he says the Powers and 
Privileges committee blocked that motion.  Are you aware 
of that? 
MS PETERS:  I am totally not aware of that Mr Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And Ms Peters, can I just and I want 
10 
to give you this assurance, none of this is intended as a 
criticism of you.  It is merely saying that around the time of 
this meeting, these were the facts or these were the 
matters that were going on in the public space.  This is to 
give context to what happened prior to the meeting of the 
20 t h of August.  Then on the 12 t h of August, then on page 
372 Mr De Freitas says that: 
“Replies from Minister Peters who my questions are 
relating to Mr Mtimkulu, he may have given his 
peers the impression that he had the necessary 
20 
qualifications.” 
 
Can you remember giving that reply? 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Ms Peters, now I am obliged to ask, 
we had a 3,5 billion rand contract, this - the version 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 93 of 301 
 
everywhere is that the person who developed the scope for 
this locomotive was Mr Mtimkulu.  Is it now said that he 
had a fair qualification.  And you are asked or your 
department is asked to look into this.  What steps were 
taken as soon as the department and PRASA became 
aware that these were the allegations relating to Mr 
Mtimkulu? 
MS PETERS:  In fact Chairperson at the time when this 
issues of Mr Mtimkulu were picked up, I had instructed all 
entities of the department to do as skills and qualifications 
10 
and competencies audit, based on that SOE reform process 
that was unfolding so that we can match and place people 
according to their qualifications and their competency.  
Unfortunately at that particular time we had not received 
the responses from PRASA.  But I want to indicate if I have 
to go back to this question which I see for the first time 
here today that it has, it is a matter for, for the 
Commission.  Chairperson if, if you read the question, I 
indicated in that, that Mtimkulu may have given his peers 
the impression that he had the necessary qualification, and 
20 
thus without being detected slipped through the verication, 
verification process.  Secondly, we go ahead and I quote, 
PRASA Rail indicated to me at that time because Mtimkulu 
submitted his resignation.  That they will not accept his 
resignation, because they wanted to pursue criminal and 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 94 of 301 
 
fraud charges against him.  And that is how I left it 
Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now this is the 12 t h of August, the, 
the – your response.  Eight days later is the meeting at the 
Presidential 
guesthouse 
relating 
to 
a 
possible 
re-
employment of Mr Montana.  Were these issues raised at 
that meeting?  By anybody? 
MS PETERS:  They were not raised Chairperson.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now you were aware of them.   
MS PETERS:  Yes I was aware of them Chair. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And, and Ms Peters I am sorry I must 
ask you this and I know you will say it is unfair, but I just 
ask you this because did you not think that until these 
clouds had been cleared regarding a 3,5 billion rand 
contract, the question of Mr Montana’s going back to 
PRASA should not even be on the radar screen?   
MS PETERS:  I will not say it was on the radar screen of 
the, the, of me or the ministry, or even the board.  And that 
is why Chairperson, I impressed at the meeting of the 20 t h 
that the board acted – Mr Montana resigned.  The board 
20 
accepted his resignation.  And in the process of the time 
that the board had requested him to stay on, there were 
issues that cropped up.  This was some of those issues.  
And the media reports, the auditor general report and that 
lead to the decision of the board, which I accept.  And, and 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 95 of 301 
 
Chairperson the issue of Mtimkulu like I have indicate, the 
company did indicate to me that they are pursuing criminal 
and fraud charges against this particular individual, at that 
particular time.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So the question I am going to now, my 
next question in that regard is, forgetting what you said at 
the meeting, in your own mind when the question, when Mr 
Montana said at the meeting, but I can do so much for 
PRASA, PRASA will benefit from me.  Forget what you 
said.  Does it not occur to you that this might not be the 
10 
right thing to do in respect of two things, one is PRASA.  
But in respect of having regard to proper governance, that 
until this cloud is, is removed, we should not be seemed to 
be putting people like this in power? 
MS PETERS:  Chairperson, at that particular time and it 
was even in the media space, I had asked the auditor 
general to do a forensic audit and lined out some of these 
issues related to mal …[indistinct], corruption that was 
happening and not following due process in dealing with 
supply chain issues at PRASA.  And at the same time there 
20 
was this audit, the skills and competency audit.  And at the 
same time the company had given me, the company at that 
time was under Mr Molefe, had given me an indication that 
PRASA is busy with criminal and fraud charges against Mr 
Mtimkulu.  And I left it at that Chairperson. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 96 of 301 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now I am asking you …[indistinct].  I 
am saying at the meeting of the 20 t h of August, Mr 
Mtimkulu did not … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your voices. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry, sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is down Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  At the meeting of the 20 t h of August, 
Mr Mtimkulu did not feature.  It was Mr Montana and you’ve 
10 
already said that Mr Montana was saying it may be that he 
can contribute to PRASA.  I am not asking for what you 
said, but I am asking and I am testing your state of mind, 
did you not think that it would not be appropriate to take 
him back until this cloud had been lifted? 
MS PETERS:  Chairperson, already at that time we had 
accepted the board’s decision to release Mr Montana.  In 
my mind the issue of him returning to PRASA did not arise.  
Especially in view of the fact that I said there were four 
other CEOs that were engaging on with regards to the 
20 
transport sector as a whole.  So at no given stage did I 
create the impression that I am pliable to consider, even 
when Mr Montana was, was lobbying aggressively for him 
to return to PRASA.  But there was no entertainment of all 
those lobbies that were happening.  So I think a person is 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 97 of 301 
 
free to lobby whoever he wishes to lobby.  The reality is, 
PRASA is an entity of the State.  It is not the private 
property of Mr Montana where he can go and, and come 
back as he wish.  And there was no way in which I was 
going to say to the board, bring back Mr Montana.  It, it 
never, and Mr Molefe can tell that I never went to them to 
say bring back Montana.  Because there was all these 
investigations that was happening and in any case at that 
particular time.  There was a lot of investigation.  In fact 
the late AG once even said to me, that the officials at 
10 
PRASA, 
the 
functionaries 
that 
have 
got 
to 
provide 
information 
for 
all 
these 
investigations, 
will 
suffer 
investigation fatigue.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  That is on account of the number of 
investigations … 
MS PETERS:  Investigations. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Which is because the amount of 
fraud. 
MS PETERS:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Now we can take it that this, the 
20 
question of the propriety of Mr Montana coming back to 
PRASA was not discussed.  Is that correct?   
MS PETERS:  Maybe in, in … 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, no, no.  I am not saying that the – 
sorry I am not cutting you.  I just want you to answer the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 98 of 301 
 
wrong question.  I am saying the propriety, not whether he 
should come back, we know that was discussed.  But where 
the propriety of that was not discussed.  I am going – we 
are going to break for lunch.  I just want to leave you with 
this proposition.  Isn’t that one of the problems that we as 
a country find ourselves that that at those meetings, 
private meetings, we don’t articulate these concerns about 
proper governing.  I, I leave, I am not criticising you, I am 
asking because the Chairperson will want to look at what 
recommendations he should make in regard to this and it 
10 
would help.   
MS PETERS:  I would say Chairperson, the fact – I am 
trying to process the evidence leader ’s question properly 
so that I respond well Chairperson.  The issues of 
governance were raised and that is why Chairperson you 
would remember I gave an indication that the board, what 
the board process was.  The other thing Chairperson was 
that in that particular meeting, like I indicated there was no 
specific agenda.  And after the long list of issues that Mr 
Montana raised, there was no opportunity to almost like go 
20 
through each one.  Because in my view Mr Montana was 
building a case for himself.  In fact when I left that 
meeting, I said, for the information that Mr Montana has I 
think he has got a good framework for writing a book about 
his time and what he has done at PRASA.  If, if he believes 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 99 of 301 
 
that it is PRASA, because I was looking at him in relation 
to the transport factor, because he did not start with 
PRASA.  So and, and I still believe that as individuals we 
don’t when we are deployed in a position, it is no – it does 
not become our feetstom(?).  It becomes a responsibility 
that you need to carry out up to where it is possible based 
on the laws of this country, the policies and the programs 
that are in place.  And that is why for me it is, it is, it is 
interesting that the President has got a performance 
agreement 
and 
we 
follow 
that. 
 
The 
board 
had 
a 
10 
performance agreement with Mr Montana.  And they needed 
to follow that.  And they, these would be issues that also 
come the supplementary affidavit that I am speaking about 
Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Mr Soni was saying that he is not 
criticising you about not raising the question of whether it 
would be appropriate to return, to allow Mr Montana to 
return.  But I do want to say this.  That one of the things 
that I’m keen to establish is whether to the extent that I 
might find at the end of the work of the Commission … 
20 
MS PETERS:  Pardon. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That Mr Zuma as President of the country 
may have done or engaged in certain wrongdoing which 
may have been, may have assisted or enable State capture 
or that may have enabled acts of corruption to happen and 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 100 of 301 
 
to flourish.  I want, I will want to know if I come to that 
finding, 
but 
we 
need 
to 
talk 
about 
it 
before 
the 
Commission’s work is finalised, because when I make that 
finding I won’t have a chance to call you back or any of the 
witnesses back.  So we have got to say, I have got to say, 
what will I say in my recommendations if I make this kind 
of finding?  So I will, one of the questions that would arise 
is, was there anything that prevented Ministers to say, no 
but this is not right Mr President.  In this context of what 
you are talking about, if as Mr Molefe says in his evidence, 
10 
Mr Zuma as President in that meeting of the 20 t h August 
2015, did push or urge the board to revisit its decision to 
release Mr Montana, or to take him back, despite the fact 
that on your evidence he was aware that there were all 
kinds of allegations of corruption and wrongdoing involving 
Mr Montana.  The question arises whether you should not 
have said, apart from saying you support the decision of 
the board which you have made it clear, you said.  But 
President how could you ask the board to change its 
decision when there all these kinds of allegation of 
20 
corruption 
that 
have 
not 
been 
resolved 
against 
Mr 
Montana?  You, you understand the context.  So, so one 
wants to find out those who were within the cabinet, what 
did they do if they did see certain wrong things happening 
where they expected the President to do something, or did 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 101 of 301 
 
they just keep quiet?  And if so, was there an environment 
that made it difficult to say something as to try and 
understand that the position was.  But we will take the 
lunch break.  Maybe when we come back, you might wish 
to say something.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson, may I before we break 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Just ask one question.  It is and if you 
just look at lunch time. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And that is, there is a distinction 
because I know looking at what happened recently the 
question is, innocent until proven guilty.  The problem here 
is, Mr Montana was not in PRASA anymore.  He was out.  
So it is, it is a different situation where you are taking 
action against somebody you say, well we did not know 
whether he was guilty.  The question is questions have 
been raised and now the question is, should you take him 
back?  It is a very different question.  And if, Chairperson, 
20 
it fits in with … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It reinforces the point of …[indistinct]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you will remember Ms Peters that 
part of what you said about State Capture is that in certain 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 102 of 301 
 
instances those who pursued State agenda of State 
Capture sought to remove certain people or officials or 
Ministers from their positions who were not prepared to be 
party to any wrongdoing.  And sought to have certain 
people appointed to those positions that they believed 
would work with them in advancing the agenda of State 
Capture.  So, so when you have a situation such as the 
one that you have testified to, where Mr Montana had been 
a Group CEO of PRASA for quite some time, he left.  The 
board released him.  And there were certain allegations, 
10 
serious 
allegations 
against 
him 
of 
wrongdoing, 
of 
corruption.  And here now you at a meeting which is 
obviously approved by the President, who comes and sits 
in this meeting and allows this person, against whom there 
are all these kinds of allegations of wrongdoing at PRASA, 
taking the stand at the meeting, according to Mr Molefe, 
that the board must rescind its decision and take this 
person back, while all these allegations are hanging over 
the head.  It makes you ask the question, why would a 
President want to do this?  Why?  So those are the kinds 
20 
of questions that the Commission has to look at and ask.  
And of course it would have been better if everyone who 
could assist us, who would be able to come and assist us.  
So there, there are those questions and they might not be 
limited to PRASA.  They might be limited; they might 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 103 of 301 
 
extend to other SOEs and maybe other departments.  So, 
so that just to give you the full context.  Okay, we will take 
the lunch adjournment.  It is 13:14.  We will resume at 
14:15. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As it pleases. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us proceed Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please Chairperson.  
10 
Chairperson, may I just enquire?  You will appreciate that 
when the last questions were asked ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Just one second.  The aircon, if you can 
lower it down.  It is too noisy.  Yes, Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I was saying Chairperson that the 
last few questions before lunch. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I do not know if I should pursue them 
now or wait until the end? 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is fine.  As long Ms Peters gets a 
20 
chance to comment or say something. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  So it is fine if you deal with them 
later if that is convenient.  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That may be because there may be 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 104 of 301 
 
other things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  That is important. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ms Peters, we were looking at 
Mr Molefe’s affidavit.  And then the next issue that he 
deals with from paragraph - or the next issues that he 
deals with from paragraphs 93 to 97 are three issues.  And 
he deals with these issues in ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you back in the bundle that has got 
Mr Molefe’s affidavit? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, sorry.  Yes Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It is Bundle D-SS-6.  And page 24. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Thank you.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   24, I will assume.  That is on the 
right hand side in red. 
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But he deals with three issues which 
you then respond to in paragraphs 9, 10 and 11 of your 
affidavit.  Sorry, 9 and 10 of your affidavit.   
 
Now the first issues I want to deal with is.  There 
20 
is an allegation at paragraph 93 that after Mr Montana left, 
the 
board 
embarked 
on 
a 
rigorous 
recruitment 
and 
interviewing process but he alleges that you frustrated the 
attempts to appoint the CEO. 
 
Now just again in terms of time context.  The 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 105 of 301 
 
impression may be created because he then says that 
instead, in July 2016, Mr Letsoalo was appointed the 
acting CEO.  You see that at paragraph 93? 
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I am just trying to put context to this. 
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  The only thing is that between 
the time Mr Letsoalo was appointed and Mr Montana’s 
leaving almost a year had passed.  Is that not so? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So there was a period when mister – 
the – before Mr Letsoalo took over as acting CEO when 
somebody else acted.  That was Mr Khena.  Is that right? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So the position then is.  From the 
15 t h of July 2015 to July 2016, PRASA had an acting CEO. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And then in July, Mr Letsoalo was 
seconded from your department to act as the CEO.  Is that 
correct? 
20 
MS PETERS:   In consultation and in agreement with 
Mr Molefe. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  I did not mean it in that sense.  
I am just looking at the... 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 106 of 301 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But I know that there is a dispute as 
to he says that Mr Letsoalo was imposed on the board, as 
it were.  You say it was done in consultation.  We will come 
to that in a minute but I am just trying to get a timeframe. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then after it was Mr Zide who acted 
as the CEO.  Is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   From February 2017. 
MS PETERS:   I do not have a recollection Chairperson 
10 
because at that time I was in hospital. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   By that time you were...? 
MS PETERS:   At the time when – after Letsoalo left, I do 
not recall what happened at that particular time because I 
was in and out of hospital for some period during that 
period. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS PETERS:   But I do remember the names Zide.  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  I am going to take you to 
documents appeared by the late Mr Kimi Makwetu where he 
records all of this.   
MS PETERS:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But the point I want to make 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 107 of 301 
 
Ms Peters is, that from the 15 t h of July 2015 until the end 
of 
March 
2017 
when 
you 
were 
relieved 
from 
the 
ministership there was no full CEO.  It was always an 
acting CEO.  Is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  Now I just want to ask you.  
If I can ask you to look please at Parliamentary Bundle 4?  
I think you have been told what the page is.   
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Can I just ask you to deal with – oh, 
10 
to go to page 35.  Sorry, page 871 of that bundle.  This is – 
remember we are talking about the left-hand side, the 
black numbers. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  Now Mr Makwetu deals with 
in paragraph 61 and he puts in the table, Table 2, which 
shows the increased ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, just ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   OH, sorry Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...for the record Mr Soni. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You want to confirm that the document 
we are asking her to look at ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright, correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...is an unsigned affidavit of the late 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 108 of 301 
 
Mr Makwetu. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  Sorry, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So that whoever reads the 
transcript can understand...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, I understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And we are at page 871. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  And just for your reassurance 
Ms Peters.  The contents of this affidavit although not 
10 
signed 
by 
Mr Makwetu 
were 
confirmed, 
with 
the 
correctness of the contents, were confirmed by officers 
from his department or from his office. 
MS PETERS:   Noted Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  So in Table 2, he deals with 
the exponential increase, as he calls it, from 2013 to 2018 
in the irregular expenditure incurred by PRASA.  I just want 
to read that for the record.  Are you with me Ms Peters? 
MS PETERS:   Come again Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   If you look at Table 2 ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   It falls under ...[intervenes]  
MS PETERS:   Chair, my apology.  I am struggling to 
reflect back here because of the lights. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, is it affecting you? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson.  I just ...[intervenes]  
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 109 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Too bright? 
MS PETERS:   I just had a procedure in my eyes.  So. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh. 
MS PETERS:   They are very bright.  So when I look up, 
then I first have to close my eyes to adjust. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If they tilt them to face in a different 
direction, that should make a difference to you? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which particular one or both of them? 
MS PETERS:   This one in particular, yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   This one in particular.  Okay alright.  
You must just – they will tilt it and you must tell us if that 
is fine for you.   
MS PETERS:   It is not.  It is actually level with me now.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Is that any better miss? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think that is too bright.  That is too 
bright.  Will it be fine if you tilt it towards the left? 
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   How is that? 
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ms Peters, how is that? 
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   It is still problematic? 
MS PETERS:   It is still problematic Chair but if anything, I 
need time to adjust. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 110 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   They can tilt it downwards? 
MS PETERS:   Probably. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Okay. 
 
Can 
you 
do 
that, tilt 
it 
downwards? 
TECHNICIANS:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   How is that? 
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Still is a problem? 
MS PETERS:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   If you tilt it towards the left, does it 
10 
affect anything if you tilt it substantially towards the left or 
the right?  Does it affect it anything in terms of the TV? 
MS PETERS:   Oh, okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It does? 
MS PETERS:   Maybe I should leave it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   How far can you tilt it to the left without 
it affecting the television? 
TECHNICIANS:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Reverend Stimela, can you tell me 
because I cannot hear. 
20 
REV STIMELA:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the furthest you can move? 
REV STIMELA:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.  How – that has not helped, hey? 
MS PETERS:   It has not helped but for progress Chair, I 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 111 of 301 
 
would just beg for indulgence for the length of time I would 
take to adjust first before I see the letters. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   But I will be fine.  I will stop looking at the 
evidence leader. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry about that.  Okay alright. 
MS PETERS:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So in Table 2 Ms Peters the Auditor-
General says or his office says that in the financial year 
2013/2014 the irregular expenditure was not R 0,1 billion.  
That I understand is about R 100 million.  Is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   Correct Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then in 2014/2015, it increased to 
R 5.5 billion.   
MS PETERS:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, in which year is that now? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   In 2014/2015 Chairperson.  The 
20 
second one from the right ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, the R 5 billion – zero comma five? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Five. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Zero comma...  So that must be 
about R 550 million. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 112 of 301 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   R 550 million 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Perhaps I should use those figures, 
yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  And then in 2015/2016, it 
increased to fifteen billion, three hundred million. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And in 2016/2017 it increased 
20 billion, three hundred million. 
10 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And in 2017/2018 to 24 billion, two 
hundred million. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  Now what is then said at 
paragraph 62 is: 
“The instability in the board and at PRASA’s 
key management level, negatively impacted 
the operations of the entity and contributed to 
the collapse of the controlled environment.” 
20 
 
That is his comment. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And then he makes a second 
comment that: 
“Although the auditors continuously reported 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 113 of 301 
 
ineffective compliance monitoring processes to 
senior management, these deficiencies were 
not addressed and resulted in repeat non-
compliant findings. 
This 
included 
ineffective 
steps 
taken 
to 
prevent 
irregular, 
fruitless 
and 
wasteful 
expenditure.” 
 
That is what is recorded there.  I am just raising 
that. 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now as I understand it Ms Peters and 
we can go to it if you want.  There were several meetings 
between you as Minister and the office of the Auditor-
General. 
MS PETERS:   Yes. 
ADV 
VAS 
SONI 
SC: 
 
 
During 
the 
period 
of 
your 
ministership. 
MS PETERS: Yes, Chairperson.    
ADV VAS SONI SC:   These matters would have been 
raised with you. 
20 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Alright.  Now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So...  I am sorry. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So just to make sure.  You accept that 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 114 of 301 
 
these were the figures in terms of irregular expenditure as 
set out by the Auditor-General’s office? 
MS PETERS:   They are the figures as indicated and as 
reflected in the meetings we had with the Auditor-General 
which – in which he raised concerns about the issues 
related to record keeping and challenges of – that most 
appropriate officials to account nothing available. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   Chair, again related to this.  I would request 
- because of the fact that after all these meetings there 
10 
was correspondence and communication with the board.  I 
would request that I supplement that information. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   With the records that – I am grateful that 
yesterday the office of the Minister managed to sent to my 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  No, that is... 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that will be important. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You can turn to the next page 
20 
Ms Peters.  This is page 872.  He then table – at Table 3, 
he deals with the instability of the PRASA Board.  Now just 
highlight two things because – oh, see.  In fact, only the 
three top ones affect you.  You were not longer Minister 
from the end of March 2017.   
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 115 of 301 
 
 
So the first matter he reflects on is that on the 
1 s t of August 2014, 
the 
new 
board 
under 
the 
chairpersonship of Mr Popo Molefe was appointed but that 
is common cause.  Is that right? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV 
VAS 
SONI 
SC: 
 
 And 
then 
he 
says 
on 
the 
1 s t of November 2016, the National Treasury representative 
and resigned. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Where are you reading from now 
Mr Soni? 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, sorry.  Table 3 Chairperson on 
page 872. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay alright.  Continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  And then he says on the 
8 t h of March, 
the 
board 
under 
the 
chairpersonship 
of 
Mr Molefe was dismissed.  And we are going to get to that 
in a moment.   
 
And then an interim board was appointed.  What 
happened on the 10 t h of April, obviously, is something that 
you must know about but namely the court made a decision 
20 
of Mr Molefe’s application.   
 
And the rest of the things we need not worry 
about because they do not concern you and obviously the 
next Minister will deal with that.  If I can then ask you to 
look at page 873 at para...[intervenes]  
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 116 of 301 
 
MS PETERS:   So sorry? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry. 
MS PETERS:   Am I allowed to comment? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  He can give you an opportunity to 
comment. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   Thank you Chairperson.  I would confirm 
that on the 1 s t of August 2014, the board appointed another 
chairpersonship of Popo Molefe.  I confirm the resignation 
of the Treasury representative. 
10 
 
When the board informed me.  I wrote to the 
Minister of Finance to appoint their representative and it 
was upon them to submit which was later done. 
 
And I confirm that under – on the 8 t h of March, 
under the chairpersonship of Tata Molefe, the board was 
dismissed.  Yes, I agree.  And the board were place – put 
in place an interim board that was chaired by Mr Allie, as 
indicated.  I confirm that. 
 
And despite the fact that I was not there, I do 
note 
that 
on 
the 
10 t h 
of 
April 
the 
board 
under 
20 
chairpersonship of Tata Molefe was reinstated. 
 
And I just want to indicate Chairperson that I 
still believe that in acting against the board of Tata Molefe 
on the 8 t h of March, I was correct. 
 
And I was correct based on the fact that in the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 117 of 301 
 
supplementary affidavit, you will note the length of time I 
took to engage the board under Tata Molefe with regard to 
these issues that are being raised by the Auditor-General. 
 
As every quarter, ministers get reports on the 
performance 
of 
the 
entities. 
 
And 
all 
perusal 
and 
engagement would find the issues that might be found to 
be issues that need attention. 
 
I wrote to the board.  And in most instances, the 
board would not even respond.  And Chairperson, quite a 
number of times, throughout the period of 2016... 
10 
 
I will make an example.  The first quarter of 
2016, the board – the company performed at around 60%.  
The second quarter they performed at around 40%.  The 
third quarter they performed at around 20% or 21%.   
 
And those matters were of concern to the 
Portfolio Committee and to myself as the Minister and it 
was at that time Chairperson that the other matter that the 
evidence leader would raise would come to the fore. 
 
The 
focus 
of 
the 
board, 
not 
on 
the 
core 
responsibility of the company was of a concern to me and I 
20 
raised it.  Even in the meetings I had with them, there are 
– what we call notes or speeches - that I delivered in those 
meetings for the record. 
 
And I want to indicate that ordinarily sitting 
back...  There is a saying in life, generally, that says you 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 118 of 301 
 
regret more the things you did not do than the things you 
did. 
 
I believe my patience with the board of Tata 
Molefe was over-stretched.  And the other thing that was of 
worry to me as the Minister was the fact that the 
correspondence related performance issues, to matters 
from the Auditor-General were not getting the attention the 
board is supposed to get. 
 
And at times, because it was difficult to meet the 
full board, we would meet every time with Mr Molefe 
10 
himself and he would say we will respond or complain that 
the administration on management is not given back the 
information and yet it is him who was the board based on 
the fact that they would have concurred. 
 
Because 
when 
the 
management 
writes 
the 
report, they present it to the board, the board must concur 
with that report and then send it to the Minister so that 
they can then say:  Yes, this is a true reflection of what 
transpired.  And that was not happening. 
 
There is correspondence that I sent to Mr Molefe 
20 
that indicated even the fact that I wrote to you on this 
particular issue.  You did not respond.  I wrote to you on 
this particular issue.  You did not respond.  I wrote to you 
on this particular issue.  You did not respond. 
 
And I want to say to you Chairperson, if you give 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 119 of 301 
 
me a chance, given an opportunity I would have challenged 
this court’s outcome because in my view it was on a 
procedural technicality based on the fact that probably I 
did not give them ample notice and all that but I still 
believe that my decision to remove that board at that 
particular time was long overdue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Did you ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I – maybe I can just say and you 
may have heard me say this and when other witnesses 
10 
were given evidence about this Table 2 on page 871 that 
for me it is really shocking to find that for 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 – 
five financial years an entity’s irregular expenditure year in 
year out was going out up astronomically. 
 
As if somebody at PRASA had taken the decision 
that I am going to show them, whoever they are, that they 
cannot do anything.  We will increase this irregular 
expenditure every year, every year. 
 
I mean, you look at the financial year 2013/2014.  
It was about R 100 million.  But it then goes up in the 
20 
following financial year, 2014/2015, to R 550 million.   
 
As if that increase was not bad enough, then 
from R 550 million it does not go to one billion.  It does not 
go to two billion.  It does not go to three billion.  It does 
not go to ten billion.  It goes to 15-billion.   
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 120 of 301 
 
 
This should have shocked everybody concerned 
and said this must stop!  How then the following two 
financial years it continued to go up.  It is just difficult to 
understand for me.   
 
And I ask the question:  Where were all of those 
people who were supposed to make sure that this did not 
happen?  What were they doing?   
 
Now 
obviously 
one 
must 
look 
at 
the 
management, one must look at the board, one must look at 
the minister and I think one must look at the Cabinet, the 
10 
President in the Cabinet because these things should have 
been brought to the attention, certainly the President’s, I 
would imagine, to say there is a serious problem at 
PRASA. 
 
But it is like nothing was being done and all 
concerned must have seen this astronomical increase year 
in year out.  I mean, it is supposed to go down not up.  It is 
like somebody knew that nobody would do anything about it 
or simply said they cannot touch me.  I am going to just 
continue making – increasing this irregular expenditure.   
20 
 
It is difficult to understand that people were 
aware of this and just allowed it to continue like that.  Of 
course, 
you 
have 
said 
that 
you 
will 
deposed 
to 
a 
supplementary affidavit and that is most welcome because 
you have got info – correspondence that shows what you 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 121 of 301 
 
did on your part because that is quite important to say as 
Minister you became aware of this, every quarter of how 
the entity was performing and therefore every year.  And 
what did you do about it? 
 
So it is very important and I want to know also 
what the board of Mr Molefe did about it but I will also 
want to know – well, I was going to want to know what 
President Zuma did about it but he might not be here. 
 
But I would like to know what the Cabinet did 
about it.  How could a state entity have these kinds of 
10 
reports and the irregular expenditure just increases like 
this and what did everybody do about it? 
 
So for your part it is important that during your 
term, because I think that this was mostly during your 
terms, it is important that you place before the Commission 
all the evidence you might have that shows what you did. 
 
So that when judgment has to be made as to who 
did their job and who did not do their job about this, at 
least you have put your side of the story properly before 
the Commission.   
20 
MS PETERS:   Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS PETERS:   With regards to – if you look at the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 122 of 301 
 
2015/2016, that was the time when we received the 
Auditor-General’s audit.  We got to start the process of the 
investigation, that the forensic investigation that I spoke 
to. 
 
Unfortunately, the forensic investigation - I had 
requested from the Auditor-General coincided with the 
release of the Derailed Report from the Public Protector 
which was dealing with matters of between 2010 and 2012. 
 
And there was a decision between myself, the 
Auditor-General and the board chairperson as well as the 
10 
office of the Chief Procurement Officer to reconcile the 
investigations. 
 
But also Chairperson, in this report of 2015, to 
the credit of the board, they had requested the Auditor-
General to reveal everything because in the previous 
report there would be indications that they still work on 
regard to this matter, with regard to this particular matter. 
 
These were some of those contracts that were 
entered without proper procurement processes, those that 
SCM procedures were either flouted or they were found to 
20 
have not been regularly entered to and these were matters 
that were taken to the SCOPA at parliament.   
You would remember, Chairperson, that at SCOPA 
some 
of 
these 
amounts 
would 
either 
be 
treated 
as 
extension of contracts, deviations and modifications and all 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 123 of 301 
 
those and others would be rejected and others would be 
either condoned and this would be the process that is not 
necessarily in the hands of the minister of the relevant 
department because the report is now released, we are 
engaging with the board with regard to what are you doing 
to make sure this matter does not recur.  Thank you, 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chairperson.  Now as 
paragraph 65 on page 873 it is recorded that: 
10 
“The instability in the Group CEO position was 
equally 
troublesome 
with 
the 
new 
appointment 
every year and on occasion more than one per year.  
Further, these appointments were made in an acting 
capacity and only in 2018 an interim Group CEO 
was appointed.” 
They before demonstrate the movements in appointment 
and I will just read it for the record, it says that: 
“Mr Montana resigned in 2015 and in August 2015, 
Mr Khena was appointed as Acting Group CEO.  In 
20 
July 2016 Mr Letsoalo was appointed as Acting 
Group 
CEO. 
 
February 
2017 
Mr 
Zide 
was 
appointed…” 
And obviously you cannot answer for this: 
“In December 2017 Mr Molepo was appointed, April 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 124 of 301 
 
2018, that is on the next page 874, Mr Zide was 
again appointed as Acting CEO and in June 2018 Mr 
Sithole was appointed interim Group CEO.” 
Two things, are you aware of these developments, the 
correctness of what is here? 
MS PETERS:   I remember up until July 2016 and like I 
have indicated, February 2017 I was in hospital at that 
particular time when this matter was decided on and 
thereafter, some things that I followed from the press. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay, but this is from the office of 
10 
the auditor general.  Are you prepared to accept its 
accuracy? 
MS PETERS:   That is why, Chairperson, I say up until July 
2016. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But you noted the point I made – 
well, that was made at paragraph 65, that the instability in 
regard to the appointment of a permanent CEO was flagged 
by the auditor general.  You accept that it was flagged? 
MS PETERS:   I accept that because it is at all times 
reflected in the engagements with the executing authority, 
20 
Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now there I want to come back to 
what Mr Molefe says at paragraph 93, he says: 
“After Mr Montana’s departure from PRASA the 
board sought to appoint …[intervenes] 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 125 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, hang on, Mr Soni.  We are 
changing bundles now, hey? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, sorry, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are going now to bundle that has 
got Mr Molefe’s …[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Bundle D, SS6.  Sorry, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Is it bundle D? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Bundle D, SS6, page 24, paragraph 
93. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now Mr Montana says: 
“They embarked on a rigorous recruitment and 
interviewing process.  However, Minister Peters 
frustrated the board’s attempt to appoint a CEO.” 
And then it is added immediately thereafter: 
“Instead she insisted Mr Letsoalo be appointed.” 
But that was of course in July 2016.  I want to now go back 
to the time Mr Montana left in July 2015.  What was your 
approach to what should happen to the position of the 
CEO?  Now we know the meeting of the 20 August took 
20 
place.  We know Mr Montana and you have said that 
nothing happened thereafter.  Now clearly there was a 
need to appoint a CEO.  Do you accept that? 
MS PETERS:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Molefe says that you frustrated 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 126 of 301 
 
their 
attempts 
despite 
a 
rigorous 
recruitment 
and 
interviewing process.  Are you aware of a recruitment and 
interviewing process? 
MS PETERS:   I am aware of it, Chairperson.  I am aware 
of it, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Were you told that the board is 
embarking on that process? 
MS PETERS:   He informed me when they had concluded 
the process and I did know that there is a process that 
unfolded, even the adverts were done and I knew that they 
10 
are busy with that particular process. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now I going to come to this but in 
parliament it was then reported that an amount of R1,7-odd 
million had been spent on that process.  I am going to 
come to that but I am just recording that.  Were you aware 
of that? 
MS PETERS:   I was aware of that but not the amount, 
Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now can I ask you before we go into 
why nobody was appointed, what role does cabinet play in 
20 
the appointment of CEOs of SOEs? 
MS PETERS:   There is a process where once a board has 
gone through the processed they would recommend – I do 
not know whether it is three names in their order and there 
would be a consultation process, Chairperson, and that 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 127 of 301 
 
consultation process culminates in the minister presenting 
a memo to the cabinet requesting cabinet to concur with 
that particular decision. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The consultation involves who and who? 
MS PETERS:   It involves quite an extensive number of 
role-players 
because 
you 
would 
be 
looking 
at 
an 
appointment that has a bearing on other colleagues in 
cabinet and you would want to make sure that those 
colleagues can then be able to give you an indication of it 
10 
they have got an issue with regard to that or, alternatively, 
to support your recommendation in cabinet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But who gets consulted by whom?  Is it 
cabinet ministers including the President, the Deputy 
President? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson, it would ultimately 
include the President and in most instances it is courtesy 
to include the President.  Chairperson, it is important to 
note that as a Minister when you go and meet the 
President or make presentation everywhere else where you 
20 
were supposed to, you are supported by a team of men and 
women who are necessarily from the establishment or from 
department and entities that you are working with.  So it 
would be important and I always used to use even my own 
experience as a head of government in my previous 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 128 of 301 
 
responsibility as Premier of the Northern Cape where you 
would as a Chairperson of a cabinet when a particular 
motivation is made.  If that motivation you are fully versed 
with and informed about then it makes the taking of the 
decision or the taking of the – or the acceptance of it even 
easy.  Even if there would have probably been others who 
would probably say no, but we would have preferred to get 
that particular individual or somebody else would then say 
in the cabinet that I have interviewed that person and in 
the next interview – it is just to cross-reference and check. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Does that consultation involve people 
who are not in government? 
MS PETERS:   Sorry, Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Does that consultation also involve 
people who are not in government? 
MS PETERS:   Not in government? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja but for example in the ruling party, 
the ANC? 
MS PETERS:   No, no, no, in the ANC the President and 
the Deputy President would report on those particular 
20 
processes, to consult. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  So the people that consulted are 
basically your cabinet colleagues and the President and 
Deputy President? 
MS PETERS:   It would be the cabinet colleagues – yes, 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 129 of 301 
 
Chairperson, it would be cabinet colleagues, it would be 
the President and the Deputy President and if so feel that 
you – based on the fact that you are appointing somebody 
who would be of assistance in the implementation of a 
particular policy you would also be free. That was not 
restricted, you would be free but it would be out of 
courtesy.  You would be free to consult other colleagues 
who would not necessarily be in cabinet but through a 
structured process. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And would those be people within the 
10 
ruling party? 
MS PETERS:   Pardon? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would those people, who are not in 
government, be within the ruling party? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chairperson, it would be wrong for me 
to go and consult people who are not necessarily members 
of the ruling party on matters that has got a bearing on the 
mandate that I draw from the ruling party. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no …[intervenes] 
MS PETERS:   But the agencies and the government 
20 
implement the policies and programmes of the African 
National Congress, which is the ruling party.   
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, I just wanted to have a 
picture of the groupings of people or categories of people 
that get consulted and I was not necessarily you were 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 130 of 301 
 
consulting people who are neither in government or in the 
ruling party but I wanted to know whether people within the 
ruling party also get consulted.  Okay, alright. 
MS PETERS:   Even with the appointment of boards. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MS PETERS:   Even with appointment of boards. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of the board, yes, okay.  That is 
important.  Mr Soni, do you want to – well, you can follow 
the line you were following. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you might wish to come back to 
…[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I do want to pursue this, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Ms Peters, we are a country of laws, 
that is more or less first paragraph of a recent judgment of 
the Constitutional Court issued.  Now in regard to the 
appointment of the CEO, this is what the PRASA Act says.  
It says that the CEO is appointed by the board in 
consultation with the minister.  It places no role on the 
20 
cabinet, it gives no power to cabinet. 
MS PETERS:  Chairperson …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   He just wants you to comment on that.  
What do you have to say about that? 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 131 of 301 
 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I think maybe I have not 
followed that particular judgment [indistinct – dropping 
voice] but when I got into government from the stages that 
I got into government, we found …[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry, Ms Peters, I do not want to be 
rude.  I have been asked to ask you to adjust your mic 
because you are not being recorded properly.  Sorry. 
MS 
PETERS: 
 
 Thank 
you, 
Chair. 
 
I 
was 
saying, 
Chairperson, that in the history of my deployment in 
different responsibilities of government we have always as  
10 
a protocol, which is a cabinet protocol, consulted with 
cabinet and there is no decision because when you 
appoint, you are not appointing for yourself, you are 
appointing for South Africa.  So the cabinet of – or 
government is in the hands of the President and the 
cabinet.  So the cabinet resolution gives you that authority.  
The pronouncement would be made by the board because 
the board would be informed on the decision of the cabinet 
and, Chairperson, if you go into the records of cabinet 
statements after every cabinet there would be an indication 
20 
on the appointment and under appointment it would then 
reflect all those people who have been appointed in 
different areas.  If it was wrong then it would mean that we 
need cabinet to review that protocol. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So there are two issues.  The 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 132 of 301 
 
protocol is that the consultation and in a sense approval of 
the appointment of the CEO of an SOE must come from 
cabinet, forget what the minister thinks. 
MS PETERS:   I would not say, Chairperson, that is, is 
forget what the minister says and incidentally, there has 
not been a lot of instances where a submission of the 
minister was rejected and that is why I was saying the 
engagements with colleagues would be to just cross-check 
and cross-reference so that they then are able because 
decisions would necessarily be taken on the majority 
10 
decisions and if you have got a strong case you will not 
have anything having comebacks.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So when you say the majority of the 
decision are you talking about the majority of cabinet 
members? 
MS PETERS:   Ja because majority is taken in that way 
and the summary of the Chairperson of the meeting. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now, Ms Peters, I am not challenging 
the process that is followed at this point, I am merely 
saying that the process that seems to be followed does not 
20 
reflect 
what 
the 
law 
says 
the 
powers 
of 
different 
institutions are. 
MS PETERS:   Noted, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And I am saying that, Ms Peters, 
again – and it is a submission I will make to the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 133 of 301 
 
Chairperson and I am going to ask you to comment on that. 
One of the things about good governance is you have an 
independent board which makes decisions and that board 
can be held accountable for the decisions it takes.   
Now, 
as 
the 
Chairperson 
said, 
when 
irregular 
expenditure increases from less than a billion rand to R20 
billion in five years the persons who should be held 
responsible are the members of the board and that is on 
the basis that they take the decision. 
 
The problem with what is now being suggested is 
10 
that 
you 
cannot 
hold 
anybody 
accountable 
because 
somebody else effectively took the decisions or somebody 
else influenced those decisions.  That is my worry about 
the way these matters are being dealt with and it is the 
submission I am going to make to the Chairperson at some 
stage. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, once the CEO or the board 
has appointed the CEO and got the concurrence of cabinet 
the board through the Chairperson signs a performance 
agreement with the CEO and takes responsibility for the 
20 
evaluation of the performance of the CEO who then should 
take responsibility for the performance of his or her 
subordinate and the board must be held responsible for 
that because they then report after everything to the 
minister.   
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 134 of 301 
 
In the instance of the PRASA process the rationale 
was whilst we are dealing with the process of the 
appointment there should not be a vacuum and therefore 
there was this particular acting positions.  Chairperson, if 
we have to go back to the report of the AG with regard to 
that spiralling irregular …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Expenditure. 
MS PETERS:   Expenditure.  I discussed with Mr Molefe, 
not Minister Molefe, Mr Molefe and we then had an 
agreement on this particular secondment.  In fact he was 
10 
recommending somebody else who was in a subsidiary 
when in the [indistinct] 20.42 I had with him and then I said 
to him, your main problem here is SCM procurement issues 
and this irregular expenditure.  You need somebody who 
understands finances who can help us to be able to get out 
of this quagmire that you find yourselves in and we 
discussed that.   
He made the recommendation on wanting one of my 
advisers and I said to him no, I am directing you to the 
point about the finances, now you want to cripple – I even 
20 
jokingly said now you want to cripple my – the ministry, if 
you want to do that and in fact at that part …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, just repeat that, what did he 
suggest and what did you say? 
MS PETERS:   He was suggesting that I borrow him one of 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 135 of 301 
 
the advisers in my office.  Then I said to him but you are 
crippling my ministry if you do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS PETERS:   And that is where – we left it at that, as 
such and we then had this discussion where the motivation 
for Letsoalo’s acting, Letsoalo went to act there and 
everything – and I want to indicate, when Letsoalo got to 
PRASA everything was hunky dory, I am sorry for that 
word, Chairperson, but I do not know where the challenges 
emerged from because for some reason – and I would want 
10 
to say this seems to play itself back.   
For some reason I do not know what happens with 
the Chairperson of the board when he goes to overseas 
trips with these CEOs and when they come back then all 
relationship issues becomes a big issue because that was 
the issue.   
And then the certain issue that they seemed to have 
an issue with, we went to the portfolio committee, they had 
no problem with Letsoalo, Letsoalo was acting there.  We 
went to the portfolio committee, the portfolio committee 
20 
raised a concern on something they had picked up that the 
board had overpaid themselves.  There is a particular 
process also that is followed for board remunerations, that 
was not followed, there has not been even a request for 
the minister to engage with regularising that particular 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 136 of 301 
 
illegal increase and it was flagged in the AG’s report as an 
issue, that the committee wrote to me.  I wrote to the board 
to request the board to repay the money, private to Mr 
Molefe.  He repaid the money.  The other board members 
refused to repay the money and later on I was informed 
that he went back to ask back for his money because he      
seemed to be the only one who has honoured that and 
repaid the money and I am raising this just to indicate that 
in the beginning there was – and the other issue that I 
believe was a problem between – emanated as a problem, 
10 
there was this request for reports, there was this request 
for an audit of the – or the board evaluation because I was 
looking at the auditor general’s report and I said we 
needed a board evaluation.  All entities did that board 
evaluation, the board Chairpersons presented the board 
evaluation …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, I am going to stop you there, 
Ms Peters. You might later on go back to whatever you 
wanted to say.  I think the question was a very narrow 
question.   
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not know if you want to repeat it, Mr 
Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, yes, Chairperson.  I was going 
to say, Ms Peters, that the dispute over Mr Letsoalo in the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 137 of 301 
 
bigger picture is a red herring and I am saying that to you 
in this context.  Mr Montana leaves in 2015, July 2015, Mr 
Letsoalo is appointed in July 2016, a year passes.  Now 
the question I asked you and have been asking is why was 
there no appointment of a board and you were telling me – 
you were telling the Chairperson that this is the process 
and one needs cabinet and so on.  And then I asked you a 
further question that he says there was a recruitment drive 
and you said yes, you did not know what it had cost.  But 
the question really is, was it not of concern to you having 
10 
regard to what the auditor general  had said to you that a 
CEO needs to be appointed? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let us break those questions up, I 
think there are three now, Mr Soni.  The first question is 
why was a permanent Group CEO for PRASA not appointed 
for over a year or close to a year before Mr Letsoalo was 
appointed to act?  But when I say close to a year, Mr Soni 
is kind to you by counting from 15 July when Mr Montana 
left, I want to suggest to you that both you and Mr Molefe 
knew by end of 2014 the previous year that Mr Montana’s 
20 
contract was going to come to an end, so therefore, from 
that time, at the latest, you ought to have been occupying 
yourselves with preparations relating to the appointment, 
the finding of a new CEO.  Now, of course, in terms of the 
separate roles, maybe it is the board that would need to do 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 138 of 301 
 
that but you would need to oversee, I would imagine, that 
they were doing that because if they were not doing that 
you would need to decide what steps to take if they were 
not doing their job.  So if you ask me, I do not start in mid-
July when Mr Montana leaves, I say from 2014 towards the 
end you and the board knew that there would be a need to 
appoint a permanent CEO and yet by 2016, is it March for 
Mr Letsoalo? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   2016 – sorry, July. 
CHAIRPERSON:   July 2016.  So it looks like certainly over 
10 
a year and a half there is still no appointment of a 
permanent Group CEO.  Why was that? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, it took the board some time 
and it was around I think – I am not sure of the exact date 
but necessarily in 2015 but early 2016 when I got the 
information on the end process that they had followed and 
then I started with the process of consultations.  And I 
would want to say, Chairperson, that there were other 
activities related to the department and to the entities 
which 
actually 
delayed 
the 
engagements 
that 
I 
was 
20 
supposed to have with Mr Molefe with regards to this 
particular appointment and we later had it where thereafter 
I was supposed -  I then start the consultations.  I would 
say I concede and agree that it did take a bit too long.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And by the time you say you got 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 139 of 301 
 
involved, around about when was that in relation to mid-
year 2015 and July 2016 when Mr Letsoalo was brought in, 
around about when would it be that you became involved? 
MS PETERS:   I am not sure of the date, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, just – towards the end of 2015 or 
early months of 2016? 
MS PETERS:   I think it was of 2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but I would have expected that part 
of what should have happened is that once you were aware 
of the effect that Mr Montana was going to leave that the 
10 
Board would place before you their plans to deal with the 
issue of the filling of the position of Mr Montana and that 
that should give you an idea to say look, we are planning 
to do A, B, C, D in terms of process but our target is by 
that month there should be a permanent CEO.  Did they not 
give you anything like that at any stage, either early 2015 
or mid 2015?   
MS PETERS:   There was indications towards after 
Montana left which was a later part of 2016 sir, I mean 
2015 that they intend to start the process.  It is just that 
20 
the dates are throwing me out right now.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, maybe when they asked Mr 
Montana to stay for six months more if that was the period, 
I think that was the period.  So the extension of his stay, 
maybe 
they 
had 
in 
mind 
that 
they 
would 
use 
the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 140 of 301 
 
opportunity to try and get a CEO appointed I would 
imagine, but do you know whether their process of 
recruitment happened during the second part of 2015 or is 
that something you do not remember or you do not know?   
MS PETERS:   The only thing that I remember Chairperson, 
was that Mr Molefe did indicate to me that in the 
engagements with Mr Montana when Mr Montana indicated 
to him that he is leaving, he said he requested him initially 
not to go.  They were saying can you give us three years, 
we just arrived, so that we can then work together, but 
10 
when he submitted the written resignation, they do not 
request again to stay for an additional six months, which in 
the letter they actually indicated that they reserve the right 
to terminate at whatever time.  Ja.  
CHAIRPERSON:   But you cannot remember whether their 
recruitment process that Mr Molefe talks about in his 
affidavit, whether it was in 2015 or later? 
MS PETERS:   It did not start at the time they were 
engaging with Montana.  When Montana was still there it 
had not started, but I am just not sure when it actually 
20 
started Chairperson.  I am trying to recollect and remember 
Chairperson, it is something that happened 2015 which is 
about six years ago.  So my dates are throwing me out.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Well, maybe I might as well just 
ask this question.  I think both Mr Soni and I would have 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 141 of 301 
 
this question in mind, but then Mr Letswalo is brought in in 
July 2016 and by the time you leave in March 2017, still 
there has been no appointment of a Group CEO, not so? 
MS PETERS:   Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And as far as you know, was there a 
process to try and appoint a Group CEO that happened 
during Mr Letswalo’s time, but before you left? 
MS PETERS:   Yes Chairperson, it was on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, and what happened to that process? 
MS PETERS:   I would not know, because at the end of 
10 
March I was relieved of my responsibilities.  
CHAIRPERSON:   So when you left it had not been 
completed?   
MS PETERS:   It had not been completed yet.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but you can see already we are 
going to 2017 March, you knew and the Board knew in 
2014, by the end of 2014 that Mr Montana would leave, so 
therefore there would be of course a need to appoint a 
Group CEO, but the whole of 2015 comes and goes, no 
appointment has been made.  I do not know whether upon 
20 
Mr Molefe’s version that there is a process that took place 
during that year to try and appoint or not, but then there is 
2016.  The whole year comes and goes.  No Group CEO is 
appointed.  I mean we, I think we know that 2017 came and 
went, there was no Group CEO appointed.  What was going 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 142 of 301 
 
on?   
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I need to acknowledge that the 
delay in appointing the CEO, I can also take responsibility 
for that part.  The short part of about six months that I was 
still there and that it did not happen and also Chairperson, 
taking the decision to in writing when the Board, Mr Molefe 
had said that they will get Mr Letswalo’s secondment, I 
indicated that it is a temporary measure to look at 
especially the issues that were raised with regard to the 
financial situation of PRASA, including that column that the 
10 
evidence leader made reference to, about the irregular 
expenditure and Letswalo’s responsibility was to make sure 
that all those matters are addressed and they can then be 
able to present to the Minister and the Portfolio Committee 
the turnaround strategy that they were talking about, 
because the Board had been talking about a turnaround 
strategy since 2014, and if I was wrong Chairperson, I will 
accept that I believe it was to correct many wrongs that 
were happening at that particular time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But of course it does, it does not look 
20 
like when it comes to with regard to irregular expenditure, 
it was committed during the time of Mr Letswalo when one 
looks at that column from the Auditor General.  The two 
financial years that he was, the irregular expenditure kept 
on going up.   
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 143 of 301 
 
MS PETERS:   Just as a correction Chairperson, Mr 
Letswalo was not even there for a year.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No you, I may be wrong but I was 
under the impression that he came in 2016 July and left 
when, in 2018 somebody was appointed. 
MS PETERS:   2017, February. 
CHAIRPERSON:   2017, February.  So he was there for 
less than 12 months.  Okay, alright.  Well, the irregular 
expenditure did not, there was no change in it.  He had 
about is it nine months or, he had less than a year to deal 
10 
with it.  One can accept that he did not have a full year, 
but never the less that part he might have performed well 
on other funds, but that part seems to have just continued 
as it has done before.  Okay, Mr Soni.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please.  Ms Peters, I have 
been 
asking, 
I 
have 
been 
waving 
the 
question 
of 
accountability so I am going to come back to an issue that 
you raised.  So we know now that Mr Montana had left in 
July 2015.  We know that cabinet is involved, rightly or 
wrongly, but it is involved in the appointment of CEO’s of 
20 
SOE’s.  That is correct?  I see you shaking your head.  
That is correct, is that not so?   
MS PETERS:   That is correct Chairperson, because the 
Minister 
submits 
the 
submission 
to 
cabinet 
for 
concurrence.   
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 144 of 301 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now the question I want to ask you is 
when Mr Montana had resigned, the President had called a 
meeting late on a Thursday evening, or on a Thursday 
afternoon which finished early on Friday morning.  Did 
nobody in cabinet from the time Mr Montana left, and he is 
leaving with a matter of great public debate and so on, did 
nobody ever raise that who is going to go, who is going to 
replace him at PRASA, at cabinet now?   
MS PETERS:   That matter was never discussed in cabinet 
because it was not an agenda item on cabinet.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry ... [intervenes] 
MS PETERS:  The one of Mr Montana’s departure? 
CHAIRPERSON:  I may have missed something.  What 
matter was that?  I am sorry.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   The fact that there is this continued 
vacancy ... [intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  In regard to ... [intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The CEO of PRASA.  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Which on Ms Peters’s version is a 
major SOE which performs an important public function.   
CHAIRPERSON:  So the question was whether that issue 
was placed before cabinet? 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 145 of 301 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Did anybody in cabinet raise that?  
That is the question I am asking.  
MS 
PETERS: 
 
 
I 
do 
not 
understand 
the 
question 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe let me ask, let me ask this.  
Maybe it is going to be easier.  Did the fact that the Group 
Executive, Chief Executive of PRASA, Mr Montana had left 
and that in the meantime no permanent CEO had been 
appointed.  Was the President Mr Zuma told about that?  
Was the cabinet told about that whether it is irregular 
10 
towards that a Minister presents to cabinet or in regard to 
his or her portfolio or in any other way?  You, it just seems 
very disturbing that you could have a situation where for so 
many years the position of Group CEO of any entity is not 
filled, let alone an entity as important as you told us 
PRASA is.  Was the President told about this?  Was 
cabinet told about this?   
MS PETERS:  Every  year when the Auditor General before 
he makes public his audit outcomes, he would make a 
presentation to cabinet and one of the indicators that he 
20 
had given in one of the cabinets that I was present in 
where he presented the audit outcomes, he did indicate 
issue 
of 
stability 
at 
SOE 
levels 
and 
even 
in 
the 
administration, and the President at that time impressed on 
all of us to address the issue of the instability in the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 146 of 301 
 
institutions that reports to us or that are  directly under us.  
It was a general, not PRASA vacancy.  Just to say there is 
instability in the administration, be it of entities or of 
departments that was raised and flagged by the Auditor 
General, and in fact the Auditor General went further to 
indicate where these type of situations are recurring, and 
like I say the President impressed on us can we deal with 
this issue of instability in SOE’s, because we were not only 
talking about PRASA.  It was a general impression created 
or a general issue raised by the Auditor General with 
10 
regard to issues of leadership in SOE’s.   
CHAIRPERSON:  But let us leave out what the Auditor 
General may have, may or may not have told cabinet.  Did 
you as Minister are responsible for PRASA, not report to 
the President about what was happening at PRASA and the 
fact that there was no Group CEO appointed for this 
number of years, and was this not something that you also 
shared with the rest of your cabinet colleagues in one or 
other meetings to discuss your portfolio?   
MS PETERS:  Chairperson, in the earlier questions that 
20 
were raised with regard to the meetings, I did not give an 
indication on the way in which we as Ministers would used 
to be able to report to the President, and given an 
opportunity, I think in one of the documents that has 
already been submitted to the Commission, there would be 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 147 of 301 
 
something that actually points to the fact that I did report 
to the President in writing about these matters and if given 
a chance, it could serve as part of the package that is 
added to that supplementary document. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no, no you, that would be most 
welcome.  So you did report to the President? 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, so he would have been aware of the 
problems at PRASA, generally speaking? 
MS PETERS:  Yes Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Mr Soni?   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As it pleases.  Now what was your 
own adieu towards the appointment of the CEO and I am 
going to narrow the ambit of your answer by saying did you 
want a CEO to be appointed expeditiously or for you was 
the length of the process did not matter? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, if I have to respond I wanted it 
to be done expeditiously, but there are developments that 
happened, like for example the request of the Auditor 
General on my part to say the Auditor General must do the 
20 
forensic audit, as well as the issue that emanated from the 
derailed report of the, what is this?  The public protector.  
So there were issues that in my engagements, and 
unfortunately so in most instances I had the engagements 
with Ntate Molefe alone, without necessarily with the whole 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 148 of 301 
 
Board.  The meeting I had with them on the 30 t h of June, 
that indicated ... [intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Which year is that?   
MS PETERS:  Pardon? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Which year?   
MS PETERS:  June 2016, which is also one of the 
meetings that we dealt with the issue of the need to 
second Letswalo to PRASA on, I think in that meeting there 
were a lot of issues that came to the fore, and in my 
wisdom at the time, I thought that we needed time to deal 
10 
with these particular issues, with the Board and the 
management that was there together with the acting CEO. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Are 
you 
saying 
you 
wanted 
the 
appointment of a permanent Group CEO to be made 
expeditiously but this did not happen because you took the 
view that certain issues, such as forensic investigations, 
needed to be done and completed first.  Is that what you 
are saying?   
MS PETERS:  Not necessarily completed.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
20 
MS PETERS:  But I would, I want to say Chairperson at 
this particular moment, they were I actually used a word 
with Ntate Molefe at the time, that says I do not think that 
... I even said to him I do not think that you and the 
company is ready for the new CEO.  Let us deal with these 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 149 of 301 
 
particular issues, and we agreed with him let us deal with 
these particular issues, that when you appoint a CEO then 
you will have an indication of this is what was a problem, 
this is how we dealt with them and this is exactly the areas 
that, because Chairperson, one of the officials in PRASA 
once said something very interesting, that said at the time 
that when they emerged from SACRCC which is the 
predecessor to PRASA, they did not sit and build an 
organisation, because there was this view that they were 
chasing the big ticket high profile type of programs and 
10 
projects, and that is why underneath in PRASA there was 
this turmoil and this particular challenge.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well, I have difficulty with that logic of 
what, of the position that you say you adopted.  You are in 
effect as I understand you, saying to me and you must tell 
me if I misunderstand you what you are saying.  You are 
saying there were problems at PRASA.  The fact that there 
was no Group CEO was not good for PRASA.  There should 
be a Group CEO as soon as possible, but you were saying 
to Mr Molefe you are not ready, you and management or 
20 
PRASA is not ready for a new CEO which happens to be in 
line with Mr Molefe’s evidence, because he did say you 
served there.  You say you are not ready for the Group 
CEO, let us have these investigations, then you can bring 
in a CEO.  I do not follow that logic.  I would think that 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 150 of 301 
 
when there are problems and you do not have a Group 
CEO, you need a Group CEO and you need a permanent 
Group CEO and because there are these problems, it is all 
the more reason why you should expedite the appointment 
of a Group CEO.  When he or she comes, he will find 
PRASA in the condition in which he or she will find PRASA.  
He or she is the one who will prepare a report to say to the 
Board and to the Minister, I found PRASA in this condition.  
When I came on such and such a date I did investigations 
to find out what are the problems.  What are the causes to 
10 
the problems.  What are the solutions that I am going to 
apply, and then say going forward, this is my vision to 
make sure that these problems do not happen again.  So I 
do not understand the logic of saying yes there are 
problems, 
yes 
we 
know 
we 
need 
a 
Group 
CEO 
expeditiously, but let us wait.  Can you help me understand 
that logic? 
MS PETERS:  Now that you say it Chairperson, and they 
usually say hindsight is the best signs, and I realise what 
you are saying.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, Mr Soni?   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please.  Just on that score, 
so there is no debate about what your position was at that 
time.  You have now conceded it was incorrect, but let us 
put that aside.  I would like you to look at page 1, SH6 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 151 of 301 
 
page 163, which is part of a ledger that Mr Molefe wrote to 
you on the 25 t h of August 2016, and you will find that that 
letter starts at page 157 and I want to read to you the last 
paragraph of page 163.  Are we, this is SH163, page 163.  
That is Mr Molefe’s affidavit, and it is Annexure PM8.   
MS PETERS:   163?   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  163 yes.  If you look at page 157, so 
you orientate yourself.  This is a letter that Mr Molefe sent 
to you on the 24 t h of August.    
MS PETERS:   I cannot find it Chairperson.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  You might not be looking in the right 
bundle.  It is the same bundle that has got Mr Molefe’s 
affidavit.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now Ms Peters, I am going to come 
back to this letter, but I just wanted to finish this issue 
first.  This is part of a letter that Mr Molefe wrote to you on 
the 24 t h of August in response to a letter you had sent to 
him on the 12 t h of August, but just so that I understand 
precisely what your position is in regard to a permanent 
CEO, I want to read something, read the last paragraph to 
20 
you where it is said, this is what Mr Molefe says to you: 
 
“The Minister indicated that ...” 
 
This is yourself: 
 
“Notwithstanding 
the 
completion 
of 
an 
independent 
robust 
process 
to 
recruit 
a 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 152 of 301 
 
permanent Group CEO, the Minister ’s view was 
that 
PRASA 
was 
not 
ready 
for 
such 
an 
appointment.  The reason we had consulted the 
Minister around our recommendation for the 
position of Group CEO of PRASA that was we 
felt the appointment of a permanent Group CEO 
will assist with stability.  We however defer to 
the Minister ’s preference to second the acting 
Group CEO from the Department of Transport.” 
Now this is about the time that Mr Letswalo was appointed.  
10 
Is that correct?   
MS PETERS:   Yes Chairperson.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So does this, is what Mr Molefe says 
in this paragraph, certainly the first sentence, reflective of 
the views that you expressed to him?   
MS PETERS:   Come again Chairperson?   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay.  So the first paragraph where 
you say PRASA is not yet ready, that is what Mr Molefe has 
said in his letter.  The question to you is did Mr Molefe 
correctly reflect in this letter what you had said to him?   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are asking her to look at the 
particular paragraph?   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That is right.  
CHAIRPERSON:  As opposed to the whole letter?   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Whole letter, yes.   
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 153 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
The 
particular 
paragraph, 
the 
last 
paragraph at page 163.   
MS PETERS:   That is a confirmation Chairperson of what I 
said earlier on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Well ... [intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I am sorry Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no, no I ... [intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, of course Ms Peters, you have 
correctly conceded that it was not the correct position to 
10 
adopt, to say the Group CEO should not be appointed as 
yet, because PRASA was not ready for a Group CEO, but 
that view seems to me to be so extraordinary that one has 
got to ask you but how could you have thought along those 
lines as Minister responsible for PRASA, how is it possible 
that as Minister it could, you could think that a year, a year 
more than a year after the position of Group CEO had 
become vacant and it had not been filled, because this 
letter is written in August 2016.  How could you have 
thought that it was not the right thing to appoint a Group 
20 
CEO at that time?  How is that possible?   
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, like I indicated there were 
those processes that we were involved in, but there was 
also the consultation process that I was busy with.  That 
was what I was saying to Mr Molefe, and I did say to Mr 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 154 of 301 
 
Molefe that at that particular moment we are not ready to 
conclude on this process of appointing a Group CEO.  In 
the same paragraph Chairperson, he gives an indication of 
the work that they are doing and also the workshops that 
they are convening, and like I said earlier on yes, with 
hindsight I could have been wrong at that particular time 
and I concede that.  
CHAIRPERSON:  I want to put to you that it just hits me as 
something that is just so obviously wrong that it is difficult 
to understand how you could have thought so, because one 
10 
a year had passed and the position had not been filled.  
Two, you knew how critical the filling of the position of 
Group CEO would be for an entity such as PRASA.  Three, 
obviously you knew the problems at PRASA and they were 
not small and more than a year after the permanent Group 
CEO had left, you were saying no, no, no, no you do not 
need to appoint a Group CEO at this stage.  So that is, 
that is just a concern to me how it is possible that you 
could have brought along those lines, because I think in 
your position as Minister, you ought to have been saying 
20 
why are you taking so long, you are the Board, you Mr 
Molefe, you are the one who told me in 2014 you knew that 
Mr Montana was going to be leaving, what is happening?   
You are the one who should have been saying to them what 
is going on.   You understand? 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 155 of 301 
 
MS PETERS:   I understand Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright.  Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   May I follow up, and Ms Peters you 
know Commissions of Inquiry are always awkward public 
debates, or spawn awkward public debates but this is a 
question I want to ask you; you have said to the 
Chairperson, and correctly so with respect, that 2020 is a 
perfect science, you look at it and you say you were wrong.  
What I want to ask you is, when did you realise you were 
wrong, today or before? 
10 
MS PETERS:   They say, in life you’ll regret more the 
things you didn’t do than those that you did and now that 
we bring it up now, by reminding me of something that 
happened at that particular time Chairperson and I want to 
say, yes, at that particular moment, despite the many 
things that we were dealing with, probably we should have 
allowed for this process but there was no way in which I 
was going to circumvent the consultation process that, 
ultimately 
would 
have 
resulted 
in 
Cabinet. 
 
Like 
I 
considered earlier on that the Court judgement – the 
20 
evidence leader made reference to, I was not even aware 
of it because it seems to be a recent…[1.50] whilst there is 
a protocol in Cabinet, with regards to the appointment of 
senior people in, is it the Board, is it the CEO, is it the 
DG’s and DDG’s they are appointed through the Cabinet 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 156 of 301 
 
process. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe just to finalise, I seem to 
remember that, in his oral evidence, Dr Molefe said, at a 
certain stage, and it may be that this is the stage that he’s 
talking about, when you said PRASA is not ready for a new 
CEO, he says, as the Board that even identified a 
candidate that they had confidence in that they wanted to 
be appointed and I asked him about the credentials of that 
candidate and he told me the credentials of that candidate, 
I think, he may have even mentioned the name. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   He did, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of the candidate and he said that it was 
somebody who would not be new in the rail industry it was 
somebody who had been involved in the rail industry and 
my impression was, that it was somebody who had been 
involved either within PRASA or with the predecessors of 
PRASA or some other subsidiaries and he said, this was a 
good candidate, we were ready, but the Minister said we 
were – PRASA was not ready for a new CEO.  Do you 
remember whether they mentioned to you that they had 
20 
identified a candidate through their process? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, Mr Molefe brought volumes of 
files of this nature. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   And I had not applied my mind to the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 157 of 301 
 
volumes of files. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   That he had brought from the beginning so 
it would have meant that I processed those so that I then 
can prepare the submission of Cabinet and ultimately when 
we get to Cabinet, it’s not a foregone conclusion that, you 
come with a file and say there’s it and then it’s a yay 
because Cabinet works in cycles of every two weeks and 
Chairperson, I don’t just remember the time that he brought 
the file to me. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay but my question was whether – and 
you can tell me if you don’t remember, that’s fine.  Whether 
you remember that at a certain stage his Board had 
identified somebody that they were happy with, to be 
appointed. 
MS PETERS:   Earlier on in my input, Chairperson, I did 
give an indication that Mr Molefe had said that they’ve got 
a line-up because when we go to Cabinet we have to go 
with three names. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MS PETERS:   A line-up of three names and in their order 
of priority and that file I left at the Department. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, but you’d remember that he said 
they had names? 
MS PETERS:   He said so. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 158 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Did you take those names to 
Cabinet? 
MS PETERS:   No, I had not, by the time I left, I had not. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But this is in 2016 as I understand it, 
so another 9 months before you left office you hadn’t  
taken it. 
MS PETERS:   I don’t think it’s another 9 months, 
Chairperson, I’m not so sure of the timeframe but I don’t 
think it’s another 9 months but it’s some few months. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Let me ask you a slightly different 
question now.  You say that your view in August 2016 was 
that PRASA was not ready for the appointment of a 
permanent CEO, that was your view.  When Mr Molefe gave 
you those names that remained your view, is that correct? 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I indicated that, he gave me a 
list with files and as a member of Cabinet if I have to go to 
Cabinet with those files, it would not have been fair.  So, I 
needed, also to process those files and summarise them 
for the benefit of Cabinet.  So, that was the work that we 
20 
were still going to be doing and then I would give an 
indication – at that same time I think it was around August 
I went to China for a State visit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m not sure whether that answered the – 
your question, Mr Soni? 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 159 of 301 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I’m going to pursue it at two levels.  
If this was your view and you say, it’s only when the 
Chairperson raised the fact that, that view didn’t appear to 
be cogent that you achieved 2020 vision on that issue but 
I’m going to suggest to you, and you can tell me if my 
suggestion is wrong, that if this was your view, that PRASA 
was not ready for a CEO you would not have taken that list 
to Cabinet. 
MS PETERS:   Pardon? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   You would not have taken that list to 
10 
Cabinet? 
MS PETERS:   I would have taken the list to Cabinet 
because, like I indicated my intention was, when I come 
back from the international trip we’ll go through the 
submission and Chairperson, I had already, even started 
looking at the report that – because there was a report that 
Mr Molefe said comes from the company that they had used 
to do that. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   To head hunt a CEO? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well this file, I just want to get the 
20 
timeframe right, this file that you say Mr Molefe gave you 
or sent to your Department for your attention with three 
names, as I understand the position, was that in 2015, was 
that given in 2015 was that given in 2016 to you? 
MS PETERS:   I think it was in 2016 Chair. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 160 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MS PETERS:   I’m not sure but it was – I think it is around 
2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Around 2016, okay, which might have 
been early in 2016 or mid 2016 because in the letter of 
August – early 2016 or mid 2016 it might have been there, 
because the letter of August 2016 that we were looking at 
a few minutes ago, when Mr Molefe said you said to him, 
PRASA was not ready for a new CEO, that letter was 
written in August 2016. So, that may tie up with what -  
10 
with your suggestion that it was in 2016 because there in 
that paragraph it does say, they had engaged in a vigorous 
recommend process.  So, that was – so you say, yes you 
did not take that – those names to Cabinet? 
MS PETERS:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   By the time you left the portfolio you had 
not done so and that would mean – because you left in 
March 2017, that would mean if it was – if this file was 
given to you early in 2016 or during the first half of 2016 
that would mean you stayed with it for maybe about a year 
20 
without taking these names to Cabinet, you would agree? 
MS PETERS:   I’m not sure, Chairperson, about the actual 
timeframes but…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no I’m saying, if, for example, 
the file was given to you during the first half of 2016 it 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 161 of 301 
 
looks like you would have stayed with it, without taking 
these names to Cabinet for about a year or just close to a 
year, you would agree with that? 
MS PETERS:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, now that’s extraordinary because 
you are the Minister in charge of PRASA, you know the 
problems at PRASA, you have expressed the view that you 
thought that the appointment of the Group CEO should be 
done expeditiously, at least at a certain stage that’s what 
you thought, at another stage you thought, well, PRASA is 
10 
not ready for a Group CEO at least August 2016.  So, is it 
possible that by the time you left, that is March 2017, you 
had not changed your view that PRASA was not ready for a 
new Group CEO and that is why you did not take the names 
to Cabinet? 
MS PETERS:   At the time, when I was almost relieved, not 
almost, before I was relieved of my responsibilities I was 
trying to engage – and that is a period, Chairperson, that I 
say, I was in hospital, I was trying because we had, had a 
meeting at PRASA House with the Board Chairperson, like I 
20 
always met with the Board Chairperson.  The Board 
members would not be there in most instances and I 
indicated to him that we are now busy looking at this 
matter and based on an engagement that I was still going 
to pursue with the President, because for that particular 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 162 of 301 
 
item I wanted the President’s support with regard to it 
because it was going to be easier, Chairperson, for the 
President to preside over a meeting where – and I’ve seen 
it work well.  I was not the type of Minister who, when the 
President passes I would grab his ear and talk to him in 
that way I would want a formal meeting with the President 
where I would take him through all this particular issues 
but in this instance was that, we are preparing the 
submission from the Board of PRASA and as and when I 
get the time from the President, I will then go to him to be 
10 
able to present this proposal and I want to indicate 
Chairperson, it has never happened in the past where, if I 
go – I’m speaking about myself now,  in the areas of 
deployment that I was given, that if I go to the President 
for courtesy to inform him about an eminent appointment, 
he would say yay or nay he had never said that - he 
actually acknowledged and even looked at indicating areas 
that I would probably have to go and strengthen and all 
those types of things.  So, I was going to process this file 
and based on the time that I would be given for the 
20 
President to meet me, to hear me out on this particular 
matter and other matters that might be related to those 
others that I was referring to, I would then be able to get 
this relief to go there.  In fact, for your information 
Chairperson, there was a similar case…[intervenes]. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 163 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m going to stop you there, the question 
is simply whether, you had changed your mind about 
PRASA not being ready for a new CEO between August 
2016 and the time that you left as Minister? 
MS PETERS:   No, Chairperson, I had not – I had changed 
my mind because I had started the process that’s why I’m 
saying I had said that the officials in the Department must 
process the file that was now given and I had written and 
requested through the DG in the Presidency for an 
opportunity to brief the President with regard to this matter 
10 
and once it was concluded I was going to take that file 
directly to the Cabinet Secretariat who was the DG in the 
Presidency so that he process it for Cabinet meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And when would you have changed your 
view on whether PRASA needed a new CEO, are you able 
to tell?  We know in August 2016 it was still your view.  
MS PETERS:   It was around January 2017. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, what made you change your view? 
MS PETERS:   At that particular time, remember Letsoalo 
had been in the position for about six months and Mr 
20 
Molefe had called me and indicated to me that, do I 
anticipate a situation where they should extend and I said, 
no it’s the prerogative of the Board, the acting and I left it 
as such because I knew that particular time that I am busy 
now with this matter and I’m sure, Chairperson, given an 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 164 of 301 
 
opportunity we would have concluded on that particular 
process. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes, but you did testify earlier on and 
said at a certain stage you were of the view that a Group 
CEO should be appointed expeditiously, you remember 
that, am I correct? 
MS PETERS:   You are correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, when was that and when did you 
cease to be of that view and you started thinking, we 
shouldn’t appoint expeditiously because PRASA is not 
10 
ready for a new CEO.  When exactly did you have this view 
that a Group CEO must be appointed expeditiously, when 
did you change that view and thought, look, PRASA needs 
some time before they can have a new CEO? 
MS PETERS:   We had discussed the matter, I think it was 
early 2016 – no not 2016 it was late 2015, I’m just thrown 
out by the dates Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   With the Board, I will also refer to the notes 
that I  have with regard to the engagement that I had with 
20 
PRASA at the AGM because there’s always Annual General 
Meetings.  At the AGM with the shareholder who is 
represented by the Minister, would address the Board and 
in that there were some issues that we also raised and 
Chairperson, it was at that particular time that I then said 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 165 of 301 
 
to Mr Molefe – because we talked and I then said to him, I 
am going to ask the Department to process that file that 
they had given.  So – and some of the details – because, 
Chairperson, sometimes it is difficult to follow the things 
that you discussed in a corridor as opposed to the things 
that you discuss in formal meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But, are you saying that it was up to – it 
was the end of 2015 it was around the end of 2015 hat you 
changed the view that a Group CEO should be appointed 
expeditiously, is that more or less around that time? 
10 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, I’m using memory here now 
and I’m struggling to put the years and months together. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I know, yes. 
MS PETERS:   But I do acknowledge that there was a time 
where we agreed with the Board and at that time the 
escalation of the problems – because the problems of 
PRASA escalated even beyond Montana’s time, before that 
things went out and the other thing that I had – ja let me 
leave it for now, Chairperson, because I’m trying to recall 
some of – and I’m getting a cross-pollination of those 
20 
things that we discussed with Mr Molefe in the corridors 
and those that we’ve discussed  officially and that’s why 
I’m requesting for the official submission of the document. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, but you seem to be saying you are 
struggling to remember when you may have changed your 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 166 of 301 
 
view about the need for an expeditious appointment, is that 
right, okay …[intervenes]. 
MS PETERS:   It’s not necessarily to say the changing of 
your view about the need for the expeditious appointment.  
Chairperson, I did indicate that there are matters that 
emerged in the process that made me arrive at this 
particular statement of saying, it doesn’t look like we are 
ready. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, but the two – the two are in conflict 
with each other, the two views.  The one is, we must have 
10 
a Group CEO appointed expeditiously, you have that view 
initially then you come to a point when you have a view 
that says, PRASA is not ready which means, I’m not in 
favour of an expeditious appointment of a Group CEO 
because PRASA is not ready, I want to wait until PRASA is 
ready.  That’s what it means, isn’t it or do you not see it 
that way?  
MS PETERS:   No, Chairperson, not to wait till PRASA is 
ready but to address – maybe for a lack of a better word, I 
used the wrong word but for a time when we could have 
20 
consolidated all these issues that we were dealing with at 
that particular time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, the robust process – the 
recruitment process had taken place before you changed 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 167 of 301 
 
your mind. In other words, initially your view was, or at 
whatever stage but certainly during the robust process that 
PRASA should have a Group CEO expeditiously, that would 
be correct, wouldn’t it but I just want a yes or no, if it’s 
not, because otherwise Ms Peters we are going to debate 
matters.  It’s a question of your own state of mind, not 
what you discussed with Mr Molefe or the President or 
anybody it is, what was your thinking at that time, that’s 
what we’re looking at. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson, in the beginning, I did give an 
10 
indication that, immediately after Mr Montana left, we 
agreed that it is important that we recruit a CEO. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Expeditiously? 
MS 
PETERS: 
 
 
Maybe 
the 
word 
expeditiously 
means…[intervenes]. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   See, there’s a difference between 
doing something expeditiously and doing it urgently, that’s 
why I didn’t use the word, urgently, right from the outset 
when I posed my question to you I said, expeditiously.  In 
other words doing it correctly but in the shortest possible 
20 
time. 
MS PETERS:   Agreed, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now – then something happened 
which caused you to change your mind.  I’m going to deal 
with that in a moment but I want to ask you a slightly 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 168 of 301 
 
different question.  By the time you had changed your 
mind, whatever caused you to change your mind, had the 
process, the recruitment process run its course? 
MS PETERS:   I’m not sure Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I’ll tell you why it is important, Ms 
Peters, you see if it hadn’t run its course and I’m going to 
refer you to a figure you gave in Parliament and I’ll just 
mention it now but I’ll come back to it, where you had said 
that this process or the amount spent on this process was 
R1 767 000.00.  If this process – if you had changed your 
10 
mind 
before 
this 
process 
had 
run 
its 
course 
then, 
effectively, 
 
that 
would 
be 
fruitless 
and 
wasteful 
expenditure, wouldn’t it? 
MS PETERS:   Can I ask for the dates, Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   This is the reply you gave in 
Parliament and perhaps you should look at it, it’s the 
Parliamentary file, Bundle 3 page 379. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you think I should bother to look at it 
Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, I can read it out, you needn’t 
20 
look at it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Alright. 
MS PETERS:   Going to Bundle? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Bundle 3 page 379, remember the 
one on the left-hand side. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 169 of 301 
 
MS PETERS:   Page? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Page 379. 
MS PETERS:   379? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   379, you will see towards the latter 
third of the page, it’s the paragraph begins, 
 
“Replies to follow-up question”, 
 
And then your reply is indicated, I just want to read 
what your reply to a question from Mr de Freitas was, 
“That the Minister, in consultation and by agreement 
with the Board of PRASA resolved at a meeting held 
10 
on the 30 t h of June that the environment within 
PRASA was not conducive for the appointment of a 
GCEO.  In this regard and following this agreement 
with the Board, the Minister seconded through the 
Board and appointed Mr Collins Letsoalo as Acting 
Group CEO effective the 1 s t of July”, 
 And right at the end in paragraph C it said,  
“The 
amount 
spent 
on 
the 
process 
was 
R1 767 000.00”. 
 
Do you see that that’s what’s recorded there, Ms 
20 
Peters? 
MS PETERS:   This question, was it a question to me at 
the time I was…[intervenes]. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, it says, 
 
“Replies to follow-up question received on the 8 t h of 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 170 of 301 
 
June 2016”. 
MS PETERS:   Okay yes Chairperson? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Well the question I was asking is, if 
the recruitment process, by the time you’d changed your 
mind had not been finalised and you allowed the process to 
go on, then on the basis of the definition in the PFMA, that 
or part of that R1.76 million would be fruitless and wasteful 
expenditure, would you agree with me? 
MS PETERS:   I would agree with you but I just want to 
indicate there that it is clearly an indication that we agreed 
10 
with the Board Chairperson on this particular. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, but I think you misunderstand my 
question.  The question is, by that time you had come to 
the conclusion, contrary to what your view was earlier, that 
the Board was not ready for the appointment of a 
permanent CEO, and I’m going back to a question asked by 
the Chairperson, namely, when did you change your mind 
that the appointment need not be done expeditiously, was 
it before the recruitment process had passed? 
MS PETERS:   It was Chairperson I think during the 
20 
process and probably at the time that I received the 
package. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, during the process and at the 
time when? 
MS PETERS:   I received the package. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 171 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh the files? 
MS PETERS:   Yes Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That’s when you changed your mind? 
MS PETERS:   Yes Chairperson. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Can I ask you was your mind 
changed by the names that appeared on the list Mr Molefe 
gave you? 
MS PETERS:   I had nothing to do with the names 
Chairperson.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:    No, no, no, I didn’t say that, I know 
10 
that the Board had gone through this process, they had got 
somebody to headhunt people, they gave you a list based 
on that process, that was the Board’s list.  The question I 
am asking is was your change of mind due to the identity 
of the persons who appeared on the list the Board gave 
you? 
MS PETERS:   Not at all Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it – was the change of your mind in 
any way based on the contents of the files that you have 
been given? 
20 
MS PETERS:   No Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was the change of your mind based in 
any way on the process that the board had followed in 
seeking to identify the right candidates? 
MS PETERS:   No Chairperson. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 172 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so what is it that made you 
change your mind? 
MS PETERS:   What changed my mind at that particular 
time Chairperson I did indicate that as a department we 
had not processed the submission and we had not gone to 
Parliament as yet and there was going to be still sometime 
before we go to Cabinet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay no I just want to make sure we are 
on the same page.  When you say you changed your mind 
during the recruitment process by the Board and after you 
10 
had been given the files by the Board or Chairperson of the 
Board as I understand it you are saying the change of mind 
was from the view that the appointment of the Group CEO 
for PRASA should be done expeditiously, changing that 
view to the view that PRASA was not ready for a new CEO, 
are we on the same page? 
MS PETERS:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, so are you saying what made you 
change your mind was that there were some investigations 
that were still to be undertaken or had been undertaken by 
20 
PRASA? 
MS PETERS:   It was many factors Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MS PETERS:   It was many factors. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was many factors, please tell me 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 173 of 301 
 
those factors. 
MS PETERS:   One of the factors was the fact that I had 
not processed the submission yet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The submissions from the Board. 
MS PETERS:  From the Board yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
MS PETERS:   And remember I indicated that it still had to 
go to cabinet. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:  And the agenda of cabinet is set by the 
10 
Secretary of cabinet and if you make a submission to the 
Secretary of Cabinet there would be indications from the 
Secretary of Cabinet that in terms of these slots for this 
particular week, because Cabinet was sitting every second 
week, for this particular week we have this particular 
challenge, so you – part of the process that I had worked 
out was that once I had processed this submission I need 
to consult with my principal, my boss, which is the person, 
but just out of courtesy inform him about what this outcome 
has produced, so that was a – where we were, and at that 
20 
time Chairperson there’s these investigations that are 
happening which is your forensic investigation which we 
ultimately agreed that it must reconciled with the one of 
the Public Protector and that it must be referred to 
National Treasury which then got to their office of their 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 174 of 301 
 
Chief Procurement Officer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you are going to have to forgive me 
Ms Peters but much of what you have told me does not 
make sense to me in terms of the question that I asked and 
in terms of the view that you said you changed.    You are 
saying to me for quite some time prior to the recruitment 
process you were of the view that the appointment of the 
Group CEO for PRASA should be done expeditiously, but 
during that recruitment process and when the files were 
brought you changed that view to the view that said PRASA 
10 
was not ready for a new CEO and to explain why you 
changed that view you are saying that you needed to 
consult the President, you were going to need to follow 
certain processes before taking the names to the Cabinet, 
is that right. 
MS PETERS:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That part of it does not make sense to 
me, how does that translate to saying PRASA is not ready 
for a Group CEO? 
MS PETERS:   That is why I said maybe it was the wording 
20 
that one use at that particular time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Please raise your voice. 
MS PETERS:   I was saying Chairperson that maybe it was 
the wording that we used at that particular time that 
probably sent a wrong picture. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 175 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   The wording of saying PRASA is not 
ready? 
MS PETERS:   That we are not ready with the appointment 
of the Group CEO at PRASA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, you now say we are not ready, I 
understood Mr Molefe to have said what you said was that 
PRASA was not ready.  When you say we are you referring 
to PRASA or are you referring to cabinet, are you referring 
to the Executive, who are you referring to? 
MS PETERS:   I was talking to Mr Molefe, so the both of us 
10 
in that engagement, we engaged and we ultimately agreed 
with him and in fact he was the one who later said to me 
that 
this 
process 
is 
even 
getting 
contaminated 
and 
compromised, I don’t know what it meant at that particular 
time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but I just want to find out when you 
say we were not ready who you are talking about, is it you 
and Mr Molefe, is it PRASA and the Ministry, is it PRASA 
the Board, the Ministry and the Executive namely the 
cabinet, who exactly ...[intervenes]  
20 
MS PETERS:  PRASA and the Ministry which means the 
Board would have been involved in – I mean included in 
the decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, but you are not able to – or 
are you able to explain to me how the fact that you must 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 176 of 301 
 
follow certain processes to take the names to the cabinet 
translates in to say PRASA is not ready? 
MS PETERS:   May I just have a moment? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and I know we have gone past two 
hours of a hearing, it may well be that there is time for a 
break.  I think your counsel Ms Peters is agreeing, he is 
nodding about the break. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   A request to that effect has been 
made. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing].   Maybe just help me with an 
10 
answer to that question then maybe we will take a break.  I 
am saying it doesn’t make sense to me because when you 
were of the view that the Group CEO should be appointed 
expeditiously you would still follow the same processes as 
far as Cabinet was concerned.  When you change the view, 
your view and said well PRASA is not ready it’s the same 
process you would follow, but quite apart from that I am 
saying there seems to be no connection for me between 
saying we must follow these processes if I want to take 
these names to cabinet and saying PRASA is not ready, I 
20 
would have thought that when you say PRASA is not ready 
you would talk about things at PRASA, you would say this 
is the position, these are the things at PRASA that make 
PRASA not be ready. 
MS PETERS:   Chairperson the stakeholders at PRASA 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 177 of 301 
 
must be there, the Ministry as well as the Department, and 
PRASA itself.  When I said PRASA is not ready I have 
already elaborated on the areas of the investigations and 
the decisions between me and the AG, and then there is 
this other process that involves the Department and myself 
as the then Minister in terms of processing the submission.  
So at that particular time Mr Molefe had taken a decision 
that he cannot work with the then CEO who was acting, so 
there needed to have been something in between and 
maybe that is the element that I did not bring in earlier on 
10 
to say in our discussion there was an indication that the 
relationship between Mr Molefe and the then acting CEO 
was not right, so at that particular moment we were not 
ready, they were not ready and the whole process was not 
concluded yet and I then said they conclude and deal with 
these financial challenges and we will get in fact even in 
the engagement with the – the day ...[indistinct] was 
seconded was the day in which we had a whole day 
engagement with PRASA Board and the Executive at that 
particular time and there were serious issues that were 
20 
coming 
from 
that, 
and 
you 
couldn’t 
wait 
for 
the 
appointment of the CEO for those things to be addressed, 
so we needed somebody in between that, and that is why I 
had no issue when Mr Molefe said the policy of PRASA re 
acting indicate that a person can act for about six months 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 178 of 301 
 
and then they went ahead and – I don’t know whether they 
extended or what they did there, and I just need to indicate 
that the process that they had worked on with regard to the 
recruitment had started around October, I am trying to get 
the picture of 2015, and we entered 2016 and at the time 
when they made the submission to meet, because I think 
there were two processes that were ran in PRASA, it is just 
that I don’t recall well those processes, and then when he 
ultimately, Mr Molefe came with the final process that they 
had worked in, it was at a point that he indicated to me 
10 
those, that particular submission that they had made, so 
Chairperson by the 10 t h of 2016 we had not as yet 
concluded on the process of appointing the CEO.  There 
was an acting CEO in place ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no that’s fine. 
MS PETERS:   And I am saying to you Chairperson if there 
is anything wrong at that particular time I would take 
responsibility for my part in that particular delay in terms 
of ensuring that the processing that happens and the 
preparation to Cabinet then happened. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   But why were you going to meet, consult 
with the President after the Board had given you these 
files and why was the issue of the processes that leaked to 
Cabinet why were they, why was that relevant because 
your position was PRASA is not ready for a new CEO?  I 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 179 of 301 
 
would have thought that if that was your position you would 
be saying there is no need to bother about processes that 
take us to Cabinet because PRASA is not ready? 
MS PETERS:   No Chairperson government did not operate 
that way. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So what were you going to talk to them 
about? 
MS PETERS:   In Cabinet there is a principle and a 
protocol that says we are individually and collectively 
responsible, and the Minister is [speaking in vernacular] 
10 
the responsibility of this effect and in my view as Dipoa 
Peters if ...[speaking in vernacular] Patisiwe you keep on 
going back to law [speaking in vernacular] are you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing]  yes. 
MS PETERS:   So that you can then be able to inform him 
or her about what he has given you as a responsibility and 
be even able to indicate that I am then from this point 
taking this matter to Cabinet and I said it earlier on 
Chairperson 
that 
in 
my 
experience, 
in 
the 
area 
of 
responsibilities that I carry I have never had a situation 
20 
where when the Board, out of the Boards I worked with in 
my previous areas of deployment, even in the other Boards 
that we were working with in Transport in have never had a 
situation where when I went to the President with regards 
to a matter and a recommendation by a Board that he says 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 180 of 301 
 
no.   
 
The issue is he would want more information and 
Chairperson you would have observed that there would be 
times even in Parliament where the opposition would ask 
President issues which he or she is not processed well, 
would not be able to respond to it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No that is fine. 
MS PETERS:   And that informed me Chairperson to say it 
is important that I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think you have made your point and 
10 
you must just confirm that when you talked about Patiswa 
what you meant was that – whether what you meant was 
that you were given a responsibility to carry out and you 
must report back to whoever gave you the responsibility. 
MS PETERS:   Yes Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Mr Soni maybe, I don’t 
know maybe – you know at five o’clock we are supposed to 
start an evening session with Mr Freund, maybe let’s talk 
about the way forward.  I think there is still ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   There is – not as much as today but 
20 
certainly some important issues that remain to be dealt 
with. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, is there a possibility that we could 
continue with Ms Peters' evidence tomorrow morning 
before tomorrow’s witness? 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 181 of 301 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Peters how is your situation about 
that, is that – would that be feasible with you and I will ask 
your counsel just now, just speaking for yourself, would it 
be possible to continue with your evidence tomorrow 
morning, before tomorrow’s witness? 
MS PETERS:   Yes Chair I will send a notice to Parliament 
because there is a Parliament sitting tomorrow and I am 
sitting in a Committee, and Chair you would know that that 
Committee that I am sitting on is called the Standing 
10 
Committee on Appropriations and I am an alternate on the 
Standing Committee on Finance, and the next day the 
Minister will be presenting his budget so I am going to miss 
out on tomorrow’s presentation by National Treasury, the 
Committee, but if the Chief Whip who is responsible for our 
participation in Parliament is informed then usually there 
won’t be a problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes there won’t be a problem. 
MS PETERS:   And also because of the importance that 
they actually give to the Commission I don’t think that 
20 
there ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That there should be a problem. 
MS PETERS:  But I will call them and inform them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes okay.  Mr Mijaba how is your 
situation? 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 182 of 301 
 
ADV MIJABA:  Chair I would request that we stand down 
so that I can make logistical arrangements, I am not averse 
to that, it is just that I have got ...[indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us take a ten minutes break 
and then when we come back then we can talk.   Okay, we 
will adjourn for ten minutes. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Soni.  I think Mr Majavu was 
10 
needing to make some contact with whoever.  I do not 
know you are going to give me the report back or whether 
he will. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I can tell you so that we then speed 
it up Chairperson.  Mr Majavu said to me so long as he is 
able to leave ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The aircon is up again.  Yes, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So long he is able to leave by quarter 
to twelve tomorrow, it should be okay. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Okay, 
okay. 
 And 
what 
is 
your 
20 
assessment that should be fine? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I think we should be finished around 
tea-time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It may be that we should start at 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 183 of 301 
 
09:30 just ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Ja, we could start a little bit 
earlier. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   There is not much, much more.  It is 
just that there are matters that one would like to... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Mr Majavu, if we start at half-past 
nine, will that be fine with you. 
ADV MAJAVU:   Chair, that will be in order. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:   Because I would also need a few minutes 
to redirect. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MAJAVU:   So if we start at 09:30, by quarter to 
twelve we should be done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MAJAVU:   So that is in order with me Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Ms Peters, starting at 
half-past nine would be fine? 
20 
MS PETERS:   Thank you Chairperson.  I have consulted 
with the ?? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS PETERS:   And they do agree. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 184 of 301 
 
MS PETERS:   I am certain Chairperson will be aware that 
we have got something called lock-up before the budget.  
They said as long as I am there by the time we get locked 
up for the budget. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.  [laughs]   
MS PETERS:  When we perused the budget before 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I did not know that. [laughs]   
MS PETERS:   Before the Minister allows us, we go 
through it together. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MS PETERS:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  So.  No, that is fine.  So I think 
we should then adjourn for now because I am due to start 
the evening shift, evening session now at five.  So we will 
adjourn.  You are all free to go home except me and those 
who must remain to assist us and there will be another 
work stream.  So I will adjourn and allow about ten minutes 
for the – five to ten minutes for Mr Freund to be ready 
together with his witness.  We adjourn. 
20 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon Mr Freund.  Good 
afternoon everybody who was not here in the morning. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Good afternoon Chair. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 185 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Are we ready? 
ADV FREUND SC:   We are indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   May I proceed? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, you will recall that Mr Frolick 
testified 
previously 
on 
the 
5 t h 
of 
February 
but 
not 
completed his evidence in the time available.  It was 
agreed he would come back.   
 
He has come back and he is ready, willing and 
10 
able to resume his testimony.  He is connected to these 
proceedings right now.  But before we proceed with his 
evidence, with your leave I would like to raise a different 
issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I would with your leave produce into 
the 
record 
a 
set 
of 
correspondence 
between 
the 
Commission, in particular the then acting Secretary of this 
Commission and the Secretary Generals or equivalent 
office 
holders 
of 
12 
political 
parties 
represented 
in 
20 
Parliament. 
 
There is a bundle of such correspondence and in 
that correspondence; essentially, the Commission invited 
those parties to lead evidence or to make submissions to 
this Commission. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 186 of 301 
 
 
And with your leave I would like to refer to that, 
introduce that into the record and just draw attention to 
certain features of that correspondence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   We suggest...  Yes, that it forms part 
of Exhibit ZZ, which is the exhibit on Oversight by 
Parliament.  And there is a bundle that has been prepared 
called Correspondence to Political Parties.  It runs to some 
63 pages and I trust that it to be in your files Chair 
together with the legal material and the other exhibits. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I have been handed the file.  Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now Chair there is a particular reason 
why I have thought it possible appropriate to draw 
attention to this particular correspondence.   
 
It has been drawn to my attention that in social 
media there has been a suggestion that the Commission is 
selective in the political party represented in Parliament 
from whom evidence and submission has been sought. 
 
Now so for example you will see at page 45 of 
this bundle a certain Mr Floyd Shivambu making some 
20 
comments on social media but - and the sting of it is this:   
“The EFF fought for the Commission to be 
established and yet they will never speak to us 
because we are not factional puppets.” 
 
The suggestion being that their evidence has not 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 187 of 301 
 
been solicited.  And the point that I wish to place on 
record, through you Chair if you think it so fit, is that 
identical letters were sent on the 27 t h of February 2020 to 
each of 12 political parties and you will see them all 
referred to in this bundle. 
 
And so, for example, just to illustrate the point 
at page 41, you will see the letters sent to the Secretary 
General of the Economic Freedom Fighters.  And Chair, I 
would suggest you might wish to turn to that page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am there. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   And Chair, this is a letter addressed by 
the acting Secretary of this Commission but on your 
directions, as I understand it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And as I say, a similar letter sent to all 
the political parties. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV FREUND SC:   And in summary, I am just going to 
refer you part of the letter ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think the ones that might not have 
20 
been sent might be those who only got to Parliament in 
2019 after the General Election of 2019 but that is 
incorrectly ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   That is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   All those which have been there prior to 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 188 of 301 
 
the appointment of the Commission during the relevant 
years, I think all of them were sent these letters. 
ADV FREUND SC:   That is indeed correct Chair to the 
best of my knowledge.  And you will see Chair at the cover 
page of the exhibit, the list of the parties to whom it has 
been sent, 12 political parties including the IFP, Cope, FF 
Plus, UDM, DA, AIC, EFF, ANC, PAC, ACDP, Agang SA and 
NFP.   
 
And what I just wanted to draw to your attention 
and perhaps to the public’s attention, through you Chair, is 
10 
that as long ago as February of 2020, you directed and the 
acting Secretary of the Commission corresponded with 
each of the political parties inviting them all to make – to 
furnish evidence or submissions before this Commission. 
 
So for example Chair, you will see in paragraph 
4 of the letter.  The letter says: 
“Your party may selected a few members, 
maybe two, who can provide the Commission 
with statements or affidavits or declarations 
setting out your experiences and observations 
20 
over the years. 
The statements and affidavits can be drawn up 
by the Commission’s lawyers or by your party’s 
lawyers in consultation with the Commission’s 
lawyer. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 189 of 301 
 
The Commission needs this evidence in order 
to see whether Parliament carried out its 
constitutional oversight obligations properly 
over the years...” 
 
And so forth.  And in considerable detail the 
parties are all invited to make representations and a 
certain time period which was stipulated within those 
invitations were submitted. 
 
But Chair, for – from a number of the parties, in 
this particular instance, it might be relevant to just draw 
10 
your attention to page 46 of this bundle.  And there, for 
example, we have a signature from a representative from 
the EFF acknowledging receipt of that letter. 
 
And to the best of my knowledge, that party and 
a number of other parties have not made submissions to 
this Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that signature – the person who 
signed there indicated that she received the letter of 
invitation at – it looks like five minutes past four on the 
3 r d of March 2020. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  She put in – he or she – I think it 
is a she, even put in her ID-number. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Indeed.  Thank you Chair.  Chair, there 
is no more I wish to say other than that I submit that this 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 190 of 301 
 
should form part of the record. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, thank you.  That is fine. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   It will ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   We can ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   It will be part of the record, ja.  Thank 
you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.  Chair, as I have 
indicated.  Mr Frolick started but has not completed his 
evidence on this particular topic. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I think he testified under affirmation if 
I recall.  I am not sure if I am correct in that regard. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   He should – I have been directed to 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV FREUND SC:   The affirmation - would that be 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Administer the oath or affirmation again.  
20 
Good afternoon Mr Frolick.  Are you there? 
MR FROLICK:   Good afternoon Deputy Chief Justice.  I 
am here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay thank you.  I cannot see you as 
yet.  Now I can see you.  Okay thank you very much.  
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 191 of 301 
 
Thank you for coming back to complete your evidence. 
MR FROLICK:   It is a pleasure sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The registrar will just administer the 
oath or affirmation afresh. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record? 
WITNESS:   Cedric Thomas Frolick. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objection to make a 
prescribed affirmation? 
WITNESS:   No, I do not. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you affirm that the evidence you will give, 
10 
will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth?  If so, please raise up your right hand and say, I truly 
affirm. 
WITNESS:   I truly affirm. 
CEDRIC THOMAS FROLICK:  (affirmed) 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Thank 
you. 
 
You 
may 
proceed 
Mr Freund. 
EXAMINATION BY ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.  
Mr Frolick, you will recall that when you testified we 
referred to the affidavit that you submitted as one of 
20 
several representatives of the African National Congress in 
Bundle 1 from page 46 and following.  You will recall this 
affidavit, I am sure. 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   And I want to start off today at page 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 192 of 301 
 
53.  That is the top right hand pagination.  And there you 
deal with the topic of certain letters written to chairpersons 
of committees in June 2017 from paragraphs 23 and 
following.  Do you have that? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   And Chair may I ask if you also have 
that? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have got that.  Thank you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now...  Thank you.  Now Mr Frolick, 
there you say that during May and June of 2017 a number 
10 
of allegations pertaining to the capture of state-owned 
enterprises and the alleged involvement of the Gupta 
family matters of the state appears in the public domain. 
 
These 
allegations 
are 
directed 
at 
certain 
government departments and/or members of the Executive.  
And after dealing with certain preliminary issues, you say: 
“Upon 
my 
return 
to 
Parliament 
on 
the 
15 t h of June 2017, I...” 
 
Of course, you were the Chair of Chairs. 
“...was called to a meeting of the Speaker and 
20 
the Chief Whip of the ANC where we discussed 
the matter of the establishment of such an ad-
hoc committee which had again been raised by 
opposition MP’s.” 
 
And you say: 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 193 of 301 
 
“We were mindful that the Commission on 
State capture was not operational yet and that 
Parliament has a responsibility to look into the 
matter and we agreed that the best approach 
to be for the relevant line function committees 
to look into the matter and to report to The 
House...” 
 
And you then referred to certain letters that you 
wrote to the chairs of certain committees.  I take it that 
this is all factually correct? 
10 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Right.  Well, what interests me is the 
principle.  The principle, as I understand it, that you are 
expecting in your affidavit, is that because there were 
allegations in the public domain of the capture of state-
owned 
enterprises 
and 
allegations 
pertaining 
to 
the 
involvement of the Gupta family matters of state. 
 
And because those allegations were directed at 
certain government departments and/or members of the 
Executive it was appropriate for Parliament to exercise its 
20 
powers of oversight and to enquire and in trying to clear up 
the truth in relation to these allegations.  You accept that? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   And I have to say Mr Frolick, I have no 
difficulty with the view that you say you had formed, the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 194 of 301 
 
Speaker had formed and the Chief Whip had formed that 
this required investigation.  
 
But what I want to put to you where I do have 
difficulty is the fact that you only thought that necessary at 
this late stage namely in the middle of 2017. 
 
And I want to ask you firstly, generally, why it 
was that prior to that no similar steps were taken to the 
best of your knowledge? 
MR FROLICK:   Well, thank you for the question.  I want to 
take you a little bit back Chairperson and Advocate Freund 
10 
to indicate that these emails that were being revealed and 
leaked in the public domain was on the back of the report 
of the Public Protector in 2016 that was published, I think 
it was in October 2016, where the Public Protector came to 
certain conclusions. 
 
And out of the recommendations of that report, 
indicates that the – a commission similar to what we are 
having now which is State capture, must be sped-up. 
 
A discussion then ensued as to what happened 
since that report from the Public Protector was published.  
20 
The expectation was that by 2017, early 2017, all the 
legalities would have been put in place for the commission 
to commence its work. 
 
It would have, and it was considered during our 
discussion that we had, that if Parliament would have 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 195 of 301 
 
interfered earlier or intervened earlier from the time that 
the complaint was lodged with the Public Protector by a 
certain Father, S Mayebe of the Dominican Group and 
former 
DA 
Leader, 
Mr 
Mmusi 
Maimane 
on 
the 
18 t h  of March 2016, as well as an unnamed member of the 
public on the 22 n d of April 2016, then we would have 
basically interfered and run a parallel process, parallel to 
that that the Public Protector was undertaking. 
 
Keeping 
in 
mind 
that 
the 
Public 
Protector 
submits reports to Parliament and those reports which was 
10 
the subject of an investigation then, arrived in The House 
that we must deliberate on. 
 
And the recommendation explicitly said that a 
commission or inquiry into allegations of State capture 
must be set up and at that stage that you are referring to, 
as it appears in my affidavit, no such commission was set 
up as yet. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  Now are you suggesting 
Mr Frolick that if a member of the public lays a complaint 
with the Public Protector about a particular issues – and 
20 
here I have in mind an issue of huge national significance, 
allegations of alleged State capture and corruption of the 
highest level – are you suggesting that once such a 
complaint has been laid with the Public Protector, it would 
be wrong for Parliament itself to investigate and to deal 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 196 of 301 
 
with such allegations? 
MR FROLICK:   Chairperson, we were mindful of the 
constitution of court ruling and the Constitutional Court 
ruled 
that 
investigations 
undertaken 
by 
the 
Public 
Protector and recommendations are made can only be 
taken on review in a court of law. 
 
And Parliament was chastised at the time for 
undertaking after the Public Protector delivered her report 
in Nkandla what was deemed to be a second guess of what 
the Public Protector said. 
10 
 
So the dilemma that they were sitting with is that 
if you intervene in this process that was investigated by 
the Public Protector that you could arrive at the same 
conclusion, that Parliament open up parallel investigations 
and come to the same conclusions than the Public 
Protector and that for us would have meant second 
guessing the report. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So is the short answer to my question 
yes that you thought it would be improper to investigate 
something once the complaint has been laid with the Public 
20 
Protector? 
MR FROLICK:   The ultimate discussion that we had is yes 
it would have been improper to do so. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And who had that discussion and 
when? 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 197 of 301 
 
MR FROLICK:   The discussion took place between the 
Speaker, as I indicate Chairperson in my affidavit.  It 
happened on the morning of the 15 t h of June 2017 when I 
was called to the office of the Speaker where I derived my 
directives from where the Chief Whip was also present. 
 
And they were in discussion about a meeting 
that 
took 
place 
earlier 
that 
morning, 
The 
National 
Assembling Programming Committee which I did not attend, 
where this matter was raised again. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now if I can just interrupt you there 
10 
Mr Frolick because I think you have misunderstood my 
question.  When I asked you who were at that discussion 
and when, I am not talking about the discussion of 
June 2017 
to 
have 
these 
four 
committees 
make 
investigations. 
 
I am talking about the discussion that I think you 
say happened that said because there is a complaint 
before the Public Protector about state capture, therefore 
it 
would 
be 
inappropriate 
for 
Parliament 
to 
even 
investigate. 
20 
 
That would have been much later.  That would 
have been more than a year earlier.  Are you saying there 
was such a discussion or did I misunderstand you? 
MR 
FROLICK: 
  
Well, 
I 
must 
also 
take 
you 
back 
Chairperson to 2016 just after there were allegations made 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 198 of 301 
 
by a certain member of Parliament around allegations of 
the 
involvement 
of 
a 
certain 
family 
in 
state-owned 
enterprises. 
 
It 
was 
referred 
to 
a 
committee 
and 
the 
committee, for one reason or another after deliberations, 
decided not to look into the matter.   
 
A 
new 
Chief 
Whip 
was 
appointed 
on 
the 
22 n d  of March 2016 and it was the firm view of the Chief 
Whip and it enrolled in several multi-party discussions as 
well 
that 
if 
Parliament 
would 
conduct 
a 
parallel 
10 
investigation it would be improper.   
 
That view was also supported by the Speaker 
and also on advice from the legal services who said we 
must look at the ruling of the Constitutional Court when it 
comes to these types of investigations. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And were you ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   One second Mr Freund.   
ADV FREUND SC:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Yes, you may proceed 
Mr Freund. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair.  If I understand what 
you are telling us Mr Frolick that this line of reasoning 
arose out of the Constitutional Court’s judgment in relation 
to the Nkandla saga and the decision by a parliamentary 
committee not give effect to what the Public Protector had 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 199 of 301 
 
recommended and rather to decide that no measures 
whatsoever should be taken against the President?  That is 
the origin of what you are telling us, is it? 
MR FROLICK:   Can you just repeat the question again?  
So in terms of the Parliamentary Committee that you are 
referring to? 
ADV FREUND SC:   No, I am trying to understand what you 
are telling us because I have never heard this before.  
What I hear you to be telling us is that the view was taken 
by somebody - and we will come back to who took that view 
10 
– the view was taken that the effect of the Constitutional 
Court’s judgment on the Nkandla matter is that it would be 
improper 
for 
Parliament 
to 
investigate 
the 
matter 
if 
somebody had made a complaint to the Public Protector 
about the same matter.  Am I understanding you correctly? 
MR FROLICK:   What I am saying is Chairperson that it 
would be improper for Parliament to conduct a parallel 
investigation whilst the Public Protector, a Chapter 9 
institution, is conducting exactly the same investigation. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So that could literally mean for 
20 
however long it takes the Public Protector ’s investigation, 
your – the view that you are explaining was that Parliament 
was hamstrung and 
could do nothing.  Is that the 
argument? 
MR FROLICK:   Well, the argument was and this is where 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 200 of 301 
 
the Chief Whip of the majority party, especially the 
Speaker was very clear, that they must give time for the 
Public Protector to produce her report and see what 
recommendations are in that report. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And the reason for that, as I 
understand 
your 
evidence, 
is 
because 
there 
was 
a 
complaint 
pending 
before 
the 
Public 
Protector 
which 
complaint had been lodged in March 2016.  Is that correct? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright. 
10 
MR FROLICK:   Actually three complaints. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, let us go back to where we were 
on the last occasion.  On the last occasion I put to you and 
Chair you will find this in the transcript of Day 338 at page 
198.  I presume you may not have Mr Frolick. 
 
But I put to you an extract from a newspaper 
report and you make a point:  Yes, but I do not have that 
newspaper report in front of me.  So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund, can you just repeat in what 
bundle will we find it?  In what bundle will we find it? 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, we will find the newspaper report 
in Bundle 2 at page 561. 
CHAIRPERSON:   561? 
ADV FREUND SC:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Okay thank you. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 201 of 301 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   And is it correct Mr Frolick that you 
have since been furnished with a copy of this particular 
report? 
MR FROLICK:   Yes, I have been furnished this afternoon 
with three reports.  You must say which one you are 
referring to. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, well, the one I am going to refer 
you to now is the one dated the 27 t h of February 2011.  It 
is a report in the Sunday Times.  It is labelled in the 
Commission’s documentations, Annexure ZR-1.  Do you 
10 
have that particular report? 
MR FROLICK:   Yes, I have the report in front of me. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And that is a report that alleges under 
the headline:  “Ministers shiver when summonsed to 
family’s home.”   
 
The following.  It says: 
“A revolt is brewing within the ANC and its 
alliance partners against the influence of the 
Gupta family over President Jacob Zuma and 
its government.” 
20 
 
And then in the third paragraph it talks about 
members of top ANC leadership structures, the National 
Working Committee and the Top Six party officials having 
raised concerns about this. 
 
It makes an allegation.  The Sunday Times says: 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 202 of 301 
 
“It 
understands 
that 
the 
Guptas’ 
role 
in 
influencing the appointment of CEO’s and 
chair-people in key state-owned enterprises 
were recently raised at an NWC meeting...” 
 
And it goes on and makes a host of other 
specific allegations.   
 
Now those are allegations of precisely the same 
character, are they not, as the allegations to which you 
refer in paragraph 23 of your affidavit, the allegations 
which in May of 2017 prompted a decision to cause certain 
10 
committees to carry out certain investigations.  Do you 
agree? 
MR FROLICK:   I do not agree? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Why not? 
MR FROLICK:   I do not agree because the allegations that 
surfaced in 2017 was on the back and it was very specific 
allegations of leaked emails.  It was on the back of a 
report of the Public Protector. 
 
And there was certain things that appeared in 
that report that I do not have in front of me now but those 
20 
emails and things refer the details on.   
 
With respect Chairperson, the article of 2011 
that is being referred to is so vague.  It does not mention 
any specific person or quote anyone in that article.  Now 
what usually happens in committees if I may proceed? 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 203 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Please. 
MR FROLICK:   That once issues are in the public domain 
it is the responsibility of members of Parliament who serve 
in these different committees to bring the information, 
highlight it to the attention of the chairperson and in terms 
of the parliamentary rules, they deliberate on the matter. 
 
And whoever brings these or whatever complaint 
they have or information must then present their case and 
they must convince the rest of the committee that the 
committee must either schedule a hearing on the matter, 
10 
require further information and so forth. 
 
So I would, with respect, differ from you that it is 
exactly the same.   
ADV FREUND SC:   But the nature of the allegations is 
exactly the same, is it not? 
MR FROLICK:   Well, the nature of the allegations in the 
article of 2011 is – deals with a certain family and what 
they had been up to but in 2017 the allegations that appear 
in the form of leaked emails was on the premise on the 
report of the Public Protector.  So very concrete, very clear 
20 
information on what appeared in the media at the time and 
the allegations that were made. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But the Sunday Times article quote 
members of the National Working Committee of the African 
National Congress as making these allegations.  So it 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 204 of 301 
 
would not have been a matter of a great deal of difficulty, 
would it, for anybody in Parliament to ask the NWC 
members whether such allegations were made, who made 
them and why they were made.  It would be perfectly 
simple, would it not? 
MR FROLICK:   Advocate Freund, when this type of 
allegation appear or appeared, then you would find that in 
Parliament there are members who may be members of the 
National Executive Committee or the National Working 
Committee. 
10 
 
And what needs to happen in these type of ANC 
meetings is that they meet behind closed doors, they 
discuss a range of issues and then thereafter a press 
release or a statement is made as to how the ANC wants to 
approach the matter. 
 
So even if you are somebody in Parliament who 
is a member of the NWC or the NEC, it can simply say this 
matter must still be discussed or we do not have further 
information yet. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But they would be lying if they said 
20 
that, would they not?  Because you have the power to 
compel to testify and to tell the truth and it is crime not to 
do so, is it not? 
MR FROLICK:   Advocate Freund, they are members and 
not all members of the ANC and NWC are members of 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 205 of 301 
 
Parliament.  Some are and some are not but the manner in 
which the ANC, NEC and NWC is that those discussions 
take place, a certain view or collective view is taken and a 
certain position is taken as to how to proceed with the 
matter. 
 
They do not have to or they do not – even if you 
ask very specifically they will say we are bound by the 
decisions of the NEC and the NWC and the discussions 
that have taken place and we cannot go outside of the NEC 
and NWC. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Ah, is that the point?  Is your point 
that if a member of the NEC or if a member of the NWC is 
summonsed to a portfolio committee and asked about these 
mattes, they are entitled to refuse to answer?  Is that the 
point you are making? 
MR FROLICK:   That is not the point.  That is not the point 
I am making.  If any member of the NEC or NWC who is 
serve in a particular capacity in government is called to a 
meeting of the Portfolio Committee, then according to the 
rules of the National Assembly that member must be able 
20 
to deal with their portfolios that are there but at that time 
in 2011 this issue did not arise in the way that you are 
putting it. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Ja, but what I am trying to explore with 
you is why it did not arrive, because the principle that you 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 206 of 301 
 
yourself have correctly asserted that allegations of this 
type warrant investigation by parliament were not made for 
the first time in the middle of 2017, they were made 
extensively in 2011 and in every year subsequent to that. 
MR FROLICK:   I have referred you to the manner in which 
the different parliamentary committees work, how they 
gather their information and how members bring issues to 
the different portfolio committees and that is a political 
process within the rules of parliament that are taking place 
and that is how the system and how particular and the 
10 
politics in parliament work.  There are political parties 
there and members who have very firm views on how 
certain matters must be raised and you must be able, even 
myself must be able to convince a particular point of view 
or even a letter that I wrote to ask for certain things to be 
done and to explain to them, that is how the terrain in 
parliament works, it is a very contested terrain.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, it is a contested terrain and yes 
there are partisan positions adopted by different political 
parties, I accept that without reservation.  The problem is 
20 
this, do you accept that there are certain types of 
misconduct 
or 
alleged 
misconduct, 
allegations 
of 
misconduct which are of such seriousness that there is a 
duty of parliament to investigate them if there appears to 
be any possible plausibility to those allegations and that 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 207 of 301 
 
would include, in particular, allegations of state capture?  
There is a duty on parliament to investigate that and to get 
to the bottom of that, is there not? 
MR FROLICK:   There is the duty of each member of 
parliament to bring such information to the relevant 
structure by following the rules and then what should 
happen is, is to get them the buy-in of the different role-
players in parliament to do as you say.  However, in this 
instance, Chairperson, I cannot speculate on what the 
reasons are or is for the members of the NEC in 2011, the 
10 
names that do not appear there to say what they have said.  
I am not a member of those structures. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Ja, I just want for the record to check 
that you were not then and you are not now either a 
member of the NEC nor of the national working committee, 
is that correct? 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Right, so I have understood that and I 
have understood that when I have been listening to your 
evidence.  Now you have become aware of the point of 
20 
view expressed by Ms Mazzone of the Democratic Alliance 
in relation to the events in 2016 and I just want to check 
with you whether you have or have not had an opportunity 
to look at paragraph 13 of her affidavit.  I think that you 
might have received it, only seen it late in the afternoon 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 208 of 301 
 
and I do not know if you have had a chance to read it. 
MR FROLICK:   Yes, Chairperson, I want to put it on 
record that last Thursday the lawyer acting on behalf of the 
ANC, Mr Krish Naidoo contacted the Commission and 
asked which documents will be dealt with this afternoon 
and we were referred to the same bundle that was used 
last time and then unfortunately, late this afternoon I 
received three – in fact five different documents that the 
advocate is now referring to and I will try to the best of my 
ability, while doing some speed reading on some of these 
10 
things, I have not read the Honourable Mazzone’s affidavit 
in 
full 
suffice 
for 
the 
sections 
that 
were 
sent 
for 
consideration and discussion in the previous hearing that 
took place.  So …[intervenes] 
ADV FREUND SC:   [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
at then.  Let me not put you on …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund and Mr Frolick, how much 
time do you think Mr Frolick you might need?  Five minutes 
to read what you need to read? 
MR FROLICK:   Deputy Chief Justice, it is quite a long 
20 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR FROLICK:   So it may assist me if Advocate Freund 
could point specifically to which section or pages and then 
it could take a few minutes, five to ten minutes, to look at 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 209 of 301 
 
exactly what is there.  But unfortunately at this stage 
where I sit I have not read the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no, that is fine.  Mr Freund do 
you have a suggestion because maybe we take a short 
adjournment to make sure there is no unfairness to him. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I have no difficulty with that, Chair, but 
I thought perhaps I could address the problem in a shorter 
way. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Which is simply take the witness to 
10 
very 
specific 
paragraphs 
which 
I 
will 
read 
and 
my 
questions just on that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   If I might endeavour to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   That might enable us to do it more 
quickly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, maybe let us try and do that Mr 
Frolick.  You understand what Mr Freund proposes to do.  
Maybe we could do that but if you feel that you might not – 
20 
whatever he might put, might tell you about the relevant 
portions of the document, might not give you enough 
context, please feel free to indicate.  Do you understand? 
MR FROLICK:   Yes, Deputy Chief Justice, I understand 
and I am amenable to that, I will try to assist as far as 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 210 of 301 
 
possible. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, that is fine. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if you feel that maybe you did not get 
the full context let me know.  Okay, alright, Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Now, Mr Frolick, in 
paragraph 13.8 of Ms Mazzone’s affidavit, that is at page 
20 of bundle 2.  Do you have that accessible to you? 
MR FROLICK:   Yes, I do have it. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So I am going to read it out so that 
10 
everybody can understand what I am referring to.  This is 
evidence 
that Ms 
Mazzone 
also 
gave 
orally 
to this 
Commission and she says: 
“On the 18 March 2016 I issued a statement 
referring to growing evidence that a number of 
SOEs had been captured by the Guptas and said 
that I was requesting the portfolio committee on 
Public Enterprises conduct a full parliamentary 
inquiry into the capture of SOEs by the Guptas.  In 
my statement I referred to allegations inter alia 
20 
that…” 
And there are then six subparagraphs. 
1. The resignation of the former Chairperson of 
Eskom Zola Tsotsi had been orchestrated by the 
Guptas as a result of him not playing the game 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 211 of 301 
 
after he had refused to grant them exclusivity 
over certain Eskom contracts. 
2. Former Minister of Public Enterprises, Barbara 
Hogan, had been placed under pressure to meet 
with Gupta-linked Indian Airline Jet Airways.” 
And her affidavit makes clear that this is a recently made 
allegation pertaining to much earlier, pertaining back to 
2010 and 2011.   
3. Hogan had been replaced by Malusi Gigaba and 
who was known to have attended the Gupta 
10 
wedding in 2013.   
4. Vytjie Mentor had been offered the position of 
Minister of Public Enterprises by the Guptas on 
the condition that she drop the SAA route to India 
and give it to Jet Airways instead.   
5. Former SAA Chairperson Vuyisile Khona had 
been offer R500 000 by the Guptas in 2012 to 
secure his cooperation.   
6. Eskom CEO Brian Molefe had admitted to visiting 
the Guptas at Saxonwold, Gupta-owned Tegeta 
20 
Exploration 
had 
recently 
secured 
lucrative 
contracts to supply coal to the Eskom power 
stations.” 
And those are, if I may say so, when one reads her 
affidavit, probably the major points but by no means the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 212 of 301 
 
only points that she made about the sorts of allegations 
that were being publicly made by that time and which 
underpinned a request that she made to the portfolio 
committee 
on 
Public 
Enterprises 
that 
that 
portfolio 
committee should investigate these issues.  
 
Now I would interested in your views as to whether, 
when she makes allegations of that type and she refers to 
where they are based from and they come from press 
reports and the like, whether you think that is the sort of 
thing that a portfolio committee responsible for Public 
10 
Enterprises ought to have investigated. 
MR FROLICK:   Well, that is a matter, as I also indicated 
last time, that the portfolio committee Chairperson and 
members should have had an interest on and should have 
deliberated on to chart the way forward in terms of Rule 
167. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And if understood your evidence last 
time, I think, but I do not want to put words in your mouth, 
I think you agree that that is something they should have 
investigated, is that correct? 
20 
MR FROLICK:   That is something that the portfolio 
committee should have had an interest in and should have 
charted a way of how to deal with it in terms of Rule 167, 
whether it is an investigation, a hearing or whatever it may 
have been. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 213 of 301 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, okay, the manner in which they 
investigate could take different forms, I think you are 
suggesting.  You could, for example, invite people to come 
to 
an 
ordinary 
meeting, 
you 
could 
perhaps 
issue 
summonses, if necessary.  The manner in which you deal 
with it you say is a matter for them to determine, am I 
understanding you correctly? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   But am I also understanding you 
correctly that although that is so, how they would do it was 
10 
for them to decide but you agree in principle that they 
should have done it somehow or other. 
MR FROLICK:   That is a matter that the committee should 
have considered. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, does that mean they should have 
considered 
whether 
to 
investigate 
and 
you 
are 
not 
expressing an opinion or does it mean that you agree that 
that they should have dealt with the issue by inquiring into 
it? 
MR FROLICK:   Ultimately the decision that the committee 
20 
decides on what to take and how we want to proceed to it 
is a committee matter but given the circumstances, as it 
appears in this affidavit that you have referred to, it is a 
matter that the committee should have considered and 
should have been seized with. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 214 of 301 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right.  And you have been furnished, 
have you not with the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Freund.  Mr Frolick, 
maybe your answer raises the question of when it is that in 
your view that committee should investigate allegations 
that come to our attention, allegations of a serious nature?  
When they should investigate them, when should they – 
when should they decide to investigate and when should 
they decide not to investigate? 
MR FROLICK:   Chairperson, it is within the powers of the 
10 
committee to decide whatever course of action they may 
take but the committee should always consider the gravity 
of the issues that are brought in front of them.  It may not 
be an investigation or inquiry but they should do the first 
step to consider the matter that is in front of them so that 
they have a factual ground on where to move but also very 
importantly when it comes to these type of decisions it is 
good for the committee as a whole to decide how they want 
to approach matters.   
What happens in a lot of these instances is that the 
20 
working arrangements amongst the different members of 
parliament in the committee is of such a nature that it is 
more conflictual more than anything else and very quickly 
parties take partisan positions around these issues without 
necessarily gone – deliberated and I feel that once the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 215 of 301 
 
committees have properly deliberated on a matter they are 
in a position to chart a way before.  But very often in a lot 
of instances you find that different members of political 
parties raise issues and then it comes a partisan issue and 
that makes it very difficult for the committee, as a whole, 
to arrive at a common decision on how to take matters 
forward, as happened later on in parliament. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now as you have just …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Freund.  Mr Freund, I am 
sorry, would it be fair in your view to say a committee is 
10 
expected to investigate serious allegations that have come 
before – come to their attention which relate to matters 
falling within the jurisdiction of their committee?  If there 
are reasonable grounds to think that if the allegations are 
true then there is something quite serious that parliament 
or the committee should really look into.  I am putting it 
very roughly.  So would not go along with an idea that a 
committee when there appears to be reasonable grounds 
before it to investigate allegations, you would not go along 
with the view that well, if they feel that they should not 
20 
investigate, that is fine, if they feel that they should 
investigate, that is fine. 
MR FROLICK:   No, Deputy Chief Justice, I would say – 
and I understand the way that you put it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 216 of 301 
 
MR FROLICK:   My view is a matter is properly deliberated 
upon and there is sufficient grounds then the committee 
must be seized with the matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR FROLICK:   Identify how to want to proceed with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR FROLICK:   And it is at that critical point where you 
find a divergence of views from the different political 
parties. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
10 
MR FROLICK:   Either (a) on how to proceed or (b) they 
can simply say we do not have a mandate from our political 
party to deal with this matter, we must first go back and 
discuss with three or whoever and then come back with a 
mandate around it.  At that time, Chairperson, you will find 
that the atmosphere and the heat in the committee has 
reached such proportions that it is difficult to find one 
another on how to proceed with the matter and then argue 
along partisan lines. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The committee cannot make the right 
20 
decision.  Would you say that because the parties which 
form part of the committee now argue along partisan lines? 
MR FROLICK:   They cannot make the right decision in 
certain respects, Chairperson, because they actually forget 
about the issue that is at hand and also what we find, 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 217 of 301 
 
Deputy Chief Justice , Chairperson, is that when these 
type of issue arise, it happens in the context of a broader 
political atmosphere in the country that is unfolding and 
then you find that in particular when you move – and you 
can sense it already as you move towards, for instance, a 
local government election that is pending or a general 
election that is pending, you can find that members of 
parliament who are actively busy outside of parliament 
campaigning on behalf of their different political parties, 
they dig in their heels for their political parties. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, thank you.  Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Now, Mr Frolick, am 
I correct that you were furnished with a copy of the letter 
from Ms Mazzone to Ms Letsatsi-Dube of the 14 March 
2016 in which she requested the Portfolio Committee on 
Public Enterprises to conduct a full parliamentary inquiry 
into the capture of SOEs by the Guptas.  You have seen 
that letter, am I right? 
MR FROLICK:   Yes, I have seen the letter, I am just 
getting it on my screen but you may proceed, Advocate, I 
20 
know about the letter. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Take your time.  And …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry, I missed the page number of 
the letter. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Sorry, it is probably because I did not 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 218 of 301 
 
give it, Chair, my apologies.  It is bundle 2 page 192. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Page 892? 
ADV FREUND SC:   192 of bundle 2. 
CHAIRPERSON:  192, okay. I have got it. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not know if Mr Frolick has got it? 
MR FROLICK:   I have got it, thank you very much. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now that letter requests the inquiry, as 
I have referred to, it talks about allegations, recent 
allegations – well... 
10 
“...a number of allegations of undue influence have 
been raised regarding the Guptas’ involvement in a 
number of state owned enterprises and then it 
specifically requests that the committee should 
immediately summon the Guptas to appear before it 
to answer these allegations as per my previous 
letter, 
should 
call 
former 
Ministers 
of 
Public 
Enterprises Barbara Hogan and Malusi Gigaba to 
provide 
details, 
summon 
the 
CEOs 
and 
Chairpersons of the largest SOEs.” 
20 
That is something that I think you accept the committee 
had the full power and right to do if it wished to do so, do 
you agree? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So when the Chair of that committee 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 219 of 301 
 
Ms Letsatsi-Dube said we have no power to do this without 
the resolution from the National Assembly she was quite 
wrong, was she not? 
MR FROLICK:   It did not require a resolution from the 
National Assembly. 
ADV FREUND SC:   I agree with you.  And that is 
something that should have been perfectly obvious to all 
members of that committee certainly once the point had 
been made to them by opposition members, would you 
agree, that the excuse that we cannot do this without a 
10 
resolution of the National Assembly was a pretence that 
did not withstand scrutiny.   
MR FROLICK:   Well, as I said, for these type of issues to 
be tabled by a member of the committee, Chairperson, 
what usually happens, Advocate, is that the letter is tabled 
in front of the committee and is deliberated upon, so I do 
not 
know 
how 
the 
Chairperson 
then 
arrived 
at 
the 
conclusion that it requires a resolution from the house. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, to be fair to her – and I do not 
know that you have this, you may or may not have it – 
20 
Chair, this is at bundle 2, page 219, it is a letter from Ms 
Letsatsi-Dube so Ms Mazzone of the 6 April 2016.  I am not 
certain, Mr Frolick, whether that sent to you.  I think it was 
but I am not sure. 
MR FROLICK:   No, I do not have that letter. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 220 of 301 
 
ADV FREUND SC:    Alright, well let me read to you the 
letter, it is at page 2019, Chair, of bundle 2, it is about that 
request that I have just read to you.  She acknowledges 
receipt and then Ms Letsatsi-Dube says this, she says: 
“I have since requested a legal advice from the 
parliamentary legal services on how to process this 
request.  In terms of the advice received kindly be 
informed that: 
1. The National Assembly Rule 138 requires a 
house resolution to initiate an investigation. 
10 
2. The portfolio committee on Public Enterprises is 
not 
authorised 
by 
law 
to 
initiate 
such 
a 
parliamentary inquiry on its own, and 
3. Any member of the assembly may move a motion 
to 
have 
a 
draft 
resolution 
pertaining 
to 
a 
parliamentary inquiry put before the assembly for 
approval as a resolution of the National Assembly 
Rule 94.” 
Now I think you have already told me that you agree that 
this is legally wrong. 
20 
MR FROLICK:   I have not seen that legal opinion but I 
would differ with it. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes.   
MR FROLICK:   Because this is a matter that first and 
foremost should have been discussed by the Portfolio 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 221 of 301 
 
Committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right. Now what Ms Mazzone then 
testifies is that having failed to persuade the portfolio 
committee to pursue this investigation, they tried to do 
what the legal adviser to Ms Letsatsi-Dube had suggested 
is the right way of proceeding, which is to go to the house 
and to move a resolution in the house and I believe that 
you have been furnished with an extract from Hansard.   
It is annexure NM42 from page 326 and following in 
bundle 2.  It is a very selected extract from a long 
10 
document but at page 357 one find the terms of the 
resolution moved by Mr Maynier of the Democratic Alliance 
and I just want to check with you, Mr Frolick, that you have 
this documentation, you are aware of what I am talking 
about. 
MR FROLICK:   It was part of the previous bundle. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right, thank you.  And you will recall 
that the motion was that the house should note the 
allegations of state capture by certain individuals and their 
alleged undue influence over government, that the house 
20 
should establish an ad hoc committee in terms of a certain 
rule and investigate these allegations in a certain way and 
there is a debate on it and you were present for that 
debate, as I understand it, is that correct? 
MR FROLICK:   That is right. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 222 of 301 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   And if we turn to page 360, we find 
who voted in favour of this and who voted against and, in 
short, there were 103 in favour comprising representatives 
of all the major opposition parties but there are 169 votes 
against and one of those is your vote, am I right? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Just as a matter of interest, am I 
correct that when we look at the next page, in the middle 
of the next page, one of the others who voted against it, 
referred to Mbete B, would that be the then Speaker? 
10 
MR FROLICK:   That is the former Speaker. 
ADV FREUND SC:   The former Speaker and another 
person was Mr J Mthembu, the then Chief Whip. 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And is it common practice, by the way, 
for the Speaker to vote along party lines on motions put 
before the house? 
MR FROLICK:   It is common practice for the Speaker to 
vote in the house unlike in the Westminster system, for 
instance, where the Speaker is not actively part of a 
20 
caucus or involved in caucus matters or in party matters.  
The South African setup allows the Speaker to participate 
in all proceedings. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And this particular Speaker was 
President at the time of the African National Congress, is 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 223 of 301 
 
that right or have I got that wrong?    
MR FROLICK:   Just repeat that, sir, I did not hear you 
clearly. 
ADV FREUND SC:   She held senior office, I think she was 
the President – or the Chair, was she not of the party? 
MR FROLICK:   The National Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:   The National Chairperson of the party.  
So far from being neutral, she did not even pretend to be 
neutral, she was an active leader of the governing party 
and on your evidence, if I understand it correctly, she 
10 
voted as a matter of course in line with the party whip, is 
that correct? 
MR FROLICK:   Well, I cannot say, I cannot decide on why 
the Speaker decided to vote in a particular manner but the 
Speaker, as it indicates there, voted against the motion. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Right.  Now why did you vote against 
this motion? 
MR FROLICK:   Oh, the matter was raised in the Chief 
Whip’s Forum and mindful of the fact that the first time that 
this issue was raised and directed towards a committee 
20 
chairperson was in March that same year.  We are now in 
September 2016. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Ja. 
MR FROLICK:   And the then Chief Whip, the late Chief 
Whip 
Jackson 
Mthembu, 
he 
attempted 
to 
move 
an 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 224 of 301 
 
amendment to that specific motion. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes. 
MR FROLICK:   And I want to give a context to that, 
Chairperson.  The amendment simply said that anyone who 
have any credible evidence in terms of what was in the 
motion should 
hand it over to the law enforcement 
authorities or to any investigative arm of the state.  
 At 
that 
stage 
the 
Public 
Protector 
was 
busy 
concluding her report on exactly the same matter and the 
rationale at the time was this is exactly what the Public 
10 
Protector is currently doing, are we not going back to the 
same situation like they have stated earlier to say – like I 
have stated, my apologies, Chairperson, it is late in the 
day – are we not going back to the same situation that 
while this investigation from the Public Protector is taking 
place and the Chief Whip was very clear at the time to say 
that he is convinced that this report is due to be released 
soon, why should parliament run a parallel process and 
possibly come with different findings and recommendations 
whilst the Public Protector will also release her report. 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   While it is not clear for me from 
reading Hansard what role you played in this particular 
meeting.  I sometimes get the impression that you were 
chairing this meeting.  Is that a misunderstanding on my 
part? 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 225 of 301 
 
MR FROLICK:   My apologies, which meeting are you 
referring to? 
ADV FREUND SC:   This was the meeting at which – the 
meeting in the National Assembly in which this motion was 
moved and then rejected. 
MR FROLICK:   Look, we have a roster for the presiding 
officers to preside and I cannot recall really. 
ADV FREUND SC:   You do sometimes chair debates in the 
house. 
MR FROLICK:   Yes, I regularly chair debates in the house. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes and it seems to me, if I can refer 
the Chair of this Commission to page 327, it seems pretty 
clear that you were chairing this particular debate as we go 
along.  Now I have not put that before you but you have no 
reason to doubt that, do you? 
MR FROLICK:   That is quite possible, that is quite 
possible. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And what you are referring the Chair to 
is that an amendment was moved. 
MR FROLICK:   Advocate, if I can just come in there? 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes. 
MR FROLICK:   The then Chief Whip of the majority party 
attempted to move an amended motion. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, I agree. 
MR FROLICK:   Ja.   
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 226 of 301 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   I am just trying to find where that is in 
Hansard, and ...[intervenes]  
MR FROLICK:   In the extract of Hansard you can go to 
page 131 of 187 and in your bundle of documents it will be 
probably on page 359 if I am not mistaken. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes thank you, thank you.  So it seems 
to me it starts at that page 358.  That is where the Chief 
Whip enters the debate.  Are you with me, Mr Frolick, page 
358 of bundle 2, Chief Whip of the opposition.  I would like 
to address you in terms of rule 121.1.  It says very clearly: 
10 
“That it is possible to move an amendment to a 
draft resolution provided and this is the important 
part, the amendment does not extend the scope of 
the draft resolution.” 
It is very clear that when the Honourable Chief Whip, oh so 
that is the Chief Whip of the opposition I am reading from. 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chief Whip for the majority party is 
that is at 358.  I think it is at page 358 it starts on the left 
hand part of the page and it carries on the right hand part 
20 
of the page.  That is what you are referring to, is it?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   It starts Chief Whip as the majority 
party, the part that I was reading was from the Chief Whip 
of the opposition: 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 227 of 301 
 
“The Chief Whip of the majority party moved or 
attempted to amend to move a motion, and the 
motion, the amendment, if adopted would not have 
empowered 
Parliament 
to 
appoint 
an 
ad 
hoc 
Committee to investigate what had been requested.  
But instead to require that all such allegations of 
State Capture be referred to the South African 
Police Service or Chapter Nine Institutions for 
investigation, including the Public Protector.” 
That was the basis not that it was pending, but that 
10 
anybody who makes allegations of this type should not 
expect them to be investigated by Parliament, they should 
take them to the South African Police Services or Chapter 
Nine Institutions, including the Public Protector, that was 
the position adopted by the Chief Whip, am I correct?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.  
ADV FREUND SC:   So really, if I read this, paragraph 2, 3 
and 4 of the amendment of page 358, it seems to me with 
respect that what the Chief Whip of the African National 
Congress was articulating was a view that allegations of 
20 
this type, ought not to be aired and investigated, well we 
will leave out the aired, ought not to be investigated by 
Parliament.  If there were allegations of that type, they 
should 
be 
referred 
to 
the 
Police 
or 
Chapter 
Nine 
Institutions, but not to Parliament. That was the stand, that 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 228 of 301 
 
was the principle on which the Chief Whip with the support 
of his party membership took his stance, is that correct?  
MR FROLICK:   Chairperson, I cannot speak on behalf of 
the late Chief Whip of the majority party was then 
Honourable Jackson Mthembu.  But at that time, when that 
matter was discussed and came up into the House, I had 
absolutely no doubt on the integrity of the Chief Whip of 
the majority party.  I articulating what he articulated there, 
and being serious about it.  
At the time, as I have also said that the Public 
10 
Protector was six months into her investigation on exactly 
the same matter, and that is now the benefit of having the 
report being published about a month later and released by 
the Public Protector.  So I have no doubt in the integrity of 
the Honourable Jackson Mthembu. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, I want to make clear that I am 
not attacking the integrity of the late, Chief Whip and 
Minister. This is not a question about integrity.  It is a 
question about debating what are the correct principles 
that govern a certain situation.  And…[intervene]  
20 
MR FROLICK:   Chairperson if I may?  
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes. 
MR FROLICK:   My apologies advocate, if I come across, 
as if I say you are questioning the integrity of the late 
Chief Whip and also the late Minister, I did not intend 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 229 of 301 
 
bringing it across like that.  
ADV FREUND SC:   That is fine. 
MR FROLICK:   But of having worked with the man for a 
long time, I can attest to what he said there is exactly what 
he meant, and being mindful in personal discussions with 
him, and in other forums.  We mentioned it even in 
multiparty forums, that report of the Public Protector, 
according to the information that he had at the time, will be 
released soon.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, the thing about this amendment 
10 
that he moved is that it is not based on we have to wait for 
the Public Protector, it is based on a different principle.  
Let me read it into the record: 
“And all the sub paragraphs that follow after the 
word to be replaced with the following.” 
So this is the resolution as amended that he says should 
be adopted: 
“Refers all such allegations of State Capture to the 
SA 
Police, 
or 
Chapter 
Nine 
Institutions 
for 
investigation, including the Public Protector.  Three, 
20 
notes that all parties and individual members of 
Parliament with evidence of such alleged State 
Capture should make available such evidence to the 
Police Service or a Chapter Nine Institution for 
further notes that such investigations by either the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 230 of 301 
 
Police Service or a Chapter Nine Institution should 
culminate 
in 
prosecution 
of 
all 
individuals 
or 
companies involved in such State Capture, if such 
is proved as a criminal activity.” 
Now I am sure you do not disagree with me, that is the 
terms of the amendment that he moved and sought to have 
adopted by the House.  
MR FROLICK:   That is the amendment Chairperson. 
ADV FREUND SC:   What happened was that the Chair 
ruled that that amendment, that proposed amendment is 
10 
not a permissible amendment having regard to the rules of 
Parliament.  So it was not adopted, and what that left for 
consideration 
by 
the 
House 
was 
the 
original 
motion 
proposed by a representative of the Democratic Alliance.  
And that was the motion that said that Parliament 
should appoint an ad hoc Committee, and that was the 
motion that all African National Congress members acting 
in accordance with the Whip refuse to support, do you 
agree? 
MR FROLICK:   I agree that is the motion that all the 
20 
members indicated there, I have not checked if all of them 
are ANC members or not voted against. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I would like to move back to 
where we started this afternoon.  Which was in the portion 
of your own affidavit, in which you referred to the decision 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 231 of 301 
 
on or about the 15 t h of June 2017.  I am in bundle 1 at 
page 53 and following Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Now Mr Frolick, the report of the 
Public Protector had been released in November of the 
preceding year, am I correct? 
MR FROLICK:   It was released on the 14 t h of October. 
ADV FREUND SC:   14 t h of October, thank you it makes my 
point even stronger and notwithstanding the release of that 
report, 
notwithstanding 
the 
principles 
that 
you 
say, 
10 
underlay the ANC’s stance namely we have to wait for the 
outcome of the Public Protectors report.  
For a good six months, Parliament did nothing at all 
about pursuing and investigating and requiring remedial 
measures to be taken arising from what has been disclosed 
in the Public Protectors report, do you agree with that?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, now, if you are right, that the 
reason for the original failure to support an investigation at 
the time that the motion was moved in September, was the 
20 
need to await the Public Protectors report.  That excuse no 
longer held that it no longer held on your own version from 
October of 2016, am I right? 
MR FROLICK:   Well you referred to Parliament that did 
absolutely nothing.  If you look at the remedial action that 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 232 of 301 
 
the Public Protector recommended was for The President 
to appoint a Commission of inquiry into State Capture, and 
that is the essence.   
The matter was now with the executive and I know 
that having been in more than one discussion Chairperson, 
with the late Chief Whip of the ANC, and also the Speaker 
of the National Assembly, the political processes that was 
taking place from an ANC level, to get the President at the 
time to move with speed in the implementation of this 
recommendation.  
10 
That is information, discussions that I was not part 
of, but that the Chief Whip as well as the Speaker shared 
with me when asked.  How far are we, when are we going 
to get this thing going?  Because it is time that has 
elapsed, and there is no effect that has been given to that 
specific recommendation that was there.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, of course, the Public Protectors 
report did not imply that unless and until a Judicial 
Commission of inquiry had been appointed and finished its 
work, which as you know, is still ongoing as we speak to 
20 
each other right now.  The Public Protectors report did not 
imply that until it was complete, Parliament should do 
nothing and no remedial steps should be taken to address 
the underlying problems of State Capture, did it? 
MR FROLICK:   Chairperson, the position is that was taken 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 233 of 301 
 
at the time is that there is a report now from the Public 
Protector for implementation, that the Head of State as the 
head of the executive can decide if the Head of State is 
not happy with it, they can take it on review, it can take it 
on review to a court of law.  
But Parliament proceeded with its other oversight 
functions 
whilst 
not 
pre-empting 
the 
work 
of 
the 
Commission of inquiry at that specific stage.  And when it 
got to a point that a substantial amount of time has 
elapsed, backed up by certain emails that appeared in the 
10 
public domain, both the Speaker, as well as the Chief Whip 
of the majority party said this is taking too long, and 
Parliament should act and that is the point at which I 
entered the discussion on that Thursday morning, the 15 t h 
of June.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Now the emails to which you are 
referring are the emails that have come to be known 
colloquially as the Gupta Leaks, is that correct?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.  
ADV FREUND SC:   A voluminous set of alleged email 
20 
correspondence, which if genuine, appears at face value to 
implicate a number of people.  You agree? 
MR FROLICK:   Those are the emails I am referring to.  
ADV FREUND SC:   So you took the view, that there is 
information, which is now in the public domain, which really 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 234 of 301 
 
needs to be investigated, and Parliament if it is going to 
fulfil its duties should pause this to be investigated.  Am I 
right?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So if you could do it in June of 2017, 
you could have done it in October of 2016.   
MR FROLICK:   The situation is different, in that there was 
no motion that was in front of the House to consider the 
establishment of an ad hoc Committee and also the letter 
from the Honourable Mazzone was personally directed to 
10 
the Honourable Letsatsi-Duba. 
ADV FREUND SC:   So Mr Frolick why did you not put such 
a motion before the House?  
MR FROLICK:   No, Honourable Chairperson, Honourable 
Deputy Chief Justice, Parliament does not work that way. 
Parliament is composed of different Portfolio Committees, 
where matters are directed to and those Chairpersons 
according to the rules, and those Portfolio Committees 
have certain responsibilities instead of pre-empting what 
they are doing. 
20 
And those matters, and that is part of the way that 
Parliament operates for a very long time since 1994, this 
democratic 
Parliament, 
that 
that 
is 
the 
process 
and 
procedure to follow.  That is the way in which it was 
approached.  
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 235 of 301 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now…[intervene] 
MR FROLICK:   May, I just have an opportunity to finish 
please.  In terms of the position that I hold in Parliament, I 
derive my powers and responsibility from the Speaker, 
which is institutional in nature, and that is the way in which 
we manage the current committees.  
We 
have 
never 
ever 
told 
any 
committee 
in 
Parliament, or any member of Parliament, you may not 
raise this issue, or you may not raise that issue. It is up to 
members to participate in these Portfolio Committees, put 
10 
their point, motivate it and try to convince the others in the 
Portfolio Committee with different political views to arrive 
at a common understanding and to take the process 
forward.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, let us just look at what you 
yourself say in your affidavit in paragraph 30, I am at page 
53 in volume 1: 
“I was requested by the Speaker, to write in my 
capacity 
as 
House 
Chairperson 
Committees 
Oversight and ICT to the Chairpersons of four 
20 
portfolio committees, namely Public Enterprises, 
Home Affairs, Transport and Minerals to inform 
them of the decision, and for them to execute their 
functions in terms of rule 2271, A, B, C, D, and E.” 
Now, that looks to me, like the Speaker, and you and the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 236 of 301 
 
Chief Whip felt that the three of you had the authority to 
instruct or to require these Portfolio Committees to conduct 
this type of investigation as referred to in your letter, 
would that be correct?  
MR FROLICK:   The decision was taken ultimately by the 
Speaker and the Speaker - and we had the discussion over 
it, we called the Secretary to the National Assembly to 
check in terms of the rules as well then instructed me and 
said, 
as 
the 
House 
Chairperson 
responsible 
for 
committees, you must write to these committees, and that 
10 
is in line in terms of the powers that the Speaker have in 
engaging with House Chairpersons. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright, I understand that you play, 
you’re a link in this chain and what you are saying is that 
the Speaker has the power.  I must understand you 
correctly, that in your understanding, the Speaker has the 
power 
to 
require 
Portfolio 
Committees 
to 
cause 
investigations to take place in accordance with their rights 
under the rules.  
MR FROLICK:   The Speaker can refer any matter to a 
20 
Portfolio Committee. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And that is why a Portfolio Committee 
can investigate that matter? 
MR FROLICK:   To do whatever in terms of the rules in 
amongst others investigate the matter, and that has been 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 237 of 301 
 
the practice and convention since 1994.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Right, so that is as regards Portfolio 
Committees but we all know it is a matter of public record 
for example, what happened with the problems at the South 
African Broadcasting Corporation, and we all know that the 
National Assembly has powers under the rules to appoint 
an 
ad 
hoc 
Committee 
to 
deal 
with 
the 
matter 
comprehensively. 
It does not have to go to the existing Portfolio 
Committees, you can establish an ad hoc Committee for 
10 
such purposes, am I correct? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct, that is a decision the 
House can take.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And the House can take such a 
decision - in order for such a decision to be adopted by the 
House, somebody must put a motion before the House, and 
then the House must vote on whether it supports that 
motion, correct? 
MR FROLICK:   Correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And frankly, any member of the House 
20 
can put such a motion but certainly any member of the 
majority party, who has the support of the majority party 
could put such a motion and would have good prospects of 
such a motion being supported if put, correct? 
MR FROLICK:   The practice in the African National 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 238 of 301 
 
Congress is that such motions are put by the Chief Whip of 
the majority party.   
ADV FREUND SC:   So the Chief Whip of the majority party 
could have done that, am I correct?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And the Chief Whip of the majority 
party did not do that, am I correct?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Instead, what happened was that the 
Gupta Leaks caused some discussions to take place that 
10 
you were initially not party to, and I just want to pause and 
consider those Gupta Leaks.   
Ms Mazzone has given evidence that she distributed 
- that her office had, as it were scrolled through the Gupta 
Leaks, extracted certain documents from them by as it 
were ministerial responsibility and distributed big piles of 
Gupta leaked material relevant to at least four different 
Ministers. Do you recall that?  
MR FROLICK:   I can recall that the Honourable Mazzone 
at the time referred to such excerpts or whatever she 
20 
distributed, but I cannot attest that it was distributed to all 
of them, but she did refer on more than one occasion to it.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, I am assuming that you must 
yourself have applied your mind to those very leaked 
emails, because they form the very basis of the letters you 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 239 of 301 
 
sent, am I correct?  
MR FROLICK:   Well, Chairperson, if I may, I must indicate 
that the discussion that preceded those letters, happened 
in 
a 
forum 
of 
the 
National 
Assembly 
Programming 
Committee that I was not part of.  However, in the Chief 
Whips forum meeting, the previous week, that is a closed 
meeting, the matter came up of the leaks, and then the 
Chief Whip of the majority party indicated in that meeting 
to Chief Whips that, let us see, by next week, what would 
be the best way to approach this. 
10 
If 
they 
came 
to 
that 
National 
Assembly 
Programming Committee, and after which the Chief Whip, 
as well as the Speaker felt that a direction must be given 
on how to deal with this matter.  And the decision that was 
arrived at, that the Speaker asked me to implement was to 
use the existing Portfolio Committees that are there to look 
into this matter, because those emails were very explicit, 
and it referred to specific Ministers who were holding office 
at the time.  
The view then of the Chief Whip was, and the Chief 
20 
Whip was very, very clear on it in the discussion, was that 
these Ministers must account to their Portfolio Committees, 
and that formed the basis of writing those letters to those 
different Chairpersons of committees.  
ADV FREUND SC:   If…[intervene] 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 240 of 301 
 
MR FROLICK:   My apologies, if I can just finish off 
advocate. It is not as if the issue of a possible ad hoc 
Committee was not discussed.  But we were very, very 
much mindful, on previous experiences also that we had, 
that when these ad hoc Committees are put together, it 
comes 
from 
the 
existing 
members 
of 
the 
National 
Assembly, 
it 
is 
not 
new 
members 
that 
comes 
into 
Parliament.  So members then leave their committees 
where they are appointed to, to attend to the work of the 
Ad hoc Committee, and at times, it has happened on more 
10 
than one occasion, where certain Portfolio Committees 
cannot correct to pass important decisions due to Ad hoc 
Committees that are there.  
And the Chief Whip then said in this instance, he 
would support the work to be done by the existing Portfolio 
Committees that are there and that is ultimately the 
decision that the Speaker arrived at.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Now, I think I am quoting your words, 
when I say that you said a moment ago: 
“That those two Gupta Leaks emails, were very 
20 
explicit. They made very explicit allegations and 
they referred to a number of Ministers.” 
Did I hear that correctly?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And that is what I was referring to a 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 241 of 301 
 
moment ago, when I was asking you a question about your 
own letters that were sent.  Now your own letters, we see 
an example of it on page 488 in bundle 2, 488, 489, 490. 
MR FROLICK:   I am with you. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Aright, let us take 488 as an example: 
“Dear Ms Magadzi, 
Allegations of State Capture in organs of State.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Freund.  I thought it was 
the same bundle we were using at the time; I have got the 
right one.  
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   I am sorry, Chair, Chair it is 488, 
bundle 2, may I proceed? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you may proceed I have got it now. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, Chair I apologise. 
Sometimes I just move backwards and forwards, I have 
even taken them out of there bundles. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV FREUND SC:   The letters addressed to Ms Magadzi it 
is headed: 
“Allegations of State Capture in Organs of State.” 
20 
It is a very short letter: 
“I 
am 
sure 
that 
you 
are 
aware 
of 
numerous 
allegations of State Capture, that have appeared in 
the 
media 
in 
recent 
weeks. 
Some 
of 
these 
allegations involve members of the Board of the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 242 of 301 
 
passenger rail agency of South Africa, PRASA.  I 
would 
like 
to 
request 
that 
your 
committee 
investigate the allegations within the parameters of 
the rules and report any findings were applicable to 
the National Assembly as a matter of urgency.” 
Now, I presume you meant exactly what you said.  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.  
ADV FREUND SC:   What were the allegations that 
involved 
the 
members 
of 
the 
Board 
of 
PRASA 
that 
appeared in the in the Gupta Leaks, which in your opinion, 
10 
required this committee to investigate them?  If not all of 
them, can you give us a few examples. 
MR FROLICK:   I do not have the specific issue, but the 
one it centred around how the Board was functioning, and 
it got into issues of locomotives, that was acquired, the 
relationship between the CEO and the Board at the time, 
as well as some of the statements that could have been 
attributed or could be attributed to some of the members of 
the Board.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And if we look at the at the next page 
20 
at page 489, there is an almost identical letter to the 
Chairperson of the Portfolio committee of Home Affairs.  
The real difference is just the second sentence of the first 
paragraph where you say: 
“Some of these allegations involve the former 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 243 of 301 
 
Minister 
of 
Home Affairs 
and 
the 
granting 
of 
citizenship to non-South Africans.” 
Would it be fair to guess that the non-South Africans to 
whom you were referring to were members of the Gupta 
family?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.  
ADV FREUND SC:   And the former Minister of Home 
Affairs, to whom you were referring was? 
MR FROLICK:   Former Minister of Home Affairs at the 
time was Minister Gigaba. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you, and then at page 490, an 
almost 
identical 
letter 
to 
Ms 
Rantho, 
the 
acting 
Chairperson 
of 
the 
Portfolio 
Committee 
on 
Public 
Enterprises.  Now I just want to pause before we go further 
here because we have left out a very important fact, have 
we not? 
You already knew by this time that the Portfolio 
Committee 
on 
Public 
Enterprises 
had 
itself 
already 
resolved to commence its own investigation in relation to 
allegations pertaining to Mr Molefe and Eskom, am I right?  
20 
MR FROLICK:   Yes, they were looking at certain specific 
aspects of certain departments or entities resorting under 
the Department of Public Enterprises. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Yes, and it was a landmark moment, 
was it not, because until then every committee dominated 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 244 of 301 
 
by the African National Congress, which is to say every 
committee had starkly declined to investigate allegations of 
State Capture, but Ms Rantho and her committee which 
then involved, amongst others, a recently, as it were 
removed, Minister of Finance. 
They took the view that they should be exercising 
their powers and that must have been, it must have been 
like an electric charge going around Parliament.  Things 
are changing here, am I right?  
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.  I think at one stage if I am 
10 
not mistaken Advocate Freund, you were also part of those 
proceedings.   
ADV FREUND SC:   I beg your pardon? 
MR FROLICK:   I said, if I am not mistaken, you were also 
at one stage part of those proceedings of that committee.  
ADV FREUND SC:   I think you are mistaken. 
MR FROLICK:   Or you supported them.  
ADV FREUND SC:   Ja, in these proceedings before this 
Commission, I have spoken in support of them but I 
certainly was not part personally of them at the time. 
20 
MR FROLICK:   My apologies then. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Not at all, no problem.  Now, some 
witnesses have suggested that the true explanation for the 
change of stance between starkly resisting suggestions 
that Parliament and its structures should investigate, and 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 245 of 301 
 
now in the PCPE and as a result of your four letters, we 
have looked at some of them well one, not all of them, that 
really there are factional considerations of relevance, in 
fact it has been suggested that even you personally were 
motivated by such considerations.  What’s your comment 
on that? 
MR FROLICK:   Just repeat the question in terms of 
personal factional motivations. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well what is – let’s leave you aside for 
the moment, we can back to your position in a moment, 
10 
what is being alleged by some witnesses generally is that 
the true explanation for the change of heart and the 
decision contrary to the practice of the last five years or 
more of not pursuing investigations in Parliament is 
explained by the different factions that were emerging 
within the African National Congress, and that as it were 
one such faction now had sufficient influence to finally 
cause Parliament to do what it should have been doing all 
along, which was to investigate these allegations.    
 
Now what is your comment on that in general 
20 
terms? 
MR FROLICK:  Well those are allegations of factions and I 
did 
not 
personally 
hear 
the 
context 
in 
which 
those 
allegations have been made, but let me – Chairperson if I 
may – just digress, just for a short moment, it won’t be 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 246 of 301 
 
long, to say that in terms of the African National Congress 
in Parliament, the African National Congress is a very big 
church and in there you find members with different views, 
different 
political 
philosophy 
around 
certain 
specific 
issues, and those play out regularly in terms of whatever 
matter is in front of the ANC, so to just describe it to a 
certain factional thing or whatever is happening but one 
thing that I can say is that the leadership given by the 
former Chief Whip of the ANC certainly assisted the 
process for these different forums to be established and to 
10 
deal with these matters. 
 
He mentioned in one of the budget vote debates 
that he participated in, one of his first budget vote debates 
that he participated in as the Chief Whip of the majority 
party, he said that given the scathing judgment that was 
given on Parliament by the Constitutional Court it cannot 
be that the ANC stand back and not deal with some of 
these issues.   It must be dealt with speedily, it must be 
dealt with as the issues arise, and the different structures 
must be given the necessary support to do their work to 
20 
the best of their ability, so at any given time, around any 
issue this thing that people think that everybody in the 
ANC and Parliament is just following a party line or just 
doing it that way is absolutely incorrect.    
There 
are 
different, 
different 
views 
about 
the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 247 of 301 
 
smallest of issues that arise that come to the fore,  so the 
perception of the allegations of different factions it could 
be that it is mentioned in that way but certainly I can say 
that there was from the leadership portrayed by the Chief 
of the majority party a clear direction that was given, given 
the judgment that was given on Parliament on how to deal 
with these matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I thought ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   No, I am ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Freund, I thought Mr 
10 
Frolick I heard evidence whether it was last or the week, or 
last week I am not sure, I thought I heard evidence to the 
effect that one Portfolio Committees other that or that the 
majority party, members of the majority party in a particular 
Portfolio Committee they will meet alone prior to the 
meeting of the Portfolio Committee in order to decide how 
they would approach issues that would arise at a particular 
meeting, or if that is not what I was told then I was told 
that there is a study group where issues are discussed, 
that is within the majority party, with a view to ensuring 
20 
that members of the majority party who serve in a 
particular committee, or in different committees, know what 
stance to take on certain issues.   Is that not so? 
MR FROLICK:   Chairperson if I can respond to the first 
part.  I am aware and when I was a member of Parliament, 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 248 of 301 
 
not in designated as one of the office bearers in Parliament 
now I am aware that since 1994 there is a system that is 
called study groups within the African National Congress in 
Parliament, 
and 
members 
of 
the 
committees, 
the 
Chairpersons and so forth, they all form part of the study 
group of the African National Congress and that is where 
the deliberate on matters that will appear on the agenda, 
or they decide on a certain political approach in dealing 
with those type of matters. 
 
I am not aware that – and I know at one stage there 
10 
was an attempt to say that the skills should match the 
deployment to a specific Portfolio Committee, but that – 
after each election it is very, very difficult because you sit 
with new members all the time, and while an attempt was 
made by the different Chief Whips at the time to deploy 
members who have certain skills to these different Portfolio 
Committees it is really a mixed result that has been 
achieved Deputy Chief Justice, and may I add with the high 
poll over rate of members of Parliament generally from all 
political parties it is sometimes as if after every general 
20 
election we start afresh and new members must be trained, 
and it is on the job training that takes place because the 
institution and the lawmaking process does not stop and 
cease 
their 
activities, 
and 
those 
are 
generally 
the 
conditions under which members of Parliament work, but 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 249 of 301 
 
there was definitely an attempt to deploy the correct skills, 
but it had a mixed result. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I was raising this issue because I 
understood you to be saying, and you must tell me if I 
misunderstood you, to be saying that members of the 
majority party, but maybe you meant members of all parties 
in a committee, members of the majority party would come 
and express different views as individuals, that was my 
understanding of what you are saying, and that seemed to 
be inconsistent with this evidence that I am saying I heard, 
10 
because that evidence suggested members of the majority 
party by the time they come to a meeting of the particular 
Portfolio Committee they have had a discussion, maybe in 
a meeting of the study group where there has been 
consensus to say this is the approach we will take, or this 
is the view that we would take, so that is why I was raising 
it.  What do you have to say about that? 
MR FROLICK:   No, no the latter part of your intervention 
now Chief Whip, Chief, Deputy Chief Justice, Chairperson, 
is correct, that there are study groups where members will 
20 
sit and they will deliberate and they agree on a common 
approach that will be adopted when they go to the different 
parliamentary forums. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.   Mr Freund? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Thank you Chair, now ...[intervenes]  
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 250 of 301 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Freund we are about two or three 
minutes to seven o’clock and I am quite happy to continue 
but if we are going to be still sometime maybe we should 
take an adjournment at seven o’clock or ... 
MR FROLICK:   It would certainly be ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...for ten minutes or so. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair it would suit me personally if we 
could take a short break now and then resume whatever 
time you deem fit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright, let us take a short 
10 
adjournment then.  Shall we say we resume at ten past 
seven? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Fine, thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, we adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us proceed.  Mr Freund.   
MR FREUND SC: Thank you Chair.  Mr Frolick, we were 
talking about portfolio committees and you accepted that 
20 
the study group system is a form of caucusing in which 
decisions are made before a portfolio committee meeting 
commences and then the members of the committee in the 
study group act in accordance with that decision when they 
fulfil 
their 
roles 
in 
the 
portfolio 
committee. 
 
Did 
I 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 251 of 301 
 
understand that correctly? 
MR FROLICK:  Well, it is a discussion forum that is a 
feature of the parliamentary process of as far as the ANC 
is concerned, I know other political parties do it as well.  
The members serving on a committee, they get together 
and they decide these are the parameters or this is the 
approach that will be used there, but in no way does it 
restrict a member of the political party, in this instance the 
ANC to ask questions.  Questions that arise out of the 
briefings that are there, that was not properly discussed 
10 
and that is the nature of it.  It differs from study group to 
study group of course, depending on the issues that are 
there.   
MR FREUND SC:  This Commission has heard evidence to 
the effect that study groups exercise real discipline on 
members and predetermine what approach is to be adopted 
in portfolio committee meetings.  Now it is not clear to me 
whether you are disputing that or accepting that.  
MR FROLICK:  Well, my experience from having served on 
the study groups is that we set the broad approach that will 
20 
be set there and if there are any issues that may arise that 
was not discussed in the study group, there are members 
who are deemed, either the whip of the committee, the 
wings to give direction or senior members of the committee 
to give direction, but yes.  Study groups do exercise some 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 252 of 301 
 
form of discipline in terms of what is happening in the 
different portfolio committees.  Whether it is attendance, 
whether it is preparations by the members and so forth. 
MR FREUND SC:  And what stance should be adopted on 
particular motions, for example a request that the portfolio 
committee should support a particular inquiry? 
MR FROLICK:  That will be part of the discussions of the 
study group, yes.  
MR FREUND SC:  Yes, and what is true for the study group 
and the portfolio committee at what I might call the mini 
10 
level is also true at the maxi level, at the level of the 
parliamentary caucus and the decisions taken on the floor 
of the national assembly.  The caucus exercises a similar 
type of function.  Am I right? 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct.  
MR FREUND SC:  Now is it correct that, well let me read to 
you some evidence that has been placed before this 
Commission.  This is in the affidavit of Ms Khoza, Dr 
Khoza.  It is at page, Bundle 1 page 773.  You will not have 
this.  I just want to read it to you and then I am going to 
20 
give you an opportunity to comment on it.  She says in 
paragraph 13.8: 
 
“In our case the ANC as governing party requires 
its members of parliament both to vote in the 
national assembly and to exercise their portfolio 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 253 of 301 
 
committee oversight duties in accordance with 
instructions received from it.” 
 
I think so far you would agree with that? 
MR FROLICK:  Well, I do not, I have ... I do not agree with 
the wording that is used by the person that you are 
quoting.  I have not seen the context also in which she is 
raising that, but what would generally happen is, is that the 
ANC whether it is in a portfolio committee or in the house 
will have an approach on how to deal with these matters.   
MR FREUND SC:  Alright, and then she continues.  This is 
10 
Dr Makhosi Khoza, you remember a figure of some 
prominence in controversy.  She says this ...[intervenes]  
MR FROLICK:  Those are your words, not mine.  
MR FREUND SC:  Those are my words.  She continues as 
follows: 
 
“No decision of any significance is permitted by 
the 
ANC 
to 
be 
taken 
by 
its 
members 
of 
parliament without prior instructions from the 
party 
itself. 
 
These 
instructions 
frequently 
emanate from office bearers who have not been 
20 
elected as members of parliament.  Depending 
on the importance of the issue to the ANC, such 
decisions may be made by the so called top six 
most senior office bearers of the party, or lower 
down e.g. at ANC strategy committee meetings.” 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 254 of 301 
 
 
Now do you dispute that factually? 
MR FROLICK:  Well, I have a view that I will not bring 
across or put across the same way as a former member 
Makhosi 
Khoza. 
 
I 
also 
had 
a 
very 
good 
working 
relationship with her, I must add.  No Chairperson, the ANC 
always stresses the importance of what is called the 
deployees in parliament.  The deployees in parliament to 
process matters and out of any given topic or situation, 
most of the times you will have different divergent views 
exterminating from it.  Now our constitutional design is of 
10 
such a nature that political parties and the leadership have 
a lot of power and influence in terms of what is happening 
to 
their 
elected 
representatives 
in 
the 
different 
legislatures, whether it is local, provincial or national 
government.  Whatever they are doing, and that is also the 
feature of what will happen in parliament, but usually there 
are very, very long protracted discussions and I have 
experience of this in the ANC on what needs to be done, 
but at a certain point the leadership of the party must give 
direction if there is not a common ground that have been 
20 
reached or if positions that are taken, that are contrary to 
the manifesting of the African National Congress that was 
put in front of the electorate or of policy positions that are 
there and for those type of matters, yes.  There will be 
direction that will be given by the top leadership.   
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 255 of 301 
 
MR FREUND SC:  And let’s be clear what we’re talking 
about here.  As a matter of routine, the Secretary General 
of the party and or the Deputy Secretary General of the 
party, attend meetings of caucus at which they convey 
instructions to members of parliament as to what stances 
they should adopt.  Is that correct? 
MR FROLICK:  Well, there is not a regular routine as far 
as that is concerned.  The chief work of the majority party, 
is the leader of the ANC in parliament and serves as the 
contact 
point 
between 
the 
members 
of 
the ANC 
in 
10 
parliament 
and 
the 
officials 
of 
the 
African 
National 
Congress that are commonly referred to as the top six or 
Lethuli House.  What you do find is, is that on certain 
occasions and for the past 20 years that I have been in the 
caucus of the ANC, you will find that once or maybe twice 
a year the officials of the ANC will attend the caucus.  
Sometimes it is once a year, and sometimes when there 
are certain messages that must be brought across in terms 
of outcomes of MEC discussions, in terms of preparation 
for election and so forth.  So it is not a routine that they do 
20 
attend caucus.  Most of the time they are not there.  
MR FREUND SC:  And I think it is a matter, I do not think 
there is any factual controversy about this.  When it came 
to the series of votes of no confidence in former President 
Zuma, would that have, would there have been a series of 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 256 of 301 
 
occasions in which either the Secretary General, the then 
Secretary General or the then Deputy Secretary General or 
both would have come and conveyed instructions from the 
party as to how members should vote in relation to votes of 
no confidence? 
MR FROLICK:  They will convey a position taken by the 
officials of the ANC. 
MR FREUND SC:  And the position was not to support such 
motions? 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct.  
10 
MR FREUND SC:  And the position was if you support such 
notions, you are acting in breach of your obligations to the 
ANC and you expose yourself to discipline.  
MR 
FROLICK: 
 
Now 
I 
just 
want 
to 
pause 
there 
Chairperson, because my experience have also shown that 
at times there has been different Secretary Generals of the 
ANC and Deputy Secretary Generals of the ANC, but it is 
not as if they arrive in a caucus of the ANC and start 
lecturing the members and say this is what you will do and 
that is what you will do.  There is usually a lot of other 
20 
interactions that take place at different levels of the 
movement and then when it comes to that particular issue, 
they will convey what is basically the position that has 
been agreed upon, and even at that point they allow for 
descent.  They allow for members and I know in one or two 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 257 of 301 
 
occasions it has happened that members will approach 
from caucus, afterwards the Chief of the ANC and say we 
do not agree with this or I do not agree with this and I am 
going to vote against it, or I am going to abstain myself 
from the voting process, but yes the constitutional design 
is there that the members of the ANC and all political 
parties who are in parliament are there on a party political 
ticket and the constitutional design indicates that it is 
political parties that are represented there.  However, how 
you 
exercise 
as 
a 
member 
of 
parliament, 
your 
10 
constitutional obligation is a matter of your own personal 
conscience.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, I am sorry Mr Frolick.  I am going 
to ask you to repeat your answer because I think it is 
quite, it may be quite important, but towards the end I was 
not sure what you were saying in terms of are there 
circumstances where a party would be, a member of the 
party would be allowed to vote on the base of his or her 
own conscience and if so, under what circumstances?  Are 
there a party, are there circumstances where a voting 
20 
according to one’s conscience would not be allowed, and if 
so, what are those circumstances, or whether the position 
is that as long as the party has issued its position, you say 
we 
expect 
our 
members 
to 
vote 
along 
these 
lines, 
everybody is bound to follow.  So I just want you to give 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 258 of 301 
 
your answer again because I want to have clarity on that.  
MR FROLICK:  Well, thank you Chairperson to provide me 
with clarity again.  I say the constitutional design is of 
such a nature that political parties are represented in 
parliament and there is members from those parties who 
are there.  So when it comes to certain issues you do find 
that the leadership of the party will convey a certain 
position to these members of parliament and in this case to 
that of the ANC, but there is usually a vigorous debate and 
discussion, 
not 
necessarily 
confined 
to 
that 
caucus 
10 
meeting only, but it can also happen in other forums.  
However, I am aware that in certain instances and that is 
when it comes to certain religious views or certain other 
positions that members may have, and if I may sight the 
just coming to my mind now, was in terms of the 
termination of pregnancy, a bill that was processed in the 
late 90’s and also in terms of the civil union bill that was 
processed by parliament.  I am aware that there is 
members who went to the Chief and said they cannot 
support this, and ultimately when it comes to the different 
20 
votes and things that are taking place there, it is the 
members arrive at their decision based of course of the 
partly political positions that they hold but also in terms of 
their constitutional responsibilities that they must exercise.  
CHAIRPERSON:  So the position, would it be fair to say 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 259 of 301 
 
your experience, you are saying your experience is that 
except in very limited cases over the past 20 or whatever 
years since you have been in parliament, except in very 
limited cases, once the party has taken a position on an 
issue, 
members 
are 
required 
to 
vote 
and 
speak 
in 
accordance with that position? 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct, Deputy Chief Justice.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, and you say the only or the onetime 
which you remember is where some members sought to be 
allowed to vote according to their conscience or because 
10 
the issues that they were to vote on affected their religious 
beliefs.  
MR FROLICK:  Those are two, and then I also now recall 
Chairperson, while you were mentioning this, I also recall 
that there was also an instance and I remember the 
Honourable Ben Turock felt very, very strongly about a 
certain situation and he decided not to, he abstained from 
voting.  He absented himself from the national assembly, 
so of course when that happens there will be a discussion 
yes, but which members did not vote for the party.  The 
20 
opposition also does it.  If you vote with the ruling party, 
then you have sold out on your principles.  So that is part 
and parcel of this political climate and atmosphere of 
proportional representation that we live in and yes, the 
constitutional design of proportional representation gives 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 260 of 301 
 
power, a lot of power to the parties and the party bosses to 
determine.  Ultimately, especially when it comes to a 
motion of no confidence in the leader or the head of state 
to come to caucus and to give those type of directives.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe when one takes into account a 
situation where the issue that is going to arise in 
parliament on which members would be required to vote, 
relate to the policy issue.  An issue on which the majority 
party has a particular policy.  Maybe it is understanding for 
the party to insist that its members should vote in order to 
10 
defend or promote the policy, and maybe members cannot 
complain 
about 
that, 
because 
when 
they 
came 
to 
parliament, they came to parliament knowing what the 
policy of the party is on those issues.  But where it is not 
really a matter of policy, maybe it is a matter of saying 
there are too many allegations of corruption directed at the 
President who happens to be the President of the party.  
There is just too much that we hear that appears to me not 
to involve policy of the party and then there is a vote of, a 
motion of no confidence in the President.  It seems to me 
20 
and you must just give me your perspective.  It seems to 
me that one, the case for the party to instruct its members 
to vote one way or another, might be less convincing as 
compared to one where it is a question of policy, because I 
guess no party would have gone to the voters and say vote 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 261 of 301 
 
for us, we will suppress exposure of corruption and we will 
defend our members if there are allegations of corruption.  
One kind of expects that in that kind of situation, members 
should be allowed to vote as they see the matter and 
obviously the party would have may have had some 
discussion and see what they do, but of course maybe I am 
just showing that I was never a politician, I am expecting 
something that maybe you know, is unrealistic.  But there 
would be concern among you know, a substantial I would 
imagine portion of the population if they thought rightly or 
10 
wrongly that the President is in controversy of corruption 
for a long time and the party that the electorate voted for 
does not allow their members to vote as they see the 
situation should this President continue to be President 
despite all of these controversies relating to corruption or 
should he be retained.  What do you have to say?  Again, 
maybe I am it just shows I am not a politician and I am 
being unrealistic, but one would like a situation where if 
there are such allegations, members could vote as they 
see the situation.  If they do not see a problem, they do 
20 
not see a problem.  If they see it, they see it.  
 MR FROLICK:  Chairperson, you can now you have an 
idea of the complexities that is brought about in terms of 
representative 
democracy 
involving 
the 
proportional 
representation, 
appealed 
proportional 
representation 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 262 of 301 
 
system, but I must hasten to say and policy issues as you 
are correct is quite, you can say it is this way or that way.  
You support black economic empowerment or you do not 
support it and if your member supports it in the house, 
then you still fire them.  You get rid of them.  You move 
them sideways, but when it comes to motions of no 
confidence in terms of the head of state it is a political, it 
is a political matter.  A heavy political matter is processed 
and I can say that there are a range of different views 
when it comes to that point.  Some agree that they will 
10 
agree with this motion and others will say no, we are not 
ready in terms of effecting a change in the head of state at 
this stage.  We are not prepared.  Do you understand?  
The former chief also said it in a certain motion that came 
at a certain time.  I think I articulated it if I am not 
mistaken, to say that it will send shock waves through the 
electorate because simply the country is not ready for it, 
so whichever motion of no confidence there is, it is a 
political notion and in that notion of no confidence there is 
instances yes that are mentioned this, that and the other, 
20 
and being politicians that politicians are they argue each 
and every point either in favour or against or you will find 
inside the political party they have a range of different 
views that are there, but ultimately the constitutional 
design is of such a nature that the power resorts in the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 263 of 301 
 
party and that has a major influence on how politicians 
generally behave at any tier of government.  I recently had 
experience of where, at another tier of government where 
there was a change in the Executive Mayor that all these, 
it is even worse at that level that is happening.  So we 
must look at our electoral design.  It will be an opportune 
moment to re-assess and to see but also something that 
becomes very important is the power that is exercised by 
the Presiding Officer.  The speaker in this instance or in 
the absence of the speaker, the deputy speaker when 
10 
these type of motions are dealt with, because I can recall 
that there was such a notion of no confidence.  It was a 
secret baled that was conducted to give that type of, for 
the lack of a better word Chairperson, protection to 
members of parliament to decide how they want to vote, 
but still afterwards based on various reasons people found 
out one way or another, rightfully or wrongfully who voted 
in a particular way.  So it is unless we look at the design of 
our representative politics at national and provincial level, 
we will sit with this challenge and dilemma that we have as 
20 
to members of these legislatures of parliament to exercise 
their free vote as they wish.   
CHAIRPERSON:  It may well be that no majority party 
would like its leader who happens to be the President of 
the country, to be removed by way of a vote of no 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 264 of 301 
 
confidence unless or except in certain really exceptional 
circumstances, but then one would hope that if a party 
adopts that stance in terms of saying we do not want our 
leader to be removed like that in parliament or maybe to be 
removed by the opposition with the assistance of some 
from 
among 
ourselves, 
because 
of 
allegations 
of 
wrongdoing and what corruption or whatever, but then 
would it not be better that in such a case then at least a 
party can say these are serious allegations against our 
own leader.  Therefore we as a party must investigate that, 
10 
so that if we establish that it is really something serious, 
then we can ask him to resign or recall him or her or 
whatever, but it might be unacceptable to, for a party or 
the majority party to say on the one hand to its members in 
parliament do not vote in support of this motion of no 
confidence, even though there are very serious allegations 
against the President, but then it does not do anything 
about them.  It does not investigate them itself, in order to 
see whether as a party it can arrive at a point where it 
says is this person still deserving of being in that position 
20 
representing our party.  Do you have a comment on that?  
in other words one scenario is where the majority party 
does not, or want all its members to resist the motion of no 
confidence in the President who is their leader, who has 
lots of allegations of corruption against him, but it does 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 265 of 301 
 
nothing itself, whereas in another scenario it might say do 
not vote with your position, but we as a party will conduct 
an internal investigation and see whether it is still fit to 
continue in that position and we will take whatever action. 
MR FROLICK:  Yes.  Chairperson, my response will be very 
brief.  There is something that is called intra party 
dynamics, and the ANC is no different than any other 
political party when it comes to intra, the dynamics inside 
the political party, to arrive at that specific position and 
from where I sit, that I could see that that is a debate that 
10 
started quite seriously at that stage amongst members of 
parliament of the African National Congress, and into 2017 
but there is another dynamic Chairperson that I just want 
to briefly refer to, and that is your intra party dynamics 
goes with conferences of the different political parties and 
in that whole political climate, you have those who feel 
firmly that you must go this way and then there is others 
who feel no, no, no wait, wait, wait.  You want to abuse the 
situation now to deal with either he is the head of state or 
with a certain member of the executive because that 
20 
alliance usually gets drawn as you go towards the intra 
party platforms and conferences that are taking place and 
that has an influence, but I do agree it is better for the 
political parties self to, and in this instance the African 
National Congress, to have that mechanism in place so 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 266 of 301 
 
who the individual is who is occupying the office that at the 
intra party level we do have the necessary mechanisms in 
place instead of waiting for the opposition to do so.  
CHAIRPERSON:  And of course I guess that in such a 
situation where, in such a situation it would be important 
that maybe you have disciplinary structures and processes, 
which are beyond approach and the people who make 
decisions of a disciplinary nature, should be people who 
cannot gratibly be accused of advancing the interest of any 
faction.  Maybe it would be people who no longer want any 
10 
positions in government or in the party.  Maybe very senior 
people and people with credibility so that you might have a 
situation where most reasonable people would say if those 
people have made a decision that so and so must be 
subjected to a disciplinary hearing, we will not question it 
because we know how, we know their level of integrity and 
we know that they are not going to be manipulated by 
anybody.  Even if some people can make some accusations 
because 
there 
will 
always 
be 
people 
who 
make 
accusations, but the majority of people will say if those 
20 
decisions are taken by those people, everybody must you 
know accept that there is no factionalism involved, there is 
no political agenda involved.  All that they are looking at is 
the discipline of the party and its members.  That is what 
may well work.  
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 267 of 301 
 
MR FROLICK:  That is the idle situation as you have 
articulated it Honourable Chairperson, but in this terrain of 
politics I can tell you that unless political parties in the 
current 
system, 
constitutional 
design 
that 
we 
have, 
continuously 
evaluate 
and 
re-evaluate 
the 
internal 
disciplinary procedures and move towards that point, then 
we will move in the correct direction.  Moving in the right 
direction, but not only putting such structures in place.  
Making it part of the constitution of the political party to 
say this is it, you have joined.  This is the constitution that 
10 
you said that you accept and that you will support and that 
you will implement and if there is a sound of that, then 
those type of questions should not arise, but we must 
strengthen 
that 
to 
avoid 
the 
situations 
where 
interpretations can be made or may be made to say it is 
factional and remind the Chairperson and I know we cannot 
compare the two situations with each other when it comes 
to this thing of the free vote, everyone voting as they can.  
Now in the United States, in the congress and in the 
senate we could see what happened, where a situation 
20 
plays out where seven republican senators decided that 
the President should be impeached and they are being held 
by the political party, but in private some of them are 
supported 
and 
then 
even 
beyond 
we 
find 
that 
the 
constituency, the people who voted for them say to them 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 268 of 301 
 
we are not going to re-elect you because you went against 
the party.  So the party system in terms of [indistinct 
00:03:48 ] internationally is so deeply entrenched that it 
allows for this type of situation to play itself out in the 
open. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I guess that as the Commission looks at 
what went wrong for certain things to happen over you 
know a certain number of years and what should, what 
measures should be put in place to minimise the prospects 
that there could be a repeat, as the Commission looks at 
10 
that, it needs to accept that there are certain realities that 
are there, whether one likes them or not and that includes 
the role of parties in the parliamentary system or in our 
democracy.  They play very important role and there are 
certain things that might be difficult to change, unless the 
change comes within the parties themselves.  
MR FROLICK:  No Chairperson, I am with you on that 
point.  I want to say that there is an opportunity that is 
currently presenting itself to all the political parties 
represented in parliament and also stakeholders in the 
20 
society and outside.  The Constitutional Court made a 
ruling to say that independent candidates may be elected 
and stand as candidates to be elected to the national 
assembly and the provincial legislatures.  That is opening 
up a platform for debate, where amongst others these 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 269 of 301 
 
types of matters can also be exhausted so that we get 
more input.  We get input from all the different political 
parties, from the largest to the smallest to see in terms of 
implementing this decision and ruling of the Constitutional 
Court, the impact that it will have on our arrangements, 
democratic arrangements in the different legislatures, how 
is it going to be done.  is it not also an opportunity to re-
look the entire electoral system and to arrive at something 
else, so that we can start dealing, I am not saying it is 
going to solve all the problems, but dealing with some of 
10 
the problems that and challenges that have manifested 
itself due to this constitutional design of representative 
democracy. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, thank you.  Mr Freund. 
MR FREUND SC:  Yes, thank you Chair.  I will try not to be 
too long, but there were some issues that we digressed 
from.  
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  
MR FREUND SC:  When we got onto the macro level, and 
they are much the same issues  but looked at at a slightly 
20 
lower level.  Now I want to put to you Mr Frolick, what Ms 
Rhonto said.  You will recall Ms Rhonto was the Acting 
Chair of the portfolio committee on public enterprises and 
she spoke about the divisions within the caucus in relation 
to this very issue of investigating allegations of the type 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 270 of 301 
 
we are currently concerned with and she says whilst 
members of the ANC’s PCPE study group, that is that 
particular study group, supported the idea of instituting an 
inquiry.  There was a quest to start with the inquiry from a 
substantial number of members in the ANC parliamentary 
caucus, who argued that the inquiry would cause divisions 
of the taint integrity of the ANC.  Of particular concern to 
some members of the caucus, was the risk to the 
reputation 
of 
the 
party. 
 
These 
views 
were 
openly 
communicated to me in clear and emphatic terms.  Now can 
10 
you confirm that you also observed such pressures? 
MR FROLICK:  Well, firstly Chairperson I can confirm that 
the Honourable Rhonto at times would come to me or to the 
Chief to give a report back on what transpired at certain 
meetings.  I can also indicate that she shared some of 
these concerns with me.  At one stage I had to inform the 
Secretary because she was giving an explanation of an 
incident where she thinks she is being intimidated outside 
of parliament, or the place in the parliamentary village 
where she was staying.  I brought it to the attention of the 
20 
speaker and the parliamentary protection services, the 
acting head of those services were asked to look into the 
matter with the relevant law enforcement authorities so 
that it can be established whether it is real or not, if there 
is any physical threat to her, but ...[intervenes]  
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 271 of 301 
 
MR FREUND SC:  I think you are missing the point of the 
question.  The point of the question is whether there was 
political resistance expressed by MP’s we should not be 
doing this because it is embarrassing to the party. 
MR FROLICK:  There were different political views around 
that 
and 
that 
is 
one 
of 
the 
views 
that 
was 
there 
Chairperson, and those views some of the members felt 
very strong that it should not happen in this way.  Some of 
the members queried where was this decision taken, where 
did it come from and also who gave the final authority for 
10 
this to be done.  Whether it was now as you have stated 
earlier advocate, the public enterprises committee that 
started with some of the work around the allegations that 
was made, or the other committees that was there.  It 
surely came across as something that was not supported 
by all ANC members, but as I said earlier ANC members 
have different views around these issues and personally I 
can attest that there were serious questions that were 
asked as to why this is done, who is being targeted and 
why are we doing it in this particular way as it was never, 
20 
ever done before.  
MR FREUND SC:  Yes, now Ms Rhonto does go on to say 
that although she experienced that kind of pressure from a 
number, from a substantial body of numbers of the ANC 
caucus, she says on the other hand that amongst others Mr 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 272 of 301 
 
Ntembu supported her, encouraged her to proceed and if I 
hear you correctly, you would consider yourself one of 
those persons who was encouraging her to proceed.  
Would that be correct? 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct.  
MR FREUND SC:  But she also says this, and this is in 
paragraph 11.5 at page 553 of Volume 2.  She says: 
 
“I should note at this point that some ANC 
caucus members made attempts to stop the 
inquiry.” 
10 
 
That is the inquiry of portfolio committee on 
public enterprises, call it the Eskom inquiry. 
 
“Some of them approached the public protector 
to try and get her assistance to stop the inquiry, 
arguing that it would duplicate the work by the 
Commission 
yet 
to 
be 
appointed 
by 
the 
President.  I am not aware of any response by 
her to this. 
 
That is the public protector: 
 
“When the issue was raised in caucus, the Chief 
20 
reprimanded those members that they have not 
been authorised to do this by the ANC.” 
 
Do you have any knowledge of this incident? 
MR FROLICK:  I cannot recall a specific request being 
made to the public protector to get involved into that type 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 273 of 301 
 
of situation.  What I can recall is that the Chief would at 
more than one occasion, and then later in 2017 I think it 
was October or November, the then Deputy President who 
is now President of the country, came to caucus to re-
enforce the importance of parliamentary committees to 
conduct these type of be it inquiry or investigation or 
whatever, because committees decide whichever way they 
want to go and the Deputy President was very supportive, 
but the chief was always very, very clear and on occasions 
when you find that the Chairperson of this committee or 
10 
other Chairpersons that letters were written to, will come 
and they are uncertain as to what is going to happen next, 
because they experienced this type of other views around 
these inquiries and they felt that they needed further 
direction.  There was always very clear direction from the 
Chief and also then later from the then Deputy President 
for committees to do this work. 
MR FREUND SC:  Well, I have no reason to doubt your 
evidence when you say that Mr Ntembu from a certain 
moment that you have described, were supportive of the 
20 
portfolio committee’s investigation in public enterprise.  I 
have no reason to doubt your evidence when you say that 
he was party to the discussion which led to your June 2017 
letters, but by the same token I want to put to you for your 
comment, that this was not a new problem in June of 2017 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 274 of 301 
 
and that one of the features that best explains the failure 
of parliament to have acted sooner in a proper and 
appropriate manner in the exercise of its oversight and 
duties, is what is described by Makhosi Khoza in paragraph 
13.6 of her affidavit.  This is Bundle 1, page 773.  She 
says this: 
 
“I am convinced that the State Capture and 
corruption events of the recent past could have 
been far better addressed and perhaps resolved 
had it not been for the political culture of trying 
10 
to please the leadership, but this requires brave 
employees working with skill and determination 
in the fairways of submittable obstacles.” 
 
So she is really identifying firstly the power 
relations between senior and junior, and secondly the 
political culture and she is saying those two factors 
together actually go a long way to explaining what she 
regards as a favour by parliament to have properly 
exercised its oversight duties in respect of the issues we 
are presently talking about.  What is your view on that? 
20 
MR FROLICK:  Well, my view firstly is on the previous 
occasion Chairperson, I mentioned the issue of power 
relations between not all, but I have experienced and seen 
over the years between study groups, committees and 
members of the executive, and so forth but in terms of the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 275 of 301 
 
culture, the culture or political culture of the ANC is the 
political culture of the ANC in terms of how things are done 
and how things are being processed.  So my view is that 
there was especially after the Constitutional Court ruling in 
2015, there was and with the arrival of the new Chief whip, 
there 
was 
a 
new 
dimension 
in 
terms 
of 
how 
does 
parliament and in effect the ANC in parliament do their 
oversight work to effect and ensure accountability by 
members of the executive.  
MR FREUND SC:  And when you refer to a Constitutional 
10 
Court judgment in 2015, I am assuming you must be 
referring to the Nkandla judgment, would that be correct? 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct.  
MR FREUND SC:  And what you say, I understand this 
point of view.  You say that that judgment emphasised from 
the perspective of the Constitutional Court, parliament’s 
not only rights, but duties to hold the executive to account 
and made it clear that parliament actually in that instance 
had failed to do what was required of parliament by the 
constitution.  That is what you had in mind when you say 
20 
that that had an influence on the developing or emerging, 
we might call it better culture of oversight.  Am I 
understanding correctly? 
MR FROLICK:  Yes, the Constitutional Court judgment was 
an important judgment and we respect that judgment and it 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 276 of 301 
 
is because of that reason that we started taking a very 
deep and do some introspection as to how some of these 
matters must be raised, that it is not necessarily a 
situation where you can say that you know what, we are 
doing the oversight, but it requires more work and clearer 
political leadership when it comes to this type of work.  
You 
must 
remember 
Advocate 
Freund, 
through 
the 
Chairperson, the Chief whip of the majority party in any 
legislature, carries enormous political clout, and from that 
perspective and on the back of the Constitutional Court 
10 
judgment, you started seeing things unfolding in the way 
that it did and the speaker was supportive of this.  
MR FREUND SC:  Now you said that it needs more work 
and I cannot remember your word, I think you said decisive 
political leadership or better political leadership, and that 
leadership obviously would include the Chief whip, but it 
would in the context of me talking about, I am putting it to 
you for comment.  It would also include the President of 
the nation who was then the President of the African 
National Congress and the top six of the ANC.  They were 
20 
key elements of the leadership whose altered state of mind 
was required if parliament was going effectively to exercise 
its oversight responsibilities.  Do you agree or disagree 
with that? 
MR FROLICK:  Well, I will say that the Chief whip as far as 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 277 of 301 
 
I know and in discussions that we have had on numerous 
occasions, this was a matter that he, he was not afraid to 
take it up with anyone.  He took it up with the officials.  He 
took it up directly the link between the Chief whip’s office 
to the headquarters of the AND Lethuli House through the 
Secretary General and he would come and say but you 
know, during discussions that we had as colleagues and 
comrades, that this is not moving fast enough.  This is not 
happening in the right way, but we must always remember 
that this happens in the context of a bigger political 
10 
environment in the African National Congress. 
MR FREUND SC:  That I understand, but what I want to put 
to you for a very specific comment is whether you agree or 
disagree that if this project is to be successful, this project 
or proper oversight over the executive when there are 
allegations, serious allegations made against very senior 
members of the executive, it is essential that the top 
leadership of the party, the President, the top six, the 
NWC, the NEC all had to commit to this, absent that this is 
not going to work.  
20 
MR FROLICK:  That is correct.  
MR FREUND SC:  Well, now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Freund. 
MR FREUND SC:  Not at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Frolic, is it expecting too much of the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 278 of 301 
 
majority party in parliament, well for the majority party to 
take the position that says any member of our party who 
gets himself or herself involved in corruption is acting 
contrary to the values that this party stands for, such a 
member is betraying the values that this party stands for 
and it does not matter what his or her position is in the 
party, whether he or she is the President or just an 
ordinary member, and members of our party who are in 
parliament are not expected to protect any Minister, Deputy 
President or President of the party against whom there are 
10 
allegations of corruption because corruption is something 
that is totally at odds with this party’s values, and actually 
any party, member of the party in parliament who is found 
to protect from scrutiny any Minister, any DG from scrutiny 
in regard to allegations of corruption, would be himself or 
herself 
acting 
contrary 
to 
the 
values 
of 
this 
party.  
Therefore we say from now on Ministers who come from 
this party, a Deputy President or President who comes from 
this party, they must expect no protection from any of our 
members of parliament when there are allegations of 
20 
corruption and therefore they must know that they will be 
on their own, because when it comes to corruption we 
expect our members in parliament to really do their job.  It 
does not matter what the Minister ’s position in the party or 
what anybody’s position is in the party.  That is something 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 279 of 301 
 
that we will not tolerate.  Is it expecting too much of the 
governing or the ruling party to take that position?   
MR FROLICK:  Honourable Chairperson, no it is not 
expecting too much.   
CHAIRPERSON:  But it does not look like it has happened.  
At least indeed, I may be in terms of words speaking 
maybe somebody has said that, but in terms of actions and 
in terms of the message to members of parliament, the kind 
of evidence I have heard has not told me that that is the 
message that has been put through and if it has not been 
10 
put through, the question would arise what would the party 
lose by taking that position.  Not just in terms of speeches, 
in terms of statements, of course the statements might be 
important, but actually making sure that the lift expedience 
of parliament is that members of the ruling party in 
parliament, when it comes to corruption, allegations of 
corruption by Ministers, DG’s or officials within government 
departments and SOE’s who may be members of the party, 
that will simply not be tolerated and no member of the 
ruling 
party 
will 
feel 
that 
there 
will 
be 
adverse 
20 
consequences if they really take a strong stand in public, 
in a committee meeting or in the national assembly against 
their own comrade against whom there are allegations of 
corruption.  Is it too much for South Africans to expect that 
that is the stance that can be taken by the ruling party and 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 280 of 301 
 
that is the stance that they can make sure it is the lift 
experience of parliament? 
MR FROLICK:  Honourable Chairperson, I agree with your 
sentiment and I can say that and that the, there is a lot of 
work that must still be done but there is a commitment and 
we have seen it from the time and from the pronouncement 
in parliament that was made by the late Chief whip of the 
ANC under very difficult conditions I might also say, at 
great personal political risk as well.  Some had to take that 
type of decision in order to move towards the next level, 
10 
but what is important is as you said we must take the 
people along so that everyone is committed towards that 
same outcome and that is work in progress and that is 
where we need to improve.  There is no excuse that I can 
put forward to say that this is the reason why it has 
happened, it has evolved, there has been lapses yes and 
we must learn from those so that it does not re-occur and 
as part of that we must strengthen our institutional designs 
to give effect to that aspiration that you have articulated 
and I fully agree with. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Mr Freund? 
MR FREUND SC:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Frolick, can we 
please try and spell out the obvious?  When you just said 
that Mr Ntembu, then Chief whip acted at great political, at 
great personal and political risk, why did you say that?  
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 281 of 301 
 
What was the great political and personal risk he was 
running? 
MR FROLICK:  Well, in discussions that I had with the late 
Honourable 
Ntembu, 
it 
became 
apparent 
that 
the 
unhappiness and dissatisfaction that was there was due to 
his approach in term of parliamentary processes and 
parliamentary oversight and at times he would joke to say 
that he does not know if he can, if he is sure that he will 
continue as the Chief whip of the majority party that 
express confidence that he has sufficient support from the 
10 
African National Congress at national level to continue in 
that role. 
MR FREUND SC:  But risk from whom? 
MR FROLICK:  Can you just repeat? 
MR FREUND SC:  But risk from whom?  I am not disputing 
this, I just want you to spell it out.   
MR FROLICK:  Well, it is I have just said from inside the 
African National Congress representatives in parliament 
there was dissatisfaction.  Dissatisfaction to the extent 
that some of our colleagues and comrades openly said that 
20 
they do not agree with this and it is the wrong thing to do, 
and this is not an instruction that was given to the Chief 
whip or to the speaker for that matter or to myself to deal 
with this matter in this particular way.  It was not 
processed properly and so the, when I talk about the inter 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 282 of 301 
 
party dynamics, it is from inside.  Inside where certain 
members felt that the Chief whip is not executing his 
mandate correctly. 
MR FREUND SC:  But would it not be correct, whilst I do 
not disagree with you, that the Chief whip faced resistance 
from a substantial body of his own MP’s.  He was also 
facing resistance from Lethuli House.  He was also facing 
resistance from the President.  He was also facing 
resistance from the most powerful people in the country.   
MR FROLICK:  Well, I cannot attest to who he was exactly 
10 
receiving resistance from, but I know he received support 
from and at the level where I operate, I am not part of 
discussions of the National Executive Committee or the 
National Working Committee, but I know from where I 
operate, he received full support in terms of his direct line 
of reporting of parliamentary activities from the Secretary 
General of the ANC. 
MR FREUND SC:  So why did, because these are not my 
words.  These are your words.  He acted with great 
personal political risk.  Why great personal risk?  What are 
20 
you suggesting? 
MR FROLICK:  He could have lost his position as Chief 
whip of the ANC.  That is what I am referring to. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The stance that he was advancing to 
which he was receiving resistance whilst a stance or a 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 283 of 301 
 
position or approach that sought to ensure that there was 
proper oversight and members of Parliament perform their 
oversight functions properly.  As far as you are concerned 
from the discussions you had with him, is that the position? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct Chairperson.  He said that 
this is a matter that and he kept on referring to say that we 
are not going to commit the same mistake, 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR FROLICK:   At least not under – under the caucus of 
the 
African 
National 
Congress 
that 
was 
committed 
10 
previously.  It was matters that arise.  It must be dealt 
with.  It must be engaged with.  And committees must play 
a role as far as this is concerned.   
 
And that is also what informed his believe in the 
discussion that we had on the 15 t h of June 2017 with the 
Speaker on the direction that must be taken as far as those 
allegations were concerned. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And if his stance was that we are not 
going to commit the same mistake, I take it his stance was 
that such a mistake had been made in the past but the past 
20 
practise had been mistaken in the manner in which it had 
failed the Executive to account in relation to allegations of 
corruption in state capture.  Am I understanding you 
correctly? 
MR FROLICK:   The stance directly related to the 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 284 of 301 
 
Constitutional Court judgment of 2015.  That is there.  It is 
very specific in terms of that Parliament failed in its 
obligation to hold the Executive accountable. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  Now I just have on further line 
of questioning before we can wrap up.  I know it has been 
a long and hard day especially for the Deputy Chief 
Justice.  But you will recall that we were dealing with your 
letters of the 15 t h of June 2017 and I took you to a couple 
of them.  And there were in fact four of them as I 
understand.  Is that correct? 
10 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Home Affairs, Public Enterprises.  It 
would have been Transport and it would have been from 
the letter to the Committee of Transport, has already into 
record.  And I think it should Mineral and Energy Affairs.  
Is that correct? 
MR FROLICK:   The answer is yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And in relation to that four letter.  We 
do not have in the record – I have never been able to track 
down and find a copy of it but it must exist or must have 
20 
existed a letter of the 15 t h of June to the Mineral and 
Energy Affairs Portfolio Committee along the same lines as 
the other three that we have read.  Am I correct in that? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   And in relation to that committee as 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 285 of 301 
 
you told the Chair a little earlier.  There would have been 
reference to the fact that the recently published material in 
the media had some bearing on that committee.  So what 
was it, as far as you were concerned, that that committee 
ought to have been investigating or concerned about? 
MR FROLICK:   There were certain allegations made 
around certain contracts.  It was in the or directly linked to 
the provisioning of coal and that is a matter that resorts 
under Mineral Resources.  And that was the matter that the 
Speaker felt that the committee should look into and to 
10 
report back to her. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And were those the contracts, the 
Eskom contracts involving for example Tegeta and where 
allegations were made involving amongst others the Gupta 
family members? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Alright.  Now we all know what 
happened with the Public Portfolio Committee on Public 
Enterprises.  It conducted a very public process which 
resulted ultimately in a report which had been placed 
20 
before this Commission.  I do not need say anything more 
about that. 
 
As with regards to Home Affairs and bear in mind 
that your letter says this needs urgent attention and urgent 
report back.  Am I correct that for a long time the Portfolio 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 286 of 301 
 
Committee on Home Affairs took no effective steps to get 
to the bottom of the allegations that you had thought that 
they should investigate? 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   And am I correct that the Portfolio 
Committee on Transport took no steps to implement the 
directive that you had given that they should pursue 
allegations pertaining to PRASA?  When I say they took no 
steps, to the best of your knowledge they took no steps. 
MR FROLICK:   Well, I get several interactions with the 
10 
chairpersons of both of those committees at various 
stages.  Some of them are in writing and different reasons 
were advanced as to why it is not happening.   
 
In the case of Transport it was non-cooperation 
being receiving from PRASA and the chairman of the board 
and other political developments of the chairperson saying 
or report to the – that is according to the chairperson of 
that committee.  She mentioned to me that they will report 
somewhere else and they busy with legislation.   
 
Home Affairs eventually got going with some 
20 
form of work that they were doing and that was also after 
some 
time 
that 
was 
happening 
but 
all 
of this 
was 
happening within this milieu and political environment 
where you had two members with different views.  Why 
must we do this.  Who tell us to do this?   
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 287 of 301 
 
 
We cannot really go into that area because as 
the chairperson of the Transport at the time mentioned to 
me, there are a number of issues in front of the courts or 
that is going to litigation that they cannot enter into. 
 
So you did find that – and also with Mineral 
Resources.  At one stage, I eventually had to write a letter 
and I kept the Chief Whip informed and I know from his 
side he tried his best to get to the chairpersons 
 
Because I said:  Ultimately, Chief Whip the 
chairpersons of these committees are members of the ANC.  
10 
Can you not assist us to get going with this work that 
needs to be done? 
 
I know at a certain occasion the Speaker also 
had a discussion with the chairperson of Transport around 
the matter.  But it was extremely difficult to achieve the 
same type of outcome that was achieved by the Public 
Enterprises Committee that was there. 
 
And that has a lot to do with the different 
positions that was taken inside the study groups of the 
ANC or – I want to call it a – at one stage the chairperson 
20 
of Mineral Resources told me they do not know how to get 
going.  Where must they start? 
 
And I referred him to the Chief Whip and the 
Chief Whip said they must start by calling the ministers to 
say that:  Minister, you report to this committee.  Have you 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 288 of 301 
 
seen these things in the public domain that has been said 
about you?  How do you respond to that? 
 
And then once that is done the committee must 
decide what is the action that will be taken or what is the 
direction that will be taken.   
ADV FREUND SC:   Now you have referred to a number of 
reasons that were given by the two chairs of those two 
committees for their failure to have acted as you thought 
they should have acted. 
 
But I thought that I detected and I want to put to 
10 
you for your comment that you were not completely 
persuaded that those reasons were convincing. 
 
And that you thought that at least part of the 
explanation lay in the fact that they were extremely unkeen 
to exercise this type of oversight power in the way you 
thought it should be done.   
 
Is that a fair comment? 
MR FROLICK:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now having said that.  I just want to 
deal, finally, with the ultimate fate of the Mineral and 
20 
Energy Portfolio Committees’ investigation.  There has 
been evidence before this Commission that, to put it 
bluntly, the then Minister gave them the run around.   
 
He appeared, he answered certain questions.  
He knew he had to come back.  He was asked to come 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 289 of 301 
 
back.  He repeatedly failed to comply with undertakings to 
come back or arrangements to come back. 
 
What then eventually occurred is that finally, a 
long time later, the committee ultimately lost its patience 
and said know we want to call the Minister to account and 
all we – we want to deal with this matter. 
 
I think at that stage there had finally been a 
change of ministers.  And they wanted to proceed with an 
inquiry and they needed – they appointed somebody to 
assist them to proceed and to interview witnesses and start 
10 
to prepare for an inquiry somewhat like the inquiry of the 
Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises. 
 
And the evidence had been that you could have 
stopped it.  That the resources that were requested were 
refused and that effectively it was Mr Frolick that ultimately 
prevented that inquiry from taken place.   
 
What is your comment on that? 
MR FROLICK:   That assessment is incorrect.  And if I may 
Chairperson just give the background to the point that the 
advocate has now mentioned to say I could have put a stop 
20 
to it. 
 
As you can recall Advocate in a pre-briefing that 
we had, I made reference to a certain letter that was 
written and I do not know if you eventually – because I just 
managed to source this letter today that was written to that 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 290 of 301 
 
committee. 
 
Because what happened was – and I will send it 
through to you, of course.  And I my apologies for not 
sending it through earlier.  I had to spend some time today 
myself in the office to find this letter. 
 
What happened was, is that, as far as this 
committee is concerned, the chairperson after receiving the 
letter came to me and I – my view was that the reasons 
that were advanced that the minister was not available.   
 
And towards the end of 2017, the Minister came 
10 
to the committee and various matters were raised.  The 
Minister was then supposed to come back but fell ill.  But 
then the events start happening very quickly Chairperson 
after the 2017 National Conference at Nasrec. 
 
On the 14 t h of February 2018, President Zuma 
resigned.  From the 15 t h of February 2018, President 
Ramaphosa is elected as President.   
 
And on the 22 n d of February 2018, I received a 
letter from the chairperson of the committee indicating 
more or less that the committee had now got to appoint 
20 
where they say that they want to proceed but they will 
require resources. 
 
And 
before 
I 
replied 
to 
the 
letter 
of 
the 
chairperson, he came to me in person and I said to him:  
What is the problem?  What is the resources that is 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 291 of 301 
 
required?  Quantify it.  We have got the legal advisor that 
permanently assist the committee and you must decide how 
you want to proceed. 
 
On the 26 t h of February 2018, there was a 
Cabinet reshuffle and the Minister was replaced by the 
current Minister of Minerals and Energy. 
 
I can recall that afterwards the chairperson came 
for me again and the chairperson said:  No, what the 
committee 
now 
wants 
to 
do 
is 
– 
and 
there 
is 
correspondence that I have in that regard – is to have, and 
10 
that is what was decided by the committee, is to have an 
overall inquiry over everything associated with Mineral 
Resources in the company. 
 
But I said but that is – your scope has now 
changed.  It is not the same as it was as we discussed 
previously.  And there was a to and thro of letters again 
between us. 
 
The chairperson came to me again and said:  
You know what.  I must report back to my committee.  I 
wrote back to the chairperson on the 6 t h of June 2018.  But 
20 
before that, we also had a meeting as comrades.   
 
I went with the chairperson to the new minister, 
Minister Mantashe where this issue of the inquiry was 
mentioned.  The Chief Whip that was currently, to take up 
the matter with the new Minister so that he can understand 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 292 of 301 
 
where this is coming from.   
 
And to cut a long story short.  After that 
discussion, it was agreed that the scope of this inquiry that 
they want to have must be looked at because now long will 
it take for the committee to do an inquiry over all Minerals 
and Resources and entities in the country. 
 
And in the communication that I have that I will 
also forward to you, I refer to the discussions that we had 
and in one line and that is the letter dated on the 
6 t h of June 2018, I said in April this year, and that is 2018, 
10 
the Deputy Chief Justice wrote to the Speaker to request 
copies of all relevant information and documents pertaining 
to state capture enquiries conducted by Parliament in three 
committees. 
 
The Speaker has exceeded to this request and 
requested me to interact with the Commission.  In the 
budget on debate of Parliament on the 22 n d of May 2018 I 
reported to The House that I have met with the lead 
investigator of the inquiry, Mr November, the former AG at 
the office of the Chief Justice on the 18 t h of May 2018 and 
20 
handed over to the Commission all relevant documents of 
the work that was done. 
 
And 
that 
referred 
specifically 
to 
Public 
Enterprises and Home Affairs.  We also agreed that 
Parliament will assist the Commission as to meet... 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 293 of 301 
 
 
Now I then did not receive a costing.  And in the 
meantime the Chief Whip said to me:  But you know, this is 
taking way too long.  We had a discussion with the Speaker 
as well.   
 
And this letter is addressed or to the Speaker, 
the ANC 
Chief Whip, the Secretary to the 
National 
Assembly and also to the Advocate Mandela who at time 
was also acting as the Secretary for Parliament or 
assisting the Parliament. 
 
And in there we clearly state or I clearly state 
10 
that the committee needs to clarify the scope and form of 
this inquiry as well as the oversight work it now wants to 
undertake in the light of the judicial commission state of 
intention to commence its proceedings in August 2018. 
 
If I may Chairperson.  This is the letter that I will 
forward as soon as I am done here to Advocate Freund.  It 
reads on the 17 t h of September 2018, Inquiry into State 
Capture.  It is addressed to the chairperson and says: 
“My discussions with you on the above matters 
refers.” 
20 
 
I said: 
“You will recall to you on 15 June 2017 and 
again on 23 August 2017 on the need for the 
committee to investigate allegations in the 
public domain on state capture. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 294 of 301 
 
I also propose that the point of departure 
should be to invite the former Minister to 
respond to these allegations. 
I also emphasise that the aforementioned 
process 
should 
commence 
and 
that 
the 
committee should report back to the National 
Assembly without delay.   
Unfortunately, for various reasons this was not 
done and the committee thus missed a golden 
opportunity to investigate the matter in 2017. 
10 
As you are aware the Judicial Commission on 
State Capture that is headed by the Deputy 
Chief Justice is now well underway. 
Parliament is cooperating with the Commission 
headed by the Deputy Chief Justice Zondo and 
numerous documents have been exchanged 
with the Secretariat. 
It will thus be duplicating the work of the 
Commission of the committee at this stage 
commence with a parallel investigation on the 
20 
same matter. 
I 
wish 
to 
emphasise 
that 
the 
matter 
of 
resourcing of the committee to conduct the 
investigation into state capture is not an issue 
at this stage. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 295 of 301 
 
The necessary financial, human and logistical 
support 
would 
have 
been 
availed 
to 
the 
committee last year. 
The committee is also reminded that it should 
now conclude mattes in front it and not embark 
on 
new 
and 
substantive 
matters 
as 
we 
approach the end of the 5 t h Parliament. 
Formal and legacy reports are due to be tabled 
on 23 November 2018 and is expected that 
committees will be seized for concluding their 
10 
work in the last few months left of this term.” 
 
The text of this letter Chairperson was agreed to 
and approved by the Speaker as well as the Chief Whip of 
the ANC.   
 
And that is why this letter is copied to the 
Honourable Speaker, the Honourable Mbete then, the 
Deputy Speaker, the Honourable Tsenoil and to the Chief 
Whip of the ANC, the Honourable Mthembu. 
 
I must finally, as far as this is concerned, add 
that the Secretary to the National Assembly, Mr Xaso and 
20 
myself had a meeting with Mr Nombembe at the offices in 
Johannesburg. 
 
And this letter of parallel investigations was 
raised and it was agreed in that meeting that parallel 
investigations should not take place because it could be 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 296 of 301 
 
that Parliament now while the Commission is starting its 
work is embarking on a certain course of action, have 
different outcomes and the Commission arrives at different 
outcomes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Now I have put that allegation to 
Mr Nombembe who disputes it.  Mr Nombembe says it is 
quite correct that Parliament undertook to cooperate and 
did cooperate by furnishing, as it were, the product of any 
investigations it had done. 
 
But that he had said in no meeting that he 
10 
attended that the Commission’s stance was that Parliament 
should referring from doing oversight that was otherwise 
willing or minded to do.  Do you dispute Mr Nombembe’s 
version? 
MR FROLICK:   Well, it was the task for the Secretary of 
the National Assembly who was part of that meeting.  That 
is what I take out of that meeting that was there.  And of 
course Mr Nombembe cannot tell Parliament not to do its 
oversight work but as far as the Terms of Reference of the 
Commission is concerned and that what Risk Committee 
20 
wanted to do... 
 
There was agreement between the Speaker, the 
Honourable Chief Whip of the majority party and myself 
had due to the time-lapse that has occurred, it would be a 
parallel process running parallel to what the Commission 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 297 of 301 
 
intended to do. 
ADV 
FREUND 
SC: 
 
 
Now 
you 
requested 
the 
four 
committees to commence their investigations in June of 
2017 long after the Public Protector had directed that there 
should be an inquiry but before the inquiry had in fact been 
appointed and before the inquiry had in fact got going.  I 
think you will agree with that. 
MR FROLICK:   That is correct.   
ADV FREUND SC:   The Public Enterprises Portfolio 
Committee ran an inquiry that ran substantially into 2018 
10 
and as I understand it with your support.  Is that correct? 
MR FROLICK:   Well, the Public Enterprises Portfolio 
Committee did extensive work and they always received my 
support. 
ADV FREUND SC:   And that continued well after the 
establishment of the present Commission that you are 
testifying before. 
MR FROLICK:   They concluded their work before this 
Commission started their work. 
ADV FREUND SC:   No, on the contrary.  Their report was 
20 
adopted by Parliament, speaking from memory, about 
October of 2018.   
MR FROLICK:   Well, the report could have been adopted 
then but it does not mean the committee worked up to 
October 2018. 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 298 of 301 
 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well ...[intervenes]  
MR FROLICK:   No...  Can I just explain?  I do not have 
that detail in front of me in terms of when that committee 
concluded their work but the bulk of their work was done in 
2017 and in the beginning of 2018. 
ADV FREUND SC:   Well, I do not want to engage in that 
detailed analyses of that with you but I what I do want to 
put to you is this.  You maybe being unfair to the Portfolio 
Committee on Minerals and Energy when you say to them:  
Well, 
if 
you 
do 
not 
get 
it 
done 
before 
the 
Zondo 
10 
Commission is up and running it is too late for you to do it 
now. 
 
You may be being unfair for this reason, that 
they immediately summoned Minister Zwane shortly after 
your letter.  In fact, on the very day that the issue came up 
for debate.  He did not come then but he came the next 
week. 
 
He then gave them the run around for two or 
three months.  From that time onwards, they were trying – 
now in the beginning of 2018 – they were trying to exercise 
20 
their oversight powers. 
 
And the record is repeat with references to 
people who alleged that they came to you for resources 
necessary to pursue this inquiry.  Your attitude was there is 
no money for it.  That is why I am not approving it.  I 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 299 of 301 
 
understand you do not agree with that? 
MR FROLICK:   I am afraid I must disagree with you.  And 
that is why I will forward the relevant letters to you 
tomorrow and also Legal Services in Parliament was 
throughout part of this process. 
 
And I must also stat to you that there was never 
a summons issued to Minister Zwane to appear in front of a 
committee.  Your information is incorrect.  If you can 
produce that summons to me then I  - I have not seen it. 
ADV FREUND SC:   No, I have not seen it either.  I am not 
10 
saying it was a summons.  What I am saying is that there 
were a number of agreements and arrangements made for 
him to come which for one reason or another did not come 
about ...[intervenes]  
MR FROLICK:   Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   ...to such extent that that committee 
became exasperated and decided to conduct an inquiry and 
the inquiry was focussed on allegations of state capture, 
Guptas’ and the very allegations that you said they should 
investigate and they say you refused them the resources to 
20 
pursue that. 
MR FROLICK:   I am afraid the record will show that that 
the Honourable Zwane was summonsed to appear in front 
of that committee.  He was not ...[intervenes]  
ADV FREUND SC:   I accept that because I know that is 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 300 of 301 
 
not correct. 
MR FROLICK:   He was summonsed in front of that 
committee.  The situation is Chairperson is that without 
any other intent a decision was taken by the Chief Whip of 
the majority party and the Speaker and I agreed with it that 
it would be a parallel process running with the State 
Capture Commission in terms of their mandates that the 
then recently elected President of the Republic and the 
Terms of Reference were clear and this committee was 
going to do exactly the same. 
10 
ADV FREUND SC:   Mr Frolick, thank you for time.  I have 
no further questions. 
MR FROLICK:   Thank you sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much Mr Frolick.  We 
appreciate that you availed yourself again.  Thank you very 
much.  You are not excused. 
MR FROLICK:   Thank you very much Chairperson.  It has 
been a very long day for your as well.  And thank you for 
the platform. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you very much.  Mr Freund? 
20 
ADV FREUND SC:   Chair, obviously, from my perspective 
that disposes of the business for the day. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV FREUND SC:   The intention from our side is to 
resume at Wednesday evening at five p.m. with Ms 
22 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 347 
 
Page 301 of 301 
 
Letsatsi-Duba’s evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  And what is your estimate of how 
long her evidence might take? 
ADV FREUND SC:   Two hours? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  No, that is fine.  So on 
Wednesday, five o’clock or as soon as possible thereafter 
depending on the day session we will – I will hear her 
evidence.  Thank you very much to everybody who has 
stayed until this time.  We appreciate it.   
 
We are just trying the best we can to cover as 
10 
much work as possible.  But thank you very much.  We will 
adjourn for the day and tomorrow during the day session 
we will continue with the PRASA evidence.  This is just for 
the benefit of the public and the media.   
 
We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 23 FEBRUARY 2021  
 
