 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
28 OCTOBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 293 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 211 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
28 OCTOBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 3 of 211 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 28 OCTOBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Good 
morning 
Mr 
Kennedy, 
good 
morning everybody.  Thank you.  You may be seated Mr 
Mlambo.  Yes are you ready? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes thank you Chair.  If we may 
proceed 
with 
Mr 
Mlambo’s 
evidence 
that 
he 
started 
yesterday? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes do you not need assistance Mr 
Mlambo there?  I think he needs assistance.  You trying to 
get used to how to handle it.  Okay, okay.  Okay alright.  
10 
The oath you took yesterday will continue to apply today 
okay?  Alright.  Thank you. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Mr Mlambo you gave evidence 
yesterday about a process in which you were asked to give 
approval as the – as the Group Executive Supply Chain 
Management for a particular transaction relating to 217 or 
183 items of equipment – the armoured hulls for the 
Hoefyster contract and we got to the point where you had 
explained your correspondence with officials and – and 
then you escalated it when you were not satisfied with the 
20 
process by sending emails to Mr Saloojee and Mr Wessels 
and others to express your reasons why you were not 
prepared to approve the transaction pointing out the 
serious irregularities. 
MR MLAMBO:  That is correct Chair. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 4 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now you – we touched yesterday on 
your points that you did not receive any response from Mr 
Saloojee or anybody else that you had sent the – the email 
to.  Mr Saloojee has been asked to give further evidence 
before the commission to deal with issues that have been 
raised by other witnesses against him. 
 
And I just want to put to you the version that Mr 
Saloojee intends to give before the commission which as I 
understand it is the – is to the effect that he received your 
email; he noted it; he did not respond to it directly to you 
10 
instead he discussed it with his colleagues including Mr 
Wessels and he understood that there was a solution found 
that resolved these issues and that is why he did not 
respond to you. 
 
Do you have any comment on that? 
MR MLAMBO:  I do not believe that the decision that was 
taken was actually a solution to the problem.  My view was 
that the business was supposed to go to LMT.  I could not 
think of any sensible reason or sound reason as to why the 
business had to be given to VR Laser. 
20 
 
Because that was going to have an adverse impact 
on our financials as a group and my view was that as one 
of the Group Executives I had the responsibility to 
contribute towards the success or profitability of Denel. 
 
And taking business away from Denel did not 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 5 of 211 
 
contribute to that objective. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now you started just before we 
adjourned yesterday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  I am sorry Mr Kennedy.  Do 
you happen to know by any chance what it is that Mr 
Saloojee says was the solution that he thought was the 
solution to your concerns?  Do you know what it is? 
MR MLAMBO:  I am assuming that.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or you do not know? 
MR MLAMBO:  The solution would be in his view that I had 
10 
actually found common grounds with the CEO of Denel 
Land Systems and my other colleagues at Corporate 
Office.  And to me that does not constitute a sound 
solution. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no but my question is whether when 
he says he engaged I think with certain people within 
Denel and he thought a solution had been found to your 
concerns do you know what he is talking about or do you 
not know but you – you speculate? 
MR MLAMBO:  I actually do not know. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  You actually do not know. 
MR MLAMBO:  Yes I am speculating. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MLAMBO:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Are you surprised that any 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 6 of 211 
 
solution to concerns raised by you would have been found 
without involving you? 
MR MLAMBO:  No I should actually have been confronted 
with alternatives.  I believe in robust basis there are 
challenges. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MLAMBO:  And if I am convinced that they are putting 
on the table sound solutions then I would actually retract 
my position and then accept what I think is in the interest 
of the business. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Is there nobody whoever came to 
you within Denel or DLS to say – apart from what Mr 
Burger wrote to you – is there anybody who came and said 
and we actually have found a solution and this is the 
solution to your concerns? 
MR MLAMBO:  No-one ever came to me Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No-one ever did that.  Okay alright. Mr 
Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  Mr Mlambo you 
mentioned as you were finishing your evidence yesterday 
20 
afternoon the position paper and then I said to you that let 
us leave that until the morning because that is going to 
take a little time.  Could you please turn in that bundle to 
page 793?   
MR MLAMBO:  Yes I have found 793. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 7 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Is this the – is this the position paper 
that you were referring to yesterday? 
MR MLAMBO:  Yes indeed it is. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And may I ask you please to turn to 
page 795 it bears your name and title Denis Mlambo 
Supply Chain Executive Manager.  Is that your signature? 
MR MLAMBO:  Yes it is Chair my signature. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And are those your initials next to 
where the person has – has amended the date? 
MR MLAMBO:  No it is not.  It is Mr Wessels initials. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Mr Wessels.  So it is also signed 
apart from yourself by Mr Jan Wessels the Group COO and 
Mr Mhlontlo the Group Financial Director? 
MR MLAMBO:  That is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Please tell the Chair how it came 
about that this position paper was prepared? 
MR MLAMBO:  Mr Wessels actually approached me based 
on the feedback I had given to the Executive team of DLS 
and my colleagues at Corporate Office.  And he believed 
that we could actually find an amicable solution to the 
20 
problem.  And we discussed the issue… 
CHAIRPERSON:  To which problem? 
MR MLAMBO:  To the problem of awarding the business to 
VR Laser. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 8 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  May I just ask?  I am sorry Chair if I 
might – sorry for interrupting you.  Was that the – was that 
arising from the email that we looked 
at yesterday 
addressed to them and Mr Saloojee and others saying this 
is the problem with awarding the contract to VR Laser?  
Was it in response to that that Mr Wessels came to you 
and said there may be an amicable solution to this issue? 
MR MLAMBO:  Yes it was a response to that email and 
others before that very email.  And we had a meeting the 
three us.  Mr Mhlontlo, Mr Wessels and myself we looked 
10 
at the merits of the decision and also spoke about the 
flaws in the process.  And in the end they concurred with 
me that yes it was definitely in the interest of Denel to give 
the business to LMT which is what this position paper is 
actually saying.  But it is also looking beyond just that 
opportunity that we talking about right now. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  If I can take you – I am not going to 
go through all the reasons for your recommendation that  
that LMT be given this contract but if I can start at page 
793 you see halfway down a heading Evaluation. 
20 
MR MLAMBO:  Huh-uh. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And just read to the Chair please the 
first two lines. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry what page is it? 
MR MLAMBO:  793 Chair. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 9 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay. 
MR MLAMBO:  The bullet – first two bullet lines. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Just immediately after the word 
evaluation. 
MR MLAMBO:  Oh. 
“LMT is a Denel subsidiary.  51% owned by 
Denel and 30% owned by Pamodzi a fully 
black 
owned 
company. 
 
Denel 
has 
management 
control 
that 
also 
means 
management accountability for LMT.” 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now you mentioned yesterday that 
one of the concerns was a group policy to try and supply 
in-house where you had a subsidiary or a division that 
could do – could do the work.  Was that what informed the 
point here in your position paper? 
MR MLAMBO:  It certainly was the reasons and in fact the 
mere fact that we were persuaded as I pointed out that I 
was a member of the DLS board.  We were persuaded to 
acquire LMT – because it was a strategic company 
especially insofar as the execution of the Hoefyster 
20 
contract I was concerned.  So it just did not make sense to 
me that all of sudden we must deviate from that position. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now you then express: 
“It is our opinion that:” 
And then we have the bullet points or the arrows if I can 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 10 of 211 
 
just refer to them either by reading out the sentence or 
summarising it?  You refer first in the first point to LMT did 
submit a financial competitive quote.  You have dealt with 
the comparison of prices yesterday, is that right? 
MR MLAMBO:  That is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then your second point is that 
LMT has already manufactured some prototype hulls – 
does have a nominal experience base line from where to 
work 
and 
improve. 
 You 
refer 
to them 
having 
real 
operational capacity and managerial challenges at LMT as 
10 
identified by DLS management.  What did that relate to 
without going into detail just at a broad level? 
MR MLAMBO:  Ja there were some management issues but 
they did not all emanate from LMT.  Someone actually did 
an assessment of the problems and they identified that the 
problems were in both DLS and LMT.  There were some 
lapses in governance which I believed we could address as 
Denel with that management accountability.  And we 
worked on that and I saw some improvement because I was 
in constant contact with the CEO of LMT Doctor Stephan 
20 
Nel. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then your next arrow says: 
“The working relationship between DLS and 
LMT has not been satisfactory from the DLS 
point of view.” 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 11 of 211 
 
You refer to uncommitted management and immature 
operational processes.  Does this relate to the same point 
that you dealt with a moment ago? 
MR MLAMBO:  Yes indeed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now on the next page that is page 
794 if I can just read out I think it is a sentence. 
“It is our considered position that given 
Denel’s strategic relationship with LMT and 
despite the challenges at LMT the intended 
sub-contract for the supply of the hull and 
10 
accessories specialised doors and related 
mechanisms should not have been placed 
on tender but rather directly negotiated with 
LMT being a 51% Denel owned subsidiary.  
However given the current status of supply 
chain process followed in this matter we 
advise that the tender process not be 
withdrawn 
and 
since 
no 
selection 
or 
pronouncement has yet been made DLS 
simply 
implements 
our 
preferred 
way 
20 
forward as suggested in this paper without 
further communication.” 
So that was the recommendation and then you refer to 
certain improvements further down where the arrow points 
are set out.  This – this recommendation that you then 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 12 of 211 
 
prepared and it signed by Mr Wessels and Mr Mhlontlo 
when the word recommendation appears there who was it a 
recommendation to? 
MR MLAMBO:  Let me just correct one thing.  The author 
of the document was Mr Wessels and I gave my inputs and 
so did Mr Mhlontlo.  And this recommendation was actually 
supposed to go to the Group CEO so he could actually 
apply his mind and see if he could persuade the CEO of 
Denel Land Systems to reverse his decision. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Do you know whether it went to Mr 
10 
Saloojee for approval? 
MR MLAMBO:  Well Mr Wessels had committed to present 
– to present it to him.  I am not aware whether he 
presented it or not. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you.  Did Mr Saloojee have any 
discussions with you about this proposed solution? 
MR MLAMBO:  No we never actually had any discussions 
on this issue with Mr Saloojee. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And the upshot of this decision if it 
had been implemented would that have meant that VR 
20 
Laser would or would not get any work for this project – for 
this part of the project? 
MR MLAMBO:  It effectively meant that the work was going 
to be given to LMT a subsidiary of Denel which would have 
made me happy. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 13 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Did you believe that it was 
resolved on this basis? 
MR MLAMBO:  Well I assumed that because I had the 
support of two key executives the Group COO and Group 
FD that Mr Saloojee would actually have no choice but to 
accommodate this proposal. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now your affidavit refers to your 
being shocked about what you learnt thereafter.  Can you 
tell the Chair please what you learnt and why you were 
shocked? 
10 
MR MLAMBO:  I was actually shocked to learn a few 
months later that the business or the contract on the 
Platform hulls had actually been approved on the 16 
October which was the following month and awarded to VR 
Laser.  That was without my knowledge.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And apart from the input you had 
previously given in the emails and your discussions with 
the officials – your email to Mr Saloojee etcetera and the 
position paper had there ever any – been any opportunity 
given to you prior to your learning that there was this 
20 
award to give input? 
MR MLAMBO:  No in fact the award to VR Laser was 
actually kept a secret because it was a few months later 
that I became aware of that.  And that boggles the mind 
because as a group you know supply chain executives had 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 14 of 211 
 
given the quantum of this contract I should actually have 
known about it.  And initially this was above R200 million 
and I would have been required to present in support of Mr 
Saloojee the proposal to the board.  Because anything 
above R200 million had to be presented to the board. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  May I take you please to the same 
bundle page 797.  It is one of the attachments to your 
affidavit.   
CHAIRPERSON:  What is the page number? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  797. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Do you have that? 
MR MLAMBO:  Yes I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  What is this document? 
MR MLAMBO:  This is a submission or do not know- 
Supply Chain submission for the approval of the Platform 
hulls. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Is that the – is that the procurement 
that we have been dealing with yesterday and today? 
MR MLAMBO:  Yes it is Chair. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And what is the outcome of this 
document?  What does it record? 
MR MLAMBO:  Well the outcome of this document is that 
approval was granted to give the contract to VR Laser for 
the manufacture of 183 Platform hulls.  But what is actually 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 15 of 211 
 
notable here is that I was deliberately left out because of 
my position and in – in terms of the Delegation of Authority 
I was actually supposed to be the one that approving 
before the Group CEO could sign. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now if we look at the signatures page 
804 there is a recommendation from DLS EXCO.  It has the 
signature of Ms Malahlela who has already given evidence 
in relation to this recommendation and how she came to 
sign it.  It is also a recommendation from – is it Ms Africa. 
MR MLAMBO:  Mr –  
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  [00:21:55] Africa, Mr Teubes, Mr 
Burger and from the DCO the recommendation – sorry the 
COO Mr Wessels as well as the Group CFO Mr Mhlontlo, 
correct? 
MR MLAMBO:  It is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then we see the signature of Mr 
Saloojee 
on 
page 
806 
for 
the 
approval 
of 
the 
recommendation.  He will give evidence that he did sign 
this as approving it as Group CEO.  Now you have raised a 
couple of difficulties in relation to this process. Firstly that 
20 
you were – this was done behind your back as it were.  Is 
that a fair representation? 
MR MLAMBO:  Ja it is true because I learnt late after 
discovering that this contract had been awarded to VR 
Laser.  But there was a meeting as you can see all the 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 16 of 211 
 
dates – all the dates are on the same day the 16 t h. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes including Mr Saloojee’s. 
MR MLAMBO:  Yes.  So there was a meeting – the reason 
why I was not invited to that meeting baffles me. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You have indicated to the Chair that 
you should have confirmed compliance with the processes 
before such a contract could be approved. 
MR MLAMBO:  Indeed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And you had specifically said it did 
not comply with the processes? 
10 
MR MLAMBO:  Yes that is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And also you have said that the 
board’s approval was required but it was approved instead 
by Mr Saloojee? 
MR MLAMBO:  That is my understanding. I am not aware 
that this approval was presented to the board. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes we… 
MR MLAMBO:  Which was initially over R200 million. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Kennedy this cannot be the document 
that Ms Malahlela said was amended had come from her 
20 
but was amended without her knowledge he? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  No it is different. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That one must be another one? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 17 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Mr Mlambo can I just put to you 
a point that Mr Wessels has indicated to us as a team 
where he – his version diverges from yours to an extent.  
What his version is; is that the – the solution that was 
found was suggested by him to this dilemma and it meant 
that work would be split between VR Laser and LMT.  And 
LMT would only do certain components such as the rear 
door and VR Laser would do the rest.  Is that – was that 
discussed with you?  If I can just take you back to your 
position paper there seems to be a reference to rear door 
10 
work being done.  Page 794.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  If you look at – if I can just take you 
to the place and then you can continue.  794 the second 
paragraph: 
“We recommend that DLS should implement 
an on-sight satellite project office at LMT 
the full level four sub-contract package for 
the 
supply 
of 
the 
welded 
hull 
plus 
accessories doors and mechanisms should 
20 
be contracted in a single directly negotiated 
way with LMT etcetera.” 
Please continue.  Do you recall discussions of LMT doing 
work such as the door and VR Laser doing the rest? 
MR MLAMBO:  No what was actually agreed was that LMT 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 18 of 211 
 
in addition to the hulls would actually be given the contract 
to manufacture the doors as well – the rear doors. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Were the doors not part of this 
contract? 
MR MLAMBO:  No, no the doors were actually a separate 
contract altogether. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So am I understanding you correctly 
that 
the 
– 
that 
the 
hulls 
that 
were 
– 
that 
were 
recommended for approval to go to VR Laser you had 
objected to? 
10 
MR 
MLAMBO: 
 Yes 
and 
that 
remained 
my 
position 
throughout. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. 
MR MLAMBO:  There was ample capacity at LMT and if 
there were any production related issues and governance 
issues it was our responsibility as the executive team of 
Denel to address those without having to take the business 
away from the LMT. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So the solution that you found with Mr 
Wessels as you understood it reflected in the position 
20 
paper was that VR Laser would get no work under the hull 
contract.  That work would go to LMT because it was an in-
house company and it was good on price and capacity and 
so forth.  Management and performance issues would be 
resolved and in addition LMT would get further work on top 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 19 of 211 
 
of the hulls such as the doors? 
MR MLAMBO:  Yes I was actually not prepared to 
compromise.  In instances where there was capability and 
capacity within any of the group divisions of subsidiaries 
there was no question about going out on tender.  And it 
was also quite explicit in the group Supply Chain Policy.  I 
think that is quoted in other parts of this evidence.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now to the extent that Mr Wessels or 
Mr Saloojee may tell the commission that this was a 
solution – this was a compromise VR Laser would get – 
10 
would get – get the main part of the work – LMT would get 
some other work and that this resolved the concerns that 
you had raised.  Do you believe that your concerns and 
objections were answered or not – properly answered or 
not? 
MR MLAMBO:  No certainly not.  Basically that would also 
mean that we would have to go back and amend the Group 
Supply Chain Policy to say there are instances when even 
if we have the capability and capacity we could actually 
outsource the work.  And that effectively means from a 
20 
governance point of view – because if you amend the 
policy it has to be presented to the board that the board 
would have to approve that.  And it is a long process.  And 
I saw no reason why we should even debate the issue 
about giving work a group division or subsidiary.  To me it 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 20 of 211 
 
is just common sense.  It must be done. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now if I can take you please to your 
affidavit page 711.  Paragraph 3.16. 
MR MLAMBO:  711. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  711.  Top number. 
MR MLAMBO:   This paragraph ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   On this page, on the following page in 
your paragraphs 3.16 and 3.17.  You refer to what seems to 
be some history, background about the acquisition of LMT or 
the acquisition of a majority shareholding.   
10 
 
Is there anything that you want to add to what you have 
said to the Chair yesterday in relation to LMT and why it was 
significant in relation to the award of this business, to LMT, 
the Hull contract? 
MR MLAMBO:   Ja, in my case, as board... former board 
member of DLS, Mr Burger himself is the one himself that 
presented the proposal that Denel must seriously consider 
acquiring LMT.   
 
LMT has got those strategy capabilities that Denel needs 
particular insofar as the execution of the Hoefyster contract 
20 
was concerned. 
 
He actually went on to say without LMT, Denel would 
have serious challenges executing the Hoefyster contract.  
So that was his presentation.   
 
So he is about ten – it actually horrified me and I 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 21 of 211 
 
thought something was actually amiss.  There is something 
that just did not make sense in what he suddenly decided to 
pursue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is Mr Burger? 
MR MLAMBO:   That is Mr Burger. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Mlambo, may we now turn to a 
section of your affidavit, paragraph 4 which is headed into 
interference by Messrs Burger and Thebus with the integrity 
of the procurement process at DOS.   
10 
 
And 
you 
refer 
to 
a 
number 
of 
emails 
that 
the 
Commission’s 
investigators 
had 
shown 
you 
that 
were 
exchanged between Mr Thebus and Ms Malahlela and 
Mr Thebus. 
MR MLAMBO:   H’m. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Dealing with why they felt that VR 
Laser should still get what Thebus, in particular, and Burger 
felt that VR Laser should nonetheless be awarded the 
contract.  You indicated that you had... you were not copied 
in on those emails at the time.   
20 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, that is true.  Although, I was horrified 
by the content of some of those emails but when I thought 
about the ones they had actually exchanged with me, it 
actually made sense because it was the same line of 
reasoning. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 22 of 211 
 
 
They were engaging, Ms Malahlela on the process whilst 
it was still on to establish where the process was and what 
the prospects were of VR Laser getting the business. 
 
And also, one of the comments that Mr Burger raised in 
one of the emails was whether the inputs from Patria which 
had actually conducted an onsite assessment of the three 
companies, was incorporated into the evaluation process. 
 
In fact, Ms Malahlela should have said to Mr Burger at 
the time:  I am not at liberty to discuss the finer details of 
the evaluation process because we are not supposed to be 
10 
influenced by anyone. 
 
And the evaluators are expected to focus on what they 
had stipulated with the performance criteria.  The issue of 
the audit report by Patria was totally irrelevant.   
 
You cannot introduce strenuous factors to the evaluation 
process.  The minute you deviate from what you had 
stipulated 
with 
the 
evaluation 
criteria, 
that 
actually 
compromises your... the integrity of your evaluation process. 
 
So that should never have been discussed.  And the 
mere fact that he also pointed out that he was going to 
20 
engage with other parties outside the normal channels to 
ensure that the price was dropped. 
 
So it as a predetermined outcome that VR Laser had to 
get the business.  So this was actually a waste of time to get 
people to evaluate the inputs in the first place. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 23 of 211 
 
 
And at some stage, I personally felt that I should not 
have even pointed out the flaws in the process because the 
process was so flawed that it just did not even married 
consideration. 
 
The outcome thereof was totally unacceptable.  It should 
have been rejected on any grounds by anyone. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I ask you now please to turn to 
page 809?  It is 808, in fact. 
MR MLAMBO:   Eight, zero...  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Eight, zero ...[intervenes]  
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In our affidavit, as I have pointed out 
earlier, you deal with the history that goes back to the 
acquisition of LMT.  So these are minutes of a special DLS 
board meeting.  Now that is the Division Board. 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   On the 31s t of March 2011.  And why is 
this significant in your view, particularly if you have regard to 
paragraph 6 of the minute? 
MR MLAMBO:   This is one of the sets of minutes that 
confirms that Mr Burger was actually extremely supportive 
20 
and very enthusiastic about Denel acquiring LMT.  So it is 
one of those sets of minutes that confirms my position. 
 
It is unfortunate that the others with actually more 
specific details that we could not get hold of because I have 
already left Denel. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 24 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  Which part of those minutes 
reveals Mr Burger’s support for LMT? 
MR MLAMBO:   That is part 6 of the minute. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it 809? 
MR MLAMBO:   809.  That is right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja?  Is what is in the...  The chairman 
started by saying: 
“He took the documents submitted for discussion as 
read by all.  Mr Burger gave some background with 
reference to previous minutes in which the LMT 
10 
opportunity was discussed at a previous Denel 
Board sub-committee meeting.   
It was already agreed that a BBBEE investor is 
brought onboard with DLS keeping majority and 
some interest.   
Mr Burger 
explained 
that 
the 
previous 
option 
agreement of 70% will change to only 51% but the 
risk for DLS will substantially decrease by the 
inclusion 
of 
Kamozi(?) 
which 
the 
financial 
investment of R 20 million ...[indistinct] and Denel is 
20 
now R 10 million facility.” 
 
Okay so basically what is in the... in that column, is what 
you say, shows Mr Burger’s support for LMT, for the 
acquisition of LMT. 
MR MLAMBO:   And also selling a stake to Kamozi. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 25 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MLAMBO:   At the time a black owned company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  H’m.  Okay.  Mr Burger(sic). 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  May I draw your attention 
to the very last small paragraph in that column. 
“The new investor is also buying in on the basis of 
the future value of the combined businesses of the 
three parties and from more strategic reasons than 
financial reasons.   
The proposal is that DLS and Denel should exercise 
10 
the option within one year.” 
 
Now you mentioned earlier in your evidence yesterday 
that there was a strategic reason that Denel felt persuaded 
by to acquire LMT.  What was your understanding of that 
strategic reasoning from a group point of view? 
MR MLAMBO:   Well, one of the critical strategic points that 
we were looking at, was that LMT had the capability to 
design vehicles, which in our case was not that much work.  
So that was a plus.   
 
And the other capability was that LMT could actually 
20 
manufacture and assemble vehicles.  And Platform House 
actually make up part of that pool of products that LMT could 
manufacture. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And was there an importance attached 
to having that capacity brought in-house, as it were, as a 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 26 of 211 
 
partly owned subsidiary of Denel? 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, it was actually critical to have that 
capability for Denel but because we were only looking at 
future opportunities offshore at the time.  And LMT was well-
placed to actually help us access those opportunities.   
 
When we applied LMT, it already had contracts in the 
Middle East.  And we actually felt that the Middle East was a 
growing market for Denel and that was priorities for us but 
we needed to have all the critical capabilities to be able to 
take advantage of that market. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now Mr Mlambo, may we now turn to 
paragraph 5 of your affidavit?  You do not need to go to it 
yourself.  I am just giving it as a guidance of the Chair.  You 
deal with the enquiries submitted to VR Laser Services 
regarding the identity of its individual shareholders. 
 
And you referred to Ms Malahlela taking certain action in 
that regard and she has given evidence on the enquiry she 
made.  And then you say you engage in correspondence with 
Mr Aurora of the Managing Director of VR Laser.  
MR MLAMBO:   Yes. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   How did that come about?  How did it 
come about that you were aware of it and you started 
intervening or taking action? 
MR MLAMBO:   Well, I was concerned that despite the fact 
that each time I receive any correspondence from DLS, there 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 27 of 211 
 
was this reference to a hundred percent black owned 
company, 25.1% black woman owned company but I did not 
have any evidence.   
 
When I requested evidence, initially what I was told was 
that Elgasolve owned 74.9% of the VR Laser and Craig Shaw 
Investment owned 25.1% of VR Laser. 
 
And the presupposed that 25.1% was black woman 
owned.  I wanted to know exactly who that individual black 
woman was but to this day, I never got an answer. 
 
The only answer that I received was that, Salim Essa 
10 
owned the 74.9%.  And my instruction to DLS Supply Chain 
Team was that we should desist from using terms that are 
actually misleading or that are totally unfounded. 
 
When you say a company is black owned, you must have 
evidence that it is indeed black owned. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I take you now please to page 
822? 
MR MLAMBO:   822.  Yes? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  That is a letter from VR Laser’s 
Chief Operating Officer, Mr Jiyane and that confirms that the 
20 
shareholders in VR Laser were Elgasolve and Craig Shaw 
and gives the percentages, 74.9% and 25.1%. 
MR MLAMBO:   H’m. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That they are the shareholders.  They 
do not have any involvement or conflict doing business with 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 28 of 211 
 
Denel or the shareholders or directors of private individuals 
who do not work for government.   
 
It did not disclose though who the shareholders of those 
companies were and that was your concern.  Do I understand 
your earlier evidence right? 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, and that is why, yesterday when I was 
asked a question about the conflict of interest that I had 
referred to in one of my emails.  DLS was actually of the 
view that because they had received these two declarations 
that, you know, the problem had been solved.   
10 
 
And I had said but there is no mention of all the 
directors of VR Laser.  Even on the document that they had 
accepted which was supposed to be a valid CIPC document 
and it was not.  They believed that that was correct.   
 
But I said:  You must actually insist on getting a CIPC 
document.  And this does not actually address the problem, 
whether they have the conflict of interest of we know their 
identity, whether they are black or white or foreigners.   
 
The 
key 
issue 
was 
also 
establishing 
the 
actual 
shareholding 
of 
VR 
Laser, 
the 
individuals 
behind 
the 
20 
companies.   
 
But I subsequently received another mail which is 
probably in my evidence, that when I pushed to find out who 
the individuals of Craig Shaw were, I was told that Westdawn 
Investment actually was a hundred percent shareholder of 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 29 of 211 
 
Craig Shaw Investment.   
 
But I mean, that does not answer my question as well.  
So there was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   They were trying to answering(?) you 
about entities. 
MR MLAMBO:   Telling me about entities ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...and not individuals. 
MR MLAMBO:   ...when my question was quite explicit that I 
wanted to know the individuals behind that shareholding. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If I may take you please to page 817?  
There are a number of other emails.  It seems that you 
corresponded not only with Mr Aurora but also Mr Van der 
Merwe of VR Laser.  But I can take you to ...[intervenes]  
MR MLAMBO:   One, one... 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   817.  817 – 8, appears to be an email 
from Mr Aurora apologising for his failure to do something.  
And then he confirms: 
“There has been a change in shareholding at VR 
Laser.” 
20 
 
And this is where he refers to Elgasolve and Craig Shaw.  
And then he says: 
“These two entities are now the sole shareholders in 
VR Laser.  Elgasolve ownership rested in Salim 
Essa.” 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 30 of 211 
 
 
Correct? 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then it says: 
“BBBEE status a hundred percent South African 
black owned.” 
 
And then he deals with the other entity that co-owned 
VR Laser being Craig Shaw.  And it says ownership a 
hundred percent shares owned by Westdawn Investments.  Is 
that the company you mentioned a moment ago? 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, that is the one.  
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then he says: 
“BBEE status.  It is a Level 5 BEE contributor.  
Westdawn is in turn owned by other corporate 
entities.” 
 
Was that a satisfactory response in your view? 
MR MLAMBO:   No, certainly not.  I did not want to know the 
corporate shareholders.  I wanted the individuals.  Because 
BBBEE’s certificates actually base their assessment on the 
individual shareholder.   
 
You have to unpack that.  You cannot simply accept that 
20 
Westdawn is hundred percent black owned when you do not 
have that evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it is interesting that he obviously 
thought it was important to mention a particular individual 
under Elgasolve, Mr Salim Essa.  But for the rest, he does 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 31 of 211 
 
not disclose any individuals.  He just gives entities, legal 
entities only. 
MR MLAMBO:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because if it was... if he had accepted 
that it was important to give the identity of the individuals in 
regard to Elgasolve, why did he not think it was equally 
important to give the identity of individuals in regard to the 
other entities?   
MR MLAMBO:   Ja, it is because that I saw. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.   
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now page 816, you sent an email back 
to Mr Aurora.  It is on the 21s t of November.  You say: 
“Thanks for your response ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Where are you now? 
MR MLAMBO:   Page 816 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  This appears to be an email 
from you back to Mr Aurora thanking him for his response 
and you say: 
“I would appreciate it if you could supply the 
20 
following 
as 
well. 
 
Details 
of 
the 
individual 
shareholders in Craig Shaw Investment or Westdawn 
Investments.  Details of the directors of Elgasolve 
and Craig Shaw, copies of ID’s, letters EE status of 
VR Laser Services.” 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 32 of 211 
 
 
Were you ever given proper details to your satisfaction? 
MR MLAMBO:   No, I actually never received any response. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You did not get a response for this one? 
MR MLAMBO:   Ja.  I think it was actually putting him in a 
bind at the time.  He realised that he could not disclose.  
There were some serious issues, I suspected.  Because 
under normal circumstances, this type of information is 
readily available.   
 
And that begs the question as to whether the verification 
urgency that declared VR Laser as hundred percent black 
10 
owned, actually saw the evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MLAMBO:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MLAMBO:   I was actually tempted to write to the 
Accreditation Board ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MLAMBO:   ...to actually interrogate that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MLAMBO:   To say you have the right to exercise that 
20 
oversight 
over 
the 
performance 
of 
these 
accredited 
verification urgencies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Yes.  Ja, when I saw this 
...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, apologies Chair ...[intervenes]  
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 33 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I suspected that he would not have got an 
answer for it.  I am just saying, when I read this email of 
Mr Mlambo to Mr Aurora, somehow something told me that 
he was unlikely to have gotten an answer.  [laughing]   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You may proceed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  So now that was 
correspondence I November 2014 and prior to that.  You 
have indicated, you did not get a response.  If I can take you 
now to page 820?   
10 
MR MLAMBO:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The email about halfway down the 
page appears to have been from you in March 2015.   
MR MLAMBO:   H’m. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So this is four months after your email, 
more 
than 
four 
months 
after 
your 
email 
as 
of 
21s t  of November and you address it to Mr Aurora and you 
say: 
“This email is a follow-up on the one below dated 
the 21s t of November 2014.” 
20 
 
Now that is the one that we have just looked at a 
moment ago, correct? 
MR MLAMBO:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that correct? 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 34 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
“We are a last month of our financial year-end and 
the audit process may uncover inconsistencies in 
Denel’s interactions with its suppliers.” 
 
Then you say: 
“It is imperative that all documents are submitted 
timeously.  Failure to do so may result in any future 
orders being cancelled or put on hold.  I trust that 
you will treat this request with the urgency it 
requires.” 
10 
 
Then there appears to be a response to that on the foot 
of the previous page, 819 dated the 31s t of March 2015 from 
Mr Van der Merwe. 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And he does not give you the answers 
that you have asked for but raise these queries.  He says: 
“Further to my previous email, may I ask the 
following?  I note that JP already provided certain 
information in his mail of the 4 t h of November.”   
 
You, 
however, 
requested 
further 
details 
of 
the 
20 
shareholders and the directors.  Who is the JP, do you 
know? 
MR MLAMBO:   JP was... or Mr Aurora. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  If you look on then previous 
page, 818.  That is the letter that came from Aurora and his 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 35 of 211 
 
initials are JP.  So you believe that is who he is referring to? 
MR MLAMBO:   Page? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Page 818, the previous page. 
MR MLAMBO:   818.  Yes, yes, yes.  Ja, that is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  So you understood Mr Van der 
Merwe to be referring to Mr Aurora ...[intervenes]  
MR MLAMBO:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   ...when he says JP. 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So he says: 
10 
“He has already provided certain information in the 
email of 4t h of November.” 
 
Which we have already dealt with.  But you requested 
further details of the shareholders and the directors.  That is 
correct, is it not?  You have asked for further details. 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then he asks his questions. 
“In order to provide you with the correct details, can 
I assume you need the following documents details?  
Details of shareholders, percentage shareholding in 
20 
VR 
Laser, 
details 
of 
the 
shareholding 
of 
the 
shareholders in VR...” 
 
And then other items that he sets out relating to the 
directors 
as 
well. 
 
And 
you 
then 
respond 
on 
the 
2n d of April 2015 in the email at the top of this page.   
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 36 of 211 
 
“Thanks for your response.  You have indeed 
interpreted my request quite well.  In light of the 
request, it is imperative that the claimed one 
hundred percent black shareholding in VR Laser 
Services be confirmed through the evidence you will 
submit.” 
 
You confirm that you repeated your request for this and 
its importance? 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, it is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now the evidence has been that by 
10 
this stage in March/April 2015, the contract had already long 
since been awarded to VR Laser in the process that you 
have indicated did not meet with your approval. 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
 
That 
was 
on 
or 
about 
the 
16t h of October 2014.   
MR MLAMBO:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Were you aware of that when you sent 
this correspondence? 
MR MLAMBO:   No, I was not.  I was totally in the dark at 
20 
the time. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   What were you trying to achieve by 
getting this information?  Were you still under the impression 
that no contract had been awarded?  I doubt this information 
was relevant to the award of the contract.  Was that your 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 37 of 211 
 
approach? 
MR MLAMBO:   Well, my reference to the end of the 
financial year has got this significance.  Each division is 
actually evaluated on its progress towards increasing the 
number of black owned companies in its supplier base. 
 
So a deal as we still had VR Laser that was listed as 
hundred percent.  There is other correspondence that... 
similar correspondence that I sent to other companies when I 
was actually in doubt about the correctness of what they had 
stated as the black ownership. 
10 
 
So that would actually distort the report if at all DLS 
would claim that since the beginning of the financial year, 
they have actually increased their black owned suppliers by 
this percentage, if at all that was not verified. 
 
So I needed to be sure that whatever company that was 
listed as black owned was indeed black owned so that I 
could actually give grade where it was due. 
 
Because there was this ill fate competition amongst 
divisions that are actually liked(?).  And then I would 
obviously 
shower 
those 
that 
were 
doing 
well 
without 
20 
compromising on quality, of course, in terms of increasing 
their black supplier base. 
 
Especially, insofar as the core business of Denel was 
concerned because typically what you find in South Africa is 
that most black owned companies are actually suppliers that 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 38 of 211 
 
on the peripheral of the business.  They provide doing 
services, catering.   
 
My focus was on the core business of Denel and VR 
Laser happened to be in that pool of suppliers.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Can I take you back to page 801? 
MR MLAMBO:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   This is part of the document we looked 
at earlier that was signed by various executives by not by 
you which ...[intervenes]  
MR MLAMBO:   801? 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  801, yes.  
MR MLAMBO:   That table? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It is the table.  I am just guiding you.  
This is part of the document that you confirmed earlier that 
was signed on the 16t h of October by executives excluding 
yourself, we see that at page 805, we looked at that earlier. 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, yes, yes, that is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   As part of this submission that was 
approved excluding you.  They have referred correctly at 
page 801 to the breakdown for scoring purposes and you 
20 
see just above the table, basis for comparative offer price, 
25%, technical 45%, BEE 30%.  So 30% of scoring would 
actually come from the BEE perspective. 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Even more than the price.  So your 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 39 of 211 
 
enquiries in relation to the BEE credentials of VR Laser, 
how important did you regard this as important for 
purposes a proper evaluation of tenders before they were 
awarded? 
MR MLAMBO:   It was critical because one of the elements 
that we looked at was ownership. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you. 
MR MLAMBO:   And then also the profile of employees and 
their skills development, how much the company was 
actually spending on the training and development of black 
10 
employees 
and 
then 
procurement 
from 
black 
owned 
companies.  Those are the four critical categories or 
elements that we looked at that time. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, I would like to turn to a 
different topic now and a different contract.  Mr Mlambo, 
you do not need to go back to your statement at this stage, 
just keep the – just move now to page 824. 
MR MLAMBO:   Page 24, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Just for the Chairperson’s guidance, 
he deals with this, Chair, in paragraph 6 of his affidavit 
20 
from page 715 and following. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you deal there in terms of your 
heading, Mr Mlambo, with a topic which you described as a 
single agreement entered into between DLS and VR Laser 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 40 of 211 
 
Services in 2015.  Now we have already dealt with the hull 
contract. 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yesterday afternoon and this 
morning.  Now this is a different contract, is it? 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes it is, indeed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It was entered into in 2015 and it 
related to a single source appointment of VR Laser 
Services by DLS, correct? 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct, Chair. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now I would like you please to look 
at page 824 and 825, it is a memorandum that comes from 
Ms Malahlela as executive manager in DLS supply chain 
department and it was sent addressed to the Denel supply 
chain executive.  Am I right in understanding that that was 
yourself? 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
 
And 
did 
you 
receive 
this 
memorandum?  
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, I did, Chair. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   What did you understand from this 
memorandum, was the purpose of it and what were you 
being asked to do? 
MR MLAMBO:   I was actually being asked to approve the 
single source status of VR Laser to essentially supply 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 41 of 211 
 
00.04.10 parts and steel components to VR Laser and this 
was not just limited to – I beg your pardon, to deal as – 
this was not just limited the Hoefyster contract, that 
essentially meant that if at all they had any fabrication 
requirements or steel component requirements they would 
go to VR Laser. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now she refers in her background 
section at the top of the text on page 824 to approval being 
given for the deviation from the normal procurement 
processes, etcetera, to be used for the T5 demo and group 
10 
supply chain executive gave an instruction that DLS must 
first explore how Denel Vehicle Systems, Gear Ratio, that 
is what is being referred to elsewhere as DVS, is that 
right? 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That is a sister division of DLS. 
MR MLAMBO:   It is a hundred percent Denel-owned 
company.  We acquired DVS from DAE Systems. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then she refers also to this 
relating to LMT which, as you have indicated already, was 
20 
a partly owned company controlled by Denel with a 51% 
shareholding.  
MR MLAMBO:   H’m. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So she seems to be referring to a 
previous decision by group supply chain executive, in other 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 42 of 211 
 
words at head office level, to prefer DVS and LMT for the 
supply of items on the basis that they were in-house, as it 
were, provided they met the requirements for quality, price 
and delivery.  Is she here reflecting what you were 
referring to yesterday?  Is she correctly reflecting what you 
understood the group policy to be? 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Then her next paragraph says: 
“In terms of the approved supply chain policy and 
DLS supply chain procedure…” 
10 
If I can stop?  So, as I understand it, at group level, where 
you were the group executive, you had your own processes 
which applied throughout the group and then each division 
also had its own supply chain procedure which was subject 
to the group overall. 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct, the focus at group level 
was policy and divisions could actually customise their 
processes to be aligned with a policy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And she refers to the group policy 
saying – and here she has quoted it: 
20 
“Under no circumstances shall products or services 
that can be procured from a group entity or division 
be procured from an external supplier or non-Denel 
company unless there is approval by the group 
supply chain executive based on sound business 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 43 of 211 
 
reasons.” 
So she is referring here, it seems, to the point that you 
made yesterday in your evidence that where there is going 
to be deviation you must approve it. 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct.  This is actually a quote 
verbatim from the group supply chain policy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And where we looked yesterday 
at the delegation of authority and there was a reference to 
consultation with you as the group supply chain executive 
or manager, as it was called there, was that subject to this 
10 
special provision saying you must not only be consulted if 
there is to be – if there is a to be a deviation from this, you 
must also give your approval that it is for sound business 
reasons. 
MR MLAMBO:   Ja, that is precisely, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Then she says in the third paragraph 
on page 824: 
“Having identified a need for a single source 
supplier for the supply of steel components and 
fabrications, in May 2015 DLS signed an MOA with 
20 
VR Laser for this scope of work.  VR Laser is a 
hundred percent black owned entity.” 
Now if I can just stop for a moment, you have already 
expressed your concerns about not have having been 
satisfied that that is the case. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 44 of 211 
 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, that is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then she continues: 
“In terms of the MOA VR Laser prices must be 
market-related and in line with the provisions of the 
MOA before an order can be placed on them.” 
And then she gets to this point: 
“Due to these contradicting positions supply chain 
approach DLS Exco to make a decision as to 
whether to honour the MOA and place the order on 
VR Laser or to follow the supply chain policy and 
10 
procure from inter-group namely DVS or LMT for 
this project.  Given the timeframe, urgency and 
history, Exco has recommended that the work be 
done by VR Laser.  I hereby request permission to 
implement the Exco decision in this regard.” 
Now Ms Malahlela has already given evidence when she 
told the Chair that her wording here was deliberate to make 
it clear that she was asking for your approval of this on the 
instructions of Exco against her own advice.  Be that as it 
may, I want your comment please.   
20 
 
Effectively, as I understand it and you must correct 
me if my understanding is wrong.  Effectively she was 
recognising that the group policy required that if work can 
be done in-house it must be given in-house, not to an 
outsider subject to price and quality, etcetera. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 45 of 211 
 
 
And secondly, if that is to be done, it has to be 
done with your approval as group supply chain executive 
that you are satisfied that there are sound business 
reasons for deviating, is that correct? 
MR MLAMBO:   Ja, that is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then what she is saying is, she 
is saying what has actually happened has been that VR 
Laser, a non-group entity has been awarded this contract 
already and there is a contradiction between that and the 
policy and Exco has said they want you to approve it.  Is 
10 
my understanding correct of his memo? 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, that is actually the gist of the request, 
for me to approve the deviation from policy knowing full 
well that there is capability and capacity within the group 
which I thought was ridiculous. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And we will get to why in a moment 
but the main point that you had to use as a test for whether 
to not to give approval was whether it was for sound 
business reasons not to give the work in-house but to give 
it to an outsider. 
20 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That was the test that you had to 
apply. 
MR MLAMBO:   Ja, that is correct and if in-house we did 
not have enough capacity, you could have such instances 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 46 of 211 
 
and to avoid a programme slipping and with the risk of 
having to pay penalties, sometimes it would make sense to 
outsource part of the work to an external company but that 
must be properly motivated and that is the reason why I 
noted here that if DVS and LMT could furnish reasons as to 
why they cannot execute this work, I would approve the 
deviation but that never materialised.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So let me – I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I see the time seems to be for the tea 
break, Mr Kennedy. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Oh, I am sorry, I did not realise, 
sorry, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but if there is one question you want 
to finalise before? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Perhaps I can just finish this thought. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Because he has just mentioned his 
notes.  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   For the record, may I then, Chair, 
20 
just read into the record – Mr Mlambo, your note that you 
are referred to, is that the handwritten note slotting MB? 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And is that your handwriting? 
MR MLAMBO:   It is my handwriting. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 47 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If I can just read it out: 
“DVS and LMT…” 
Those are the in-house entities. 
“…must submit proof that they cannot meet the 
requirements prior to the contract being awarded to 
VR Laser.” 
So you are saying that – you said a moment ago that this 
is what you meant, they have to show that they do not have 
the capacity.  If they do not have the capacity you would 
feel there is a good business reason to award it outside 
10 
the group but that has to be shown. 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, I needed to be convinced that they 
did not have the capacity and there was a risk that we 
could actually miss our delivery deadline which is a very 
serious thing in the defence industry.  If you miss your 
delivery milestones you could actually lose the entire profit 
on that contract because of that so you have to have sound 
programme management in place. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, if I might just have one further 
question? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you say that that proof has to be 
given by the in-house companies prior to the contract 
being awarded.  It seems from the body of Ms Malahlela’s 
letter in the second last paragraph on page 824 that she 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 48 of 211 
 
confirms that DLS had already signed the memorandum of 
agreement with VR Laser in May 2015, five months before 
they were asking you to approve it.  Any comment on that? 
MR MLAMBO:   Ja, it is also one of those dodgy contracts 
that they entered into and to my surprise, at the time it was 
Zwelakhe Ntshepe who was the Group CEO, Mr Saloojee 
had already been suspended and he actually overturned my 
decision, as you can see his signature over the – without 
even consulting with me. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Are you referring to his signature, Mr 
10 
Ntshepe’s signature on page 825? 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And above his signature someone 
has 
written 
in 
the 
word 
“approved” 
is 
that 
your 
handwriting? 
MR MLAMBO:   No, I rejected this, so it was actually Mr 
Ntshepe himself who wrote approved. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you know his handwriting? 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, it is his handwriting and it is his 
signature. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MLAMBO:   He was the Group CEO at the time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you – what was your understanding 
of what he was approving because based on where he put 
– he wrote approved and put his signature, one does not 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 49 of 211 
 
know on the face of it whether he was approving your 
comment that DVS and LMT must submit proof that they 
cannot meet the requirements prior to the contracts being 
awarded to VR Laser or whether he was furnishing his 
approval of what Ms Malahlela wanted in her memo.  What 
was your understanding of what he was approving? 
MR MLAMBO:   Chair, he was actually overturning my 
decision and approving the request. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so …[intervenes] 
MR MLAMBO:   Without even consulting with me. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, alight. 
MR MLAMBO:   So his loyalty was outside Denel. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, alright.  So he was 
overriding what you had just said in that note? 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct, Sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  Alright, we are going to take 
the tea break. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On a light note, I just want to declare 
that I did not communicate with Mr Kennedy or Mr Mlambo 
20 
or Registrar Mr Mfeka about the colour of the ties we must 
wear this morning.  I did not talk to anybody, I do not know 
about the three of you but I did not talk to anybody. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   We follow judicial precedents. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn.  
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 50 of 211 
 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   I found that there is another culprit, one  
of my protectors is wearing a similar tie. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It is spreading like a virus, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, thank you, let us continue. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Mlambo, we 
were 
talking 
about 
the 
refusal 
by 
you 
to 
sign 
Ms 
Malahlela’s 
memorandum 
where 
she 
conveyed 
Exco’s 
request, DLS Exco’s request for you to approve the award 
10 
of the single source contract to VR Laser which you say 
was overruled by Mr Ntshepe as CEO.  Can I take you now 
to page 837? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just before that, Mr Kennedy, neither 
you, Mr Mlambo nor Mr Ntshepe indicated the date when 
you respectively signed on this page.  Do you have a 
recollection of whether you go this memo on the same date 
which is 29 October 2015 and you made your note then or 
that you got it maybe a day or two after and you made this 
note there? 
20 
MR MLAMBO:   Actually I cannot recall the date. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You cannot recall.  You cannot recall 
also how soon after receiving it you made the note? 
MR MLAMBO:   But I would imagine this was shortly after 
the 29 October 2015. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 51 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, alright. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  May I then turn to page 
837?  This is a letter from Stephan Burger, DLS’ CEO, it 
was addressed to you and at the end of the letter there is a 
blank space where it says approved by, approval Dennis 
Mlambo, Group Supply Chain Executive.  So was this an 
attempt by Mr Burger to get you to again to give approval? 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, it is true, Chair, but they had actually 
added other products that they wanted me to approve, the 
fire compartment module and the outer shields were added 
10 
here. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And here the document has the date 
in small print on page 837, 29 April 2016.  So this is long 
after the date of Ms Malahlela’s memorandum that the 
Chair has just been asking you about. 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct, that is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then Mr Burger starts by 
thanking you for a meeting held at DCO with Mr Odwa 
Mhlwana and yourself on the 28 April 2016.  Do you 
confirm that you had such a meeting? 
20 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, Chair, that is true. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then he says in paragraph 2 that 
he confirms you discussion that a single source supplier 
agreement, the MOA had been entered into with VR Laser 
on the 19 May 2015 pursuant to a motivation being 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 52 of 211 
 
submitted to DCO.  It was recommended for approval by 
both the then Group Executive Business Development, Mr 
Zwelakhe Ntshepe.  Is that the same person who later 
acted as Group CEO when Mr Saloojee was suspended?  
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, that is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   There is also recommended by the 
Group COO, Mr Jan Wessels, was then approved by the 
Group CEO at the time, Riaz Saloojee and then he says: 
“That approval by Mr Saloojee is in accordance with 
Regulation 
16A 
(6)(4) 
of 
National 
Treasury 
10 
regulations.  Copy of the approval was signed, MOA 
and the applicable National Treasury regulation is 
attached, marked A, B and C.” 
Now those annexure do not appear as attachments to your 
letter but your affidavit has quoted the regulation.  If I can 
just have a moment?  Yes, Mr Mlambo, I think we will just 
keep the letter in front of you, but I just want to give the 
Chair the reference.  Chair, the regulation is quoted in the 
text of his affidavit at page 719, paragraph 6.16 and I am 
just going to read out from our affidavit your quotation of 
20 
the regulation. 
“If in a specific case it is impractical to invite 
competitive 
bids 
the 
accounting 
officer 
or 
accounting 
authority 
may 
procure 
the 
required 
goods or services by other means provided that the 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 53 of 211 
 
reasons for deviating from competitive bids must be 
recorded and approved by the accounting officer or 
accounting authority.” 
Are you familiar with that regulation? 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, it is actually an instruction note from 
National 
Treasury. 
 
I 
am 
very 
much 
familiar 
with 
…[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is it binding on Denel? 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, all Schedule 2 and 3 companies are 
bound by that. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Then to continue in Mr Burger’s letter 
at the foot of page 837, he says: 
“As indicated during the meeting and in terms of the 
abovementioned approval by the Group CEO the 
rationale for appointing VR Laser as a sole supplier 
was based on inter alia the following: 
1. Its 
unparalleled 
expertise 
on 
fabrication 
of 
complex engineering systems which includes but 
is not limited to turrets, outer shield, add on 
armour and vehicles hull structure. 
20 
2. It is a key supplier and strategy partner to DLS. 
3. It 
offers 
the 
best 
value 
having 
inter 
alia 
committed to invest capital and resources in its 
facilities in order to ensure that the capability 
remains intact and available to deal is for a 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 54 of 211 
 
minimum period of 10 years. 
4. It is prepared to assist and has established DLS 
with its obligations in foreign jurisdictions such 
as Malaysia in transferring skills relating to its 
manufacturing process.” 
The IP is referred to and then: 
5. It promotes a black industrialist entrepreneurial 
company within the defence industry.” 
And then he concludes by saying: 
“It 
is 
hereby 
recommended 
that 
the 
attached 
10 
submissions 
relating 
to 
the 
fire 
compartment 
module FCM and the outer shield marked D and C 
respectively be sourced via VR Laser in accordance 
with the terms and conditions of the MOA.” 
Is the last paragraph the reference to the additional work 
that he was asking for approval? 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And the earlier part of the letter 
referred to the previous award of the contract without your 
approval to VR Laser of the single source provision. 
20 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So he asks for your approval and you 
have indicated that you refused that. 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, I always made sure that if I rejected 
something I gave reasons in writing and those are the four 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 55 of 211 
 
reasons that I gave. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Are those the reasons in the 
handwritten portion next to the letters NB? 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Below the blank line that was meant 
for your signature to approve you instead refused to sign 
that and instead set out your reasons for refusal. 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And again is that you signature at 
the bottom right after this handwriting? 
10 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If I may read for the record your 
note: 
“1. 
The evidence on how VR Laser was selected 
is not available to support the appointment 
as a single source supplier. 
2. 
The approval process of the MOA excluded 
supply chain and the reasons thereof have 
not been furnished. 
3. 
The recommendation is given the fact that 
20 
Denel executive committed the company to 
place orders on VR Laser for specified 
products for ten years to have the same 
executives approve future orders.” 
Just explain that please? 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 56 of 211 
 
MR MLAMBO:    Basically what I was saying, Chair, is that 
I am not going to entertain this because I was not party to 
the memorandum of agreement.  Those who entered into 
that agreement are the ones that must actually approve 
future transactions which were at any rate going to be 
irregular. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then paragraph 4 sets our your 
final reason for rejection: 
“The paragraph in treasury regulations that has 
been cited...” 
10 
I am afraid, Chair, the photocopying has cut off a couple of 
letters on the right hand side but it seems to be: 
“…that has been cited in the motivation memo.” 
Is that the provision of the Treasury instruction note I read 
out earlier that you are referring to?  
MR MLAMBO:   It is correct, I can read the rest of it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, thank you. 
MR MLAMBO:   “The paragraph in treasury regulations that 
has been cited in the motivation memo is relevant 
because it was not impractical to test the supply 
20 
market.” 
This instruction note deals essentially with emergency 
procurement.  If emergency procurement you do not really 
have the luxury of getting quotes but in this particular 
instance it was actually quite possible.  Assuming that we 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 57 of 211 
 
did not have the capability within the group it was possible 
to go out and find a suitable supplier at a competitive rate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it is the second time that it looks 
like somebody who is going to testify here who relied on 
this provision does not seem on the fact of it to understand 
what impractical means.  I did have another witness here in 
relation to the Free State evidence, the then CFO of the 
Department of Agriculture said she relied on this provision 
for supporting that a certain job should not be sent out to 
open tender but I asked her what her understanding of 
10 
impractical is and it seems here – I mean, when you look at 
Mr Burger’s reasons, there seems to be nothing that shows 
that it was impractical to invite bids because that is what 
this provision says, you know, if it must be impractical to 
invite other bids before you can invoke it.  So that is the 
point I think you make in your last reason but Mr Burger 
will come here, maybe he will persuade me that actually it 
was impractical. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, he will be giving evidence at a 
later stage, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And he will be asked to deal with 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I ask the witness, Chair, to just 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 58 of 211 
 
give an example of what you understand would constitute 
the type of emergency that makes it impractical. 
MR MLAMBO:   Well, if there is a thunderstorm, it blows 
off the roof of a house and you actually need to protect the 
assets within the house you can actually justify going out 
to one service provider or roofing contractor to do the work 
because you cannot wait seven days or three weeks before 
you get the work done.  If life is actually threatened or 
your assets are actually threatened in the process you are 
justified in going to just one service provider but the 
10 
expectation is that you must keep a record of that so that 
when you are audited you can prove beyond any doubt that 
indeed this was an emergency, you did not have valuables 
to wait for two weeks or three weeks before you could have 
the problem addressed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In other words, you cannot rely on how 
good a particular service provider is to justify invoking this 
regulation, you cannot say they are so good, they are 
international, they are this, they provide, you know, 
excellent service.  That is not a reason to invoke this 
20 
…[intervenes] 
MR MLAMBO:   Certainly not otherwise that would nullify 
the notion of going out on tender. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, because …[intervenes] 
MR MLAMBO:   Because the very reason why we go out on 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 59 of 211 
 
tender is to actually establish who of the tenderers or 
bidders is the best in terms of the work that is required or 
the service that is required and the price, you know, to do 
the job. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja because when you look at the 
reasons 
that 
Mr 
Burger 
gives, 
he 
says 
one, 
it 
is 
unparalleled 
expertise 
on 
fabrication 
of 
complex 
engineering systems.  That is just about how good it is in 
his view.  Then he says it is a key supplier and strategic 
partner of DLS, that says nothing about impracticality.  He 
10 
says it offers the best value.  That says nothing about the 
impracticality.  And then he goes on.  But, as I read this it 
just seems to me that he may have I misunderstood what 
impracticality means in that provision but he will come and 
he will explain and maybe he will give us a certain 
perspective.  Yes, Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  What was the 
outcome of this – your second – the second time that you 
were refusing to give your approval or a contract that had 
already been awarded?  What then happened with that? 
20 
MR MLAMBO:   I seem to recall it may well be in this – in 
my evidence that this was also overruled. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Yes, you are right, you do say 
that.  Let me just get you the …[intervenes] 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 60 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I see at 839 there is something 
written Mr Ntshepe overruling Mr Mlambo’s rejection.  I 
guess that is what he said, 840, I assume. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, did you mention 849? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I said 839. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   839, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, it says Mr Ntshepe overruling Mr 
Mlambo’s rejection. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then 840 I think must be the annexure 
10 
where – okay, no, no, I am sorry, 840 is something else but 
there is a note at 839. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, Chair, may I just indicate, his 
affidavit, the witness’s affidavit refers to this annexure as 
being showing that Mr Ntshepe overruled.  This, of course, 
is the same document that we looked at a bit earlier. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that was at page 824 to 5.  It is 
exactly the same document. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Well, I am looking at 841 where Mr 
20 
Ntshepe wrote “Approved” and then put his signature. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that must be overruling that is being 
referred to. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 61 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I just ask the witness to confirm 
that?  Mr Mlambo you have referred to this at 841 as being 
the overruling by Mr Ntshepe. 
MR MLAMBO:   841, yes, that is Mr Ntshepe. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right. 
MR MLAMBO:   Overrule or overturning my decision. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Okay, thank you.  Now we can 
move off this contract.  So we have dealt with now the 
second contract which is the VLS contract awarded for a 
10 
sole supply – single supplier to VR Laser.  Now is it correct 
that there was another process followed by DVS, Denel 
Vehicle Systems to award a similar contract for their 
product needs to VR Laser as a single source supplier? 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you deal with that in your 
affidavit.  If I can just give the Chair the reference, that is 
from page 722, Chair.  Now may I take you …[intervenes]3 
CHAIRPERSON:   722? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   722, yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I take you now, Mr Mlambo to a 
document that you referred to in your affidavit that relates 
to this.  If I can take you please to 843. 
MR MLAMBO:   To page 843? 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 62 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   843, that is correct. 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, I found it.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now the first email there seems to be 
an email from a Mr Johan Steyn, is that correct? 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, it is. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Who was Mr Steyn in the Denel 
Group? 
MR MLAMBO:   Mr Steyn was the Chief Executive Officer 
of DVS, Denel Vehicle Systems. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So he was the equivalent of Mr 
10 
Stephan Burger in the other division, DLS? 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright.  Now I am just going to read 
the first few lines: 
“Since Zwelakhe’s surprising instruction to me a few 
weeks ago to enter into an agreement with VRL we 
have made good progress with Johan Wessels’ help 
and we have had several discussions with VRL…” 
Which I understand to mean VR Laser. 
“…and DCO about this.” 
20 
Now can you tell the Chair please, we know that DLS has 
had a contract awarded to VR Laser for its specific 
requirements on a single source supplier basis for ten 
years.  That was despite the fact that they did not comply 
with processes and did not get your approval a number of 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 63 of 211 
 
times.  You have given evidence on that. 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now can you tell the Chair please 
what was being proposed in relation to DVS? 
MR MLAMBO:   Mr Ntshepe, who was at the time the Group 
CEO, had instructed Mr Johan Steyn, CEO of DVS, to enter 
into a similar agreement with VR Laser and this is what Mr 
Steyn is describing as a surprising instruction.  DVS and 
LMT basically have very much similar capabilities and that 
is why in some of my rejection notes I mentioned the two 
10 
companies as to why they are not being contracted to do 
the work instead of VR Laser. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you remember whether Mr Ntshepe 
was Acting Group CEO or Group CEO at the time? 
MR MLAMBO:   At the time if it is – 2019 he was already 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of November 2015. 
MR MLAMBO:   2015 he was Acting then because Mr 
Saloojee was …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   On suspension. 
20 
MR 
MLAMBO: 
 
 
Suspended 
in 
– 
I 
think 
it 
was 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   September 2015. 
MR MLAMBO:   September 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, so he was acting. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 64 of 211 
 
MR MLAMBO:   Ja and he was appointed as the Acting 
Group CEO. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and I think Mr Saloojee left 
sometime in 2016 or early 2017, I cannot remember.  Ja, 
okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  And were you asked for 
your 
approval 
from 
the 
supply 
chain 
management 
executive’s perspective for what was being proposed? 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, Chair, I was actually approached 
about that and I actually rejected that proposal and I seem 
10 
to recall that Mr Steyn had actually been told by Mr 
Ntshepe that you are reporting to me, you cannot take 
instructions from Mr Mlambo.  That is what Mr Steyn told 
me and he said to me what can I do?  I said do what is 
right for the business, I am not afraid of anyone.  He must 
confront me and let me know why he actually insists that 
you have to outsource work that you can do yourself 
because Mr Steyn actually pointed out that by outsourcing 
that work, that was actually going to cost him about 15% 
more to do that and it just did not make sense and I said to 
20 
him then do what is right.  I have made it very clear, it is in 
writing, I am rejecting that, you are not going to outsource 
that.  But then he is the Group CEO and he felt that he had 
all the rights to overturn my decision and he did just that to 
the detriment of the business. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 65 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Was there any financial detriment? 
MR MLAMBO:   Ja, there was – at that time there was 
surplus capacity at DVS which could not be utilised 
because the Group CEO, Mr Ntshepe that time, insisted 
that the work be outsourced to VR Laser.  So that 
definitely had an adverse impact on the financials of the 
group. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You refer in your affidavit to Mr 
Steyn discussing a higher cost that would be involved with 
VR Laser.  Do you recall that? 
10 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, I do recall that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    What did he tell you? 
MR MLAMBO:   That it was going to increase his costs by 
at least 15%. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   By how much? 
MR MLAMBO:   15%. 
ADV KENNEDY SC: 15%.    
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct and typically we do not 
even make that kind of profit in the defence industry.  If 
you make 7% it is an excellent net profit on a contract. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it was quite a serious financial 
detriment. 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Prejudice to the entity. 
MR MLAMBO:   Yes, Chair, it was very serious.  That is 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 66 of 211 
 
why I believe that even if he actually told Mr Ntshepe that 
he was not going to do it, if he got fired or disciplined he 
would still have his integrity intact.  In fact he would later 
be proved right, that he was acting in the interests of the 
group. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I just have a moment, Chair?  
Alright, may I just mention, Chair, at page – Chair, may I 
just indicate this – well, perhaps I should take the witness 
to it.  Can I take you in your affidavit please, Mr Mlambo, 
10 
to page 722.  You refer in paragraph 7.1, 722 is the page. 
MR MLAMBO:   722.  Yes, I found it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  7.1 and 7.2 refers to Mr Steyn 
saying he had received the instruction to put an MOA in 
place for DVS with VR Laser and he expressed his 
reservations and the 15% is there mentioned and then you 
say in 7.3: 
“Mr Steyn further presented to me a submission 
which I was supposed to sign in support of the 
procurement decision to enter into an MOA with VR 
20 
Laser Services.  I rejected the submission and 
presented my reasons in my handwriting on the said 
document.” 
Now you do not refer to any annexure there and I have not 
found any of the annexures to your affidavit, the document 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 67 of 211 
 
you refer to here.  We are dealing here, of course, with V 
…[intervenes] 
MR MLAMBO:   DVS. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, DVS, not the DLS that we 
were referring to earlier.  Do you in fact have that 
document available to you?  
MR MLAMBO:   Unfortunately I do not have it but I had 
actually 
requested 
the 
investigators 
to 
request 
that 
document and the unfortunate thing is that I have already 
left Denel and I could not have access to the documents 
10 
that I had received. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright, thank you.  Chair, may we 
undertake that we will produce that for your records. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   To have it admitted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   We just need to - it is not an 
annexure to another witness’s affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   We are not quite sure at this stage. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine and if that is found later 
he could possibly just do a supplementary affidavit and 
confirm what he knows about it. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   We will do that, thank you Chair.    
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 68 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  What then happened with this project 
to award a sole supplier contract for DVS’s requirements to 
VR Laser, that was instructed by the now Group Chief 
Executive Mr  Ntshepe, which you were asked to approve, 
which you refused to approve, what then happened, was it 
ultimately awarded? 
MR MLAMBO:   I am not aware that it was awarded, but it 
is highly likely that it was awarded, because just like with 
the others they were awarded without my knowledge 
thereof. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, but you do not have personal 
knowledge as to that? 
MR MLAMBO:   No, I do not. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright, thank you.  Now may I now 
turn – leave that contractor the DVS contract to another 
contract which is referred to as the Chad contract in your 
affidavit.  Tell the Chair please what was this Chad 
contract for?  
MR MLAMBO:   Well Denel entered into a contract with the 
Chad government, had to supply 40 vesper vehicles at a 
20 
cost of I think around $18.2million.  What I know about the 
contract is that Mr  Ntshepe is the one that approved the 
contract but it was later mentioned in one of the EXCO 
meetings that the approval of that contract was detrimental 
to Denel because it was actually below cost and it was 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 69 of 211 
 
going to cost Denel money and there was also an issue of 
what we normally refer to as a technical advisor that had 
actually been paid but there was no evidence that the 
technical advisor had actually done any work for Denel.   
And Denel had already been committed to deliver 
those 40 vehicles and what turned out was that the IP 
which 
is 
something 
that 
really 
surprised 
me 
in 
the 
motivation it was mentioned that…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Intellectual property.     
MR MLAMBO:   The IP for the Casper vehicles belongs to 
10 
VR Laser. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I just want for the record to confirm 
that when you say IP you refer to intellectual property.    
MR MLAMBO:   Intellectual property, that’s right. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
MR MLAMBO:   I was told that it belongs to VR Laser and 
for that reason I was requested to approve giving the work 
once again to VR Laser to manufacture the 40 Casper 
vehicles.  I rejected that request on the grounds that I was 
convinced that the intellectual property belonged to Denel 
20 
and no one could actually furnish any sound reasons as to 
why it was now in the hands of VR Laser.  I requested 
proof that Denel had actually followed a due process to 
sell the IP to VR Laser and in my view that would have 
been well documented if that had happened and I also 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 70 of 211 
 
wanted to know what were the reasons or what was the 
rationale behind selling the IP when there were lots of 
opportunities for Denel to supply Casper vehicles not just 
to Chad but to other countries.   
And all I got was that yes it was but no proof to 
authenticate that yes we had sold that and one of the 
things that was said in the motivation was that VR Laser 
had 
undertaken 
at 
its 
own 
cost 
to 
actually 
make 
improvements to the Casper vehicles and it was for that 
reason that you know they ended up owning the intellectual 
10 
property.   
And my question was how could they do that without 
an order from Denel because under normal circumstances 
when you place an order on a company to improve a 
product you’ve paid for that improvement the IP remains 
yours so I did not understand why in this particular 
instance the IP ended up in the hands of VR Laser.  So I 
rejected that request and in the process we learnt that VR 
Laser had been placed under business rescue and that 
actually forced us to look at our own internal capability and 
20 
capacity and a decision was taken that we would do 
reversing the engineering in this case because we did not 
have the latest data pack because that if you do not have 
the IP you could not possibly have the latest data pack.  
So that was the reason and DLS motivated that another 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 71 of 211 
 
company could actually supply some of the products 
because that is the chassis in particular.   
The chassis had already been used successfully 
before according to the motivation from DLS and they 
submitted the letter to myself from a company called 
Sinotruk which is a Chinese company that letter confirmed 
that the accredited representative was a company known 
as ENNE7 and no one else could supply that chassis 
except that company and it was on the letterhead of 
Sinotruk.  And on the basis of that I actually approved the 
10 
designation of ENNE7 as a single source supplier because 
there was evidence in this particular case.   
And it later turned out that there was a Bowman’s 
report that had investigated the whole saga and found that 
amongst other things that were wrong that the so-called 
letter from Sinutruck was not authentic it was a fake letter 
and I had to face disciplinary action for having approved 
that and I went out of my way in fact once again after the 
event to verify the authenticity of that.  I wrote to the 
managing director of Sinutruck and sent a copy of that 
20 
letter to him and asked him whether it was an authentic 
letter and he confirmed in writing that it was indeed an 
authentic letter.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So you faced disciplinary action in 
regard to this one incident what about other incidents in 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 72 of 211 
 
which other people seems to have been involved which 
appear to have been problematic?  
MR MLAMBO:   Well I actually saw this as a ruse or as an 
excuse to get me out of the way because I was a difficult 
person I wasn’t towing the line and at that time the Group 
CEO was Mr Danny Du Toit because Mr  Ntshepe had 
already left. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.    
MR MLAMBO:   And I actually thought that it had 
something to do with some previous disagreement also 
10 
relating to the award of a contract to a company an 
auditing company that they actually believed had to be 
awarded that contract.  But the evaluation process did not 
support that and I rejected that and because I was now 
facing disciplinary action for having approved something 
that was authentic I requested a copy of that report from 
Bowman’s and to this day I never received that report, 
each time I got excuses.   
There are a number of emails that I exchanged with 
Mr Du Toit and I never got that until I enlisted the services 
20 
of an attorney Mr Fisher who challenged that, requested 
the documentation and that never happened and Denel 
actually backtracked after that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So are you saying that you were told 
that Bowman’s had conducted an investigation and had 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 73 of 211 
 
concluded that the letter was fake but you never actually 
saw the report from Bowman’s.         
MR MLAMBO:   Ja, precisely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
But 
you 
say 
you 
yourself 
had 
communicated with the company and sort confirmation that 
the letter was authentic and they had provided that 
confirmation.    
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and that was before you were 
dismissed or was it after you were dismissed.   
10 
MR MLAMBO:   No, I was never dismissed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh you were never dismissed.  
MR MLAMBO:   No. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh you resigned.  
MR MLAMBO:   What happened I actually decided to leave 
the company because I thought the situation was such that 
I could not continue working for Denel I applied for a VSP, 
voluntary severance package. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.    
MR MLAMBO:   It was actually approved but after the 
20 
mention of that Bowman’s report I was told that it was 
going to be suspended pending the outcome of the 
disciplinary hearing. But when I sit back and thought about 
the circumstances that led to that it was blatantly clear as 
we will discuss that or we will present evidence later that 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 74 of 211 
 
my refusal to approve the appointment of Ernst & Young 
actually triggered that because I based my decision on the 
evaluation teams report in this course.  I interrogated that 
and I was satisfied that they were objective, impartial, fair 
and they did things in accordance with the requirements of 
the policy.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Mr Kennedy.      
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Chair, thank you.  Mr Mlambo you 
have dealt briefly now in the last few minutes with a 
number of topics all of which are set out in some detail in 
10 
your affidavit the Chad contract, the Bowman’s report, the 
authenticity of the letter, your approach to – your concern 
about the intellectual property not being established and 
then also and I do not propose Chair unless you would like 
me to go through any of that in any detail…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No that is fine.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Because I think he has covered very 
usefully the broad outline. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And Mr Mlambo you confirm all your 
20 
evidence in your affidavit specifically in relation to that and 
also the annexures that you put up in support of that? 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct Chair.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The appointment of the auditors was 
that the appointment of Ernst & Young that is referred to in 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 75 of 211 
 
your affidavit? 
MR MLAMBO:   Ja, Ernst & Young was not the winning 
bidder.  The winning bidder…[intervene] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am sorry yes it was Kopano was it 
not who was actually awarded.  
MR MLAMBO:   Ja, but Kopano was actually second on the 
list I do not know where the evaluation report is here it is 
one of the annexures.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, but just summarise in a 
sentence or two if you would for the Chair ’s assistance.  
10 
What was the difficulty in relation to the appointment of the 
auditors? 
MR 
MLAMBO: 
 
 
The 
tender 
was 
actually 
for 
the 
appointment of an internal audit company.  After the 
evaluation 
as 
per 
our 
process 
the 
evaluation 
team 
presented their report.  I was actually quite happy with 
their report initially they had recommended that the 
company known as Nexia SAB&T something.  But it turned 
out that that company had actually not disclosed some 
contravention, it was guilty of issuing a BBBEE certificate 
20 
that they were not supposed to issue and the BBBEE 
Commission was involved in that.  So that was a serious 
contravention and on the basis of the representation to 
myself by the acting group financial director and also in 
that report he mentioned the Chair of the audit committee 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 76 of 211 
 
Mr Taliep Sadick that he had actually expressed concerns 
that evaluation team had overlooked that.   
I saw the evidence and on the basis of that 
evidence I concurred with him that yes it was the right 
thing to do to disqualify that company which I did.  And I 
said then we have to as per policy award the contract to 
the next best company it was Kopano and the argument 
that was raised after that was that they did not know 
Kopano it was the acting Group CFO was supported by the 
Group CEO and they actually claimed that even the head of 
10 
the audit committee did not support the idea of Kopano 
being appointed because they did not know it and my 
argument was that you do not have to know the company.   
After all the three companies are large companies 
and that pre-supposes that they have enough resources to 
execute the contract and if I look at the head count of the 
three companies there is no way that they would not be 
able to execute that contract and I said we do not actually 
appoint companies on the basis of who we know in those 
companies.  I look at the evaluation report and on the 
20 
basis of that I approve or reject if I find that there is any 
anomaly in that report.  And then they raised another 
argument that the company in question was doing work for 
the Auditor General, I investigated that and even spoke to 
a senior manager in the Auditor General’s office and that 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 77 of 211 
 
senior manager confirmed that almost all the companies, 
audit firms that are in South Africa are doing work for the 
Auditor General and I said if that is the argument I am not 
going to entertain it.  The award will go to Kopano as per 
the outcome of the evaluation process that was rejected 
because 
the 
Group 
CEO 
and 
the 
Group 
CFO 
were 
supposed to also sign as approving that.   
They rejected that and ultimately the contract was 
cancelled but one of the things that did not happen.  When 
you cancel a contract that was advertised on the eTender 
10 
portal, the National Treasury’s portal you have to furnish 
reasons and post on that website as to why you are 
cancelling that tender that was not done.  But then 
unfortunately during that period that is the time when I left 
the company but a subsequently learnt that the tender was 
re-advertised and the outcome was in favour of Ernst & 
Young the company they wanted to appoint.   
So it would be interesting for the evaluation process 
to be investigated and see whether a proper process was 
followed in awarding.  I do not think it is a coincidence that 
20 
the contract ended up going to Ernst & Young that is what 
they wanted to do right at the outset.                     
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair may I just conclude 
these questions by asking this, had you started with Denel 
in 2004?  
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 78 of 211 
 
MR MLAMBO:   That is correct Chair.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you worked continuously there 
until you left in the circumstances that you have just 
outlined to the Chair.   
MR MLAMBO:   In 2019.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In 2019 so it was 15 years 
afterwards.  How did you feel when you left?  How did you 
feel about the circumstances in which you came to leave?  
MR MLAMBO:   Well it was actually sad because I had 
actually invested a lot of time and energy in making sure 
10 
that together obviously with people who believed in the 
future of Denel to make sure that Denel is a viable and 
successful organisation.  When I joined Denel I joined one 
of the divisions which was at the time the biggest division 
in the group that was known as Kentron but it was later 
renamed Denel Dynamics.   
I did quite a lot, Denel was lost making that time it 
was in a dire state.  My key role at that time was to 
implement a management systems to comply with the 
relevant ISO standard, ISO of 9001, 14 001 and 18 001 
20 
and there I managed to get Denel Dynamics which was the 
biggest division at the time to be ISO 9000 and 14 000 
accredited because one of our biggest clients at the time 
which was Armscor it is not one to do business with 
companies that are not ISO certified.  And the next big 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 79 of 211 
 
project that I handled was running with development and 
implementation of the strategy that we dubbed voyage to 
excellent.  And at that time Mr Wessel’s was actually the 
CEO of Denel Dynamics and very supportive I think he did 
a sterling job at that time supported me and even got me to 
actually be part of the team that approved the appointment 
of key individuals in the group with a view to driving a 
transformation because as a high-tech organisation we 
employed a lot of engineers and scientist at Denel.  
And we managed through the right interventions to 
10 
get a lot of black engineers into the group and in that 
period the division was actually doing well people were 
very motivated and it was regarded as strategic.  In fact, 
they used the term sovereign, sovereign capability which is 
above strategic status because there is no other company 
on the entire continent that has got the capability to 
develop missiles and UAV’s and Denel Dynamics had that 
and in the southern hemisphere as well it was the only one 
that could do that.   
So we were very proud of what we have achieved 
20 
and the company started doing well financially and you 
know the group and with the appointment of Mr Riaz 
Saloogee the company did even better.  I think it was 
during his era that Denel did exceptionally well and it was 
showed quite constantly with the label of the best governed 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 80 of 211 
 
SOE because we had good governance, we were just doing 
well.  Our processes were great and then it was actually 
sad to see Denel in the State it was in being unable to pay 
salaries most of the time, depending on tenders and we 
were losing a lot of critical skills because the focus had 
been lost, we were not focusing on the things that actually 
make a business to hum.   
So it was actually sad to, for me to see that 
happening but what I am hoping to see because I still 
believe Denel is a very strategic and critical business not 
10 
just for the State but for the country.  It is important to find 
the right people in key positions that will turn the fortunes 
of Denel around.  I think it is still possible they can still get 
back some of those lost critical skills and just get people 
that will focus on the things that matter in a business. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Kennedy.                     
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you those are our questions 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. Thank you very much Mr 
Mlambo for coming to assist the Commission we appreciate 
20 
it very much and if we need you we will ask you again and 
I have no doubt you will come back if asked.  Thank you 
very much.     
MR MLAMBO:   My pleasure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 81 of 211 
 
MR MLAMBO:   Thanks for giving me the opportunity.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, you are excused.  
MR MLAMBO:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Kennedy.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair may we call our 
next witness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I just indicate the next witness 
is not the person who directed email correspondence to the 
Commission that was the subject of discussion earlier. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now his situation will be clarified and 
dealt with on a later date. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   We propose now to call as the next 
witness Mr Nkosi, Mr Phumlane Nkosi who I believe is 
present.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I ask that he then come to the 
witness Chair and then be sworn in? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay they can bring him up to the 
witness 
chair. 
Maybe 
I 
should 
take 
a 
five 
minute’s 
adjournment while you sort out everything.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   As you please Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, we will adjourn.   
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 82 of 211 
 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair I confirm that our next 
witness who is now in the witness box is Mr Phumlane Nkosi. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  May he be sworn in please? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Before he is sworn in Mr Nkosi where is 
your jacket?  Where is your jacket? 
MR NKOSI:  Oh I have – I am [Not speaking into 
10 
microphone]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR NKOSI:  [Not speaking into microphone]. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You did not wear a jacket?  You should 
wear a jacket when you come to a forum like this.  I think 
somebody is going to give you a jacket.  Thank you Mr Nkosi 
and to those who have assisted you.  Now you may take the 
oath or affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR NKOSI:  Phumlane Nkosi. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR NKOSI:  No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 83 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:  Yes. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so help me 
God. 
MR NKOSI:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Thank you; you may be seated Mr Nkosi. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Good afternoon Mr Nkosi.  Mr Nkosi is 
10 
it correct that you have provided at the request of the 
commission an affidavit which is – it should be in front of you 
in the bundle. 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Chair for the record the bundle that I 
am referring to is Denel Bundle 03. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And it is Exhibit W13. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes thank you. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Mr Nkosi would you please look at the 
20 
document – you will see that there are various page numbers 
look on the top left hand side of each page you will see page 
numbers – do you see that Denel -03-004?  You have that? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  For convenience we will just refer to 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 84 of 211 
 
the number here as being 4 – we will not read out the whole 
thing.  You confirm that this is – it is referred to as a 
statement but this is in fact your affidavit? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And may I take you please to page.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Please raise your voice Mr Nkosi. 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And try and just look towards the Chair 
if you would not mind even though the questions are coming 
from me just so that he hears you clearly.  And can I ask you 
10 
please to turn to page 27.   
MR NKOSI:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Is that your signature above the typed 
Phumlane Nkosi? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And you signed that before a 
Commissioner of Oaths whose details and signature appear 
on the following page? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You confirm that this in fact sets out 
20 
your evidence in written form of an affidavit? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And do you – have you been through 
this affidavit to confirm that you are happy with the contents 
as being true and correct? 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 85 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:  Yes correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And – right.  Thank you Chair we would 
ask then formally for leave to have this affidavit and its 
annexures admitted in – as evidence of the commission 
Denel Bundle 03 Exhibit W13. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The statement/affidavit of Mr Phumlane 
Nkosi starting at page 4 of this bundle is admitted as Exhibit 
W13. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  Chair I propose with 
your leave to go through particularly the introductory parts 
10 
very briefly and to lead the witness on issues that are 
uncontroversial. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Mr Nkosi you are a Mechanical 
Engineer is that right? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You hold degrees of Bachelor of 
Science as well as an MSC in Leadership and Innovation? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then you have various other 
20 
qualifications.  You are employed where at the moment? 
MR NKOSI:  Armscor. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Armscor.  And when did you start? 
MR NKOSI:  I started in 2009. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  2009? 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 86 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Your affidavit refers to your being 
initially at Armscor as a trainee engineer in 2000 to 2002 and 
then you moved elsewhere to CSIR, is that right? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then you joined BAE Land Systems 
South Africa? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Is that the entity also known sometimes 
as BLSSA? 
10 
MR NKOSI:  It is the current DVS Denel Vehicle System yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  The current DVS? 
MR NKOSI:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Previously was owned by the 
British Arms Group BAE but it was acquired later by Denel. 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And then it is now known as DVS Denel 
Vehicle Systems, is that correct? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So you worked there for what years? 
20 
MR NKOSI:  From 2005 until 2009. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And is that when you moved then over 
from Denel to Armscor? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And in what capacity? 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 87 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:  I was a Program Manager at Armscor. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  And then you were promoted to 
what position? 
MR NKOSI:  To a Team Leader. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Team Leader? 
MR NKOSI:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  For what? 
MR NKOSI:  In Program Management Support. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And is that the position you hold 
currently? 
10 
MR NKOSI:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now your affidavit if you can look at 
page 6 again look at the top left hand numbers.  The last 
digit is 6 paragraph 3.  You set out there your roles and 
responsibilities. 
MR NKOSI:  Yes. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
As 
a 
Team 
Leader 
Program 
Management Support? 
MR NKOSI:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now I am going to just leave it on the 
20 
basis that obviously the Chair has the affidavit before the 
commission 
and 
has 
the 
opportunity 
or 
has 
had 
the 
opportunity to read through all of that detail.  I do not 
believe Chair with subject to your guidance that it is 
necessary for us…. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 88 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  To take him through that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no that is fine. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Mr Nkosi you deal in the body of your 
affidavit with a number of issues relating to standards that 
had to be met and RSA Mil – M-i-l standard 37.  You deal 
with a number of tests that are referred to as TP2 and TP3 
tests.  Before we get into that just explain your role as an 
Armscor Official in this particular job that you hold now what 
role if any do you have to play in relation to testing arms – 
10 
items of arms or components of arms and weapons? 
MR NKOSI:  Yes.  I am a blast specialist what was then 
referred to as a RSM new standard officer.  That entails 
basically ensuring that all the vehicles that go to the SANDF 
are properly tested and certified. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Now you refer in your affidavits 
and again we will get into the detail in a moment to a need 
for tests to be done for certain items relating to the 
Hoefyster contract. 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  You confirm that? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right and what were those items? 
MR NKOSI:  Basically before the vehicle can be issued to 
SANDF according to the RSM Mil standard that is a clearly 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 89 of 211 
 
specified – it has to be [intervention] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes I am asking sorry to interrupt.  
What items are we talking about? 
MR NKOSI:  It is – it is the vehicle itself. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  The vehicles? 
MR NKOSI:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  These are armoured vehicles? 
MR NKOSI:  Armoured vehicles yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Under the Hoefyster contract? 
MR NKOSI:  Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And were these being purchased by 
Armscor from Denel? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And Armscor would supply whom with 
those armoured vehicles? 
MR NKOSI:  SANDF. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  SANDF? 
MR NKOSI:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  And is it Armscor’s function to 
test the vehicles for something specific? 
20 
MR NKOSI:  It is Armscor’s function to test that before it is 
given to the SANDF. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Can Denel or its divisions or entities do 
their own testing or do you – are – is Armscor ultimately 
responsible? 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 90 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:  Armscor is ultimately responsible they are the 
National Authority. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Now again Chair subject to your 
guidance I am going to be very brief in trying to get the 
witness to explain. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  In very layman’s terms lay person 
terms. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Some technical issues and Mr Nkosi 
10 
can you just please bear in mind that we are – we are on the 
legal side rather than the mechanical engineering side so 
please assist us in our – certainly in my ignorance on 
technical aspects such as this.  Were you in your capacity 
that you have described personally responsible for testing 
these armoured vehicles in relation to the Hoefyster contract 
or at least ensuring that proper tests were done? 
MR NKOSI:  I only became responsible from 2011.  The tests 
happened in 2005 as per CV has indicated that I was at 
CSIR at the time. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  So long before you joined there 
were certain tests that were done? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And you have indicated in your affidavit 
concerns about the adequacy or the correctness of the tests 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 91 of 211 
 
that were done. 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And were they specifically done on 
armoured vehicles that were being manufactured as part of 
the Hoefyster Project? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you. How many tests were done 
– are you aware of in 2005? 
MR NKOSI:  In 2005 there were three tests that were done. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Three tests? 
10 
MR NKOSI:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay. And your affidavit refers to a Mr 
Frans Beetge. 
MR NKOSI:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Who was he or is he? 
MR NKOSI:  Frans Beetge is the – is the previous incumbent 
of the position that I am currently holding now. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  So you replaced him? 
MR NKOSI:  Yes I replaced him. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  In what year? 
20 
MR NKOSI:  Basically I was his understudy from 2011 
basically getting all the background information for his work 
because it is a critical skill and a critical work as specified 
by Armscor and hence it is not a work that can be – you need 
time just to get a ground until you get acquainted with the 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 92 of 211 
 
work. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes I understand what understudy 
means.  Now Mr Beetge you have recorded in your affidavit 
has sadly passed away. 
MR NKOSI:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Did – and – when he left the employ of 
Armscor how did he leave the employ of Armscor? 
MR NKOSI:  Ja unfortunately he was ill – he could not carry 
on anymore I think he retired just before – before turning 65.  
He must have been around 62. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. 
MR NKOSI:  So he felt he needs to spend enough time with 
his family. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.  Now Mr Nkosi was he the person 
occupying the position you later took over at the time of the 
tests – the three tests that you have referred to as having 
been done in 2005? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And did he – did he convey to you 
information about what tests have been done? 
20 
MR NKOSI:  Yes he conveyed and provided all the evidence 
on all the tests that were done. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Did he provide you with documentation 
in that regard? 
MR NKOSI:  Yes I have documentation, I have videos, I have 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 93 of 211 
 
files and the pictures basically. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Alright thank you.  Now you refer in 
your affidavit to a standard that is referred to as RSA-Mil 
standard 37 if I can take you to page 8. 
MR NKOSI:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Your paragraph 4 has a heading 
Summary of the RSA-Mil standard 37 issue 3.  Now am I 
right in understanding Mil there means military? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.  Now can you just very, very 
10 
briefly Mr Nkosi I do not want you to go into considerable 
technical detail but can you just explain to us in a sentence 
or two what the standard is, who lays it down, what is its 
purpose? 
MR NKOSI:  The standard’ s purpose is to ensure that the 
vehicle that ultimately goes to service by the SANDF has 
been properly tested as it involves basically those vehicles 
are subject – could be subjected to landmines in the area of 
operation.  So basically that – that standard lays down on all 
the processes that one has to follow until the vehicle can be 
20 
issues to the SANDF. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  So is the – is the main object of 
a test to ensure that the vehicle has sufficient protection 
against the damage that might be caused if the vehicle came 
into contact with an explosive device such as a landmine? 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 94 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Now you refer in your affidavit 
to two tests.  You refer to them as test piece 2 or TP2 and I 
am going to use the abbreviation and test piece 3. 
MR NKOSI:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  TP2 and TP3.  Were they tests that 
were part of this RSA-Mil standard 37 issue 3? 
MR NKOSI:  Yes they are part of that.  There is also a TP1 a 
test plate 1 whereby it is just the preliminary stage of the 
whole process. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
MR NKOSI:  So – so basically they are part of that standard 
test. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Do you have any issue with any test 
relating to these vehicles in the Hoefyster Project that relate 
to the TP1 test? 
MR NKOSI:  TP1 test is basically a test plates that you still 
sort of like trying to find out scientific evidence or maybe the 
vehicle can [00:15:30] sustain and survive any landmines or 
something like that.  The critical ones are actually the TP2 
20 
and TP3. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  TP2 and TP3. 
MR NKOSI:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And is that is why have dealt with those 
in your affidavit rather than TP1? 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 95 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay.  Now what is the – what 
specifically does TP2 test seek to test as compared with 
TP3?  Again very briefly from a technical point of view.  What 
is TP2 test? 
MR NKOSI:  A TP2 test basically it is the critical test 
whereby if there are bidders on a particular contract of 
supplying armoured vehicles.  It is an entry test whereby you 
actually trying to ensure that the vehicle that you are going 
to accept has a minimum structural integrity to be able to be 
10 
considered for – for the contract. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. 
MR NKOSI:  Yes.  So basically the understanding is that the 
vehicle is not being properly developed yet because it is still 
a bidding phase. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. 
MR NKOSI:  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Sorry did the Chair – I think the Chair 
wants to ask something. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, yes, ja.   
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you may I proceed?  Thank you.  
May I just ask Mr Nkosi page 10 paragraph 4.6 until 4.9 on 
the following page.  Does that set out in more technical 
terms the different elements of the TP2 test? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 96 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you.  And have you employed the 
same approach in relation to the TP3 test the details are set 
out in paragraph 5 page 11 to 12? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Just explain to us though in layman’s 
terms TP3 test how does that compare with the TP2 test? 
MR NKOSI:  The TP3 test it is after you have basically had a 
confidence 
that 
the 
vehicle 
has 
the 
bare 
minimum 
requirements.  The TP3 test is the final test now whereby the 
design has been fully developed.  So it is – you can then test 
10 
but having a TP2 test actually prevents an issue whereby 
you go to a TP3 and there are issues.  So the TP3 test is the 
final test basically. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  The final one. 
MR NKOSI:  The manufacturing base line has been reached.  
Just before you begin to manufacture it has to pass a TP3 
test. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  So before you get to a TP3 test 
you must have passed the TP2 test? 
MR NKOSI:  Correct. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  And once you have passed that 
then you can be considered further for the project but that is 
subject to a TP3 test being passed? 
MR NKOSI:  Yes.  The understanding is there is still some 
development issues that still have to be tackled but by and 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 97 of 211 
 
large you have – you have met the basic requirements. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now is it possible to supply to the end 
user in this case the South African National Defence Force 
who will then allocate human beings to sit in these armoured 
vehicles.  Is it possible to supply to the SANDF an armoured 
vehicle which has not passed the TP2 and then the TP3 test? 
MR NKOSI:  Not according to the RSM-Mil standard. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
Right. 
 
And 
what 
would 
the 
10 
consequence be if there was not a proper test conducted at 
the TP2 stage and the TP3 stage and that these were passed 
fully? 
MR NKOSI:  The consequences are quite severe.  One could 
be – can be death of the soldiers, [00:19:04], injuries, 
basically ja.  Those are the main things – and loss of lives. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Would that be because just correct me 
if I am wrong and my layman’s understanding.  The TP2 and 
the TP3 tests are there to ensure that the vehicle – the 
armoured vehicle is sufficiently compliant with requirements 
20 
to try and minimise damage to vehicles and destruction or 
injury – sorry destruction of vehicles or injury to humans or 
their deaths 
MR NKOSI:  Correct.  If I may further elaborate.  Basically if 
you having all those tests you have evidence that you have 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 98 of 211 
 
done basically – all the necessary things just to ensure that 
the soldiers are safe.  For future legal ramifications if there 
could be loss of lives you know that you could actually refer 
them back to all those tests results and tests data that you 
obtained to show that you have actually done proper 
engineering judgment. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Right now let us get to you 
involvement in relation to reviewing information regarding 
the landmine tests.  You deal with that in your affidavit from 
page 12 paragraph 6, correct?  And so you have already 
10 
testified that the two tests in question were done in 2005. 
MR NKOSI:  Three tests. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Sorry three tests I beg your pardon 
correct.  In 2005 many years before you even joined.  So you 
were not involved in those tests but what was your 
involvement in relation to those tests?  Your affidavit refers 
to your discussions with Mr Beetge who had been involved in 
the tests and were you required then as your heading 
suggests paragraph 6 to reviewing information relating to 
two tests in question? 
20 
MR NKOSI:  Yes basically I had to review the information 
and look at the data just to acquaint myself with the work as 
it was on-going at the time. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  And from the information you 
obtained from Mr Beetge presumably both what he said and 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 99 of 211 
 
what he provided in the form the documentary evidence that 
you refer to were you able to satisfy yourself that a test had 
been conducted for TP2?  Let us leave aside whether it was 
a proper test – whether it was passed or not.  Had there 
been an attempt to undergo a TP2 test for the vehicles in 
question? 
MR NKOSI:  Yes basically there has been – there is 
evidence that tests were conducted for a TP2 test. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  For TP2 tests? 
MR NKOSI:  Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Did you say? 
MR NKOSI:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Sorry I just did not hear you.  And what 
about the TP3 test was that done? 
MR NKOSI:  No it was not done.  It was not done. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are at one o’clock Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair would this be a 
convenient time? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Shall we take the lunch adjournment until 
two? 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay we will take the lunch adjournment 
we will resume at two o’clock.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 100 of 211 
 
INQUIRY RESUMES:    
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Mr Nkosi, we were 
dealing with some backgrounds ...[intervenes]  
MR NKOSI:   Sorry.  Sorry, Chair.  Just water, please? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry? 
MR NKOSI:   Water. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Water? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Can someone help with water? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, somebody must just organise water 
for him. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now Mr Nkosi, you have explained to 
the Chair before we took the adjournment about the 
difference about the TP2 and TP3 tests, both of which had to 
be passed. 
 
And particularly the TP3 test as being the ultimate test 
before products could be supplied to the end user.  In this 
case, the SANDF.   
 
Now you have referred to a number of tests that were 
20 
done before you started in your current... in your position, 
taking over from Mr Beetge.   
 
What, in very broad outline, did you discover?  How 
many tests were conducted for TP2 in 2005? 
MR NKOSI:   Okay.  I will repeat again.  It is three tests that 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 101 of 211 
 
are conducted for TP2 tests, three tests. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right. 
MR NKOSI:   There were two sets of tests that were done.  
One done by the auspices of Armscor.  The other one done 
by LMT on their own accord.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   With who? 
MR NKOSI:   With CSIR. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The CSIR? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Which came first? 
10 
MR NKOSI:   The one that was conducted by Armscor. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   By Armscor? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And ordinarily, would Armscor conduct 
these tests itself? 
MR NKOSI:   We conduct it together with CSIR as they are 
our technology partner but it is important for Armscor to be 
there so that they keep a record of the hull configuration 
amongst other things. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  You mentioned in your affidavit, 
20 
you have touched on this earlier, that in Armscor, in fact, has 
a legal authority, a legal status in relation to the certification 
of arms components or items such as this.  Is it in fact as the 
statutory authority, the legal authority to pursue? 
MR NKOSI:   I am not sure about that but it is Armscor’s task 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 102 of 211 
 
as responsibility.  I am not sure as in terms of the statutory 
requirements.  But it is their... they are obliged to do so.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then there were two... so there 
were two processes that you have just reminded us of in 
2005, had three tests done.  Is that right? 
MR NKOSI:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And was any TP3 tests done in 2005? 
MR NKOSI:   No, they would not have done that because at 
10 
the time the baseline had not been finalised.  So it is a... it 
was just an entry test.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Just explain to the Chair what a 
baseline is, please? 
MR NKOSI:   Basically, again, it is a entry test so that 
Armscor makes a due diligence to make sure that if some 
modifications are happening to like the baton(?), then you 
would have done max the bare minimum requirements.   
 
The 
bare 
minimum 
requirements 
test, 
with 
the 
understanding that – because we wanted additional things on 
20 
the hull.  There will be additional things that are still going to 
be finalised for the process, for the procurement of that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And did you discuss with Mr Beetge 
what the outcome of the first test was in 2005? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, I discussed with him the outcome of that.  
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 103 of 211 
 
And he basically told me everything that he had to. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is it? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, that he had. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  What was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  He informed you of...? 
MR NKOSI:   Ja, he informed me of everything else and all 
the intricacies that were involved in the projects and some of 
his misgivings as well. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  Well, we will get to that  If you 
can just ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do not be too far from the mic but do not 
be too close either. 
MR NKOSI:   Okay.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  [laughing]   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And if you could please just try and 
remember.  I know it is difficult but try and look towards the 
Deputy Chief Justice, the Chair rather than me even though I 
am giving most of the questions. 
MR NKOSI:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Because it will be easier for the Chair 
20 
then to hear and it will also pick up on your microphone in 
that direction. 
MR NKOSI:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  So what was the outcome of the 
first test?  Did the vehicles...  These are called Patria 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 104 of 211 
 
vehicles, is that right? 
MR NKOSI:   Correct, sir. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Did those Patria vehicles, in fact, 
passed or failed the first test? 
MR NKOSI:   Let us start with the first test.  It is a wheel-
short-test.  They passed the wheel-short-test.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is it correct that there are different 
elements to the tests? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, there are different elements that those 
tests actually entail. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  So ...[intervenes]  
MR NKOSI:   Ja, it depends on the complexity of the vehicle 
that is being tested. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And you deal with this in some 
detail in your affidavit which the Chair will be able to go 
through.  Can you just confirm?  So some of the elements of 
the first TP2 tests that these vehicles were subjected to, 
some of those have passed and others not. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, it is a series of tests, basically. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
20 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, h’m. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So what was the overall outcome of 
the test itself ...[intervenes]  
MR NKOSI:   The overall outcome.  The first test, it was a 
wheel-short-test.  Generally, by enlarge, with my experience 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 105 of 211 
 
with the tests, the wheel-test generally passed because it 
shows you...   
 
It sorts of like simulates one the ...[indistinct] that will 
hit a landmine with the front tyres or the rear tyres.  So 
basically because of the... it passes generally but the most 
important test that fail is the hull shot. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So it failed the hull...? 
MR NKOSI:   The hull shot. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Hull shot? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes.  Basically, where the occupants sit at the 
10 
back. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright.   
MR NKOSI:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And how important is that as an 
element? 
MR NKOSI:   Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   What is the significance if you fail that 
particular element of the TP2 test? 
MR NKOSI:   Basically, we get human readings on the...  We 
put a dummies.  From pics.  Just devices on that, the 
20 
dummies.  And we basically get a threshold values with...  
 
Threshold 
values 
from 
international 
literature 
and 
studies that have actually show that if it was a human who 
sits on that vehicle, if it is above a certain threshold, then 
they will either pass...  
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 106 of 211 
 
 
They will either die or being amputated, basically.  In 
just simple terms.  But the hull test failed because the 
readings were just a bit too high. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Come closer to the mic again.   
MR NKOSI:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are too far.  So you say it would affect 
people sitting at the back. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What about people sitting in the front?  
They would not be affected? 
MR NKOSI:   It depends.  When we...  That is why it is 
important for Armscor to be involved at the... on the test 
because we are an independent body with an interest of the 
SANDF at heart.  We look at the vehicle to see where... 
which area is likely to actually cause damage.  That is where 
we put the landmines, basically.  We look at the worst case 
scenario.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   What I am trying to find out.  You know, 
when you talk about the people at the back, one supposes 
that at the back, there could be people at the front. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, the drivers.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 107 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:   There is normally a driver and there is normally 
the crew commander.  There is people operating the vehicle 
as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.   
MR NKOSI:   And ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But does it mean that they would be safe? 
MR NKOSI:   It does not mean that they will be safe but we 
have to take the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, chances of being injured are... there 
are less chances of them being injured compared to those 
10 
who sit at the back. 
MR NKOSI:   Basically, we look... we could either put it at 
where the drivers are because the landmine can actually 
explode...  In actual sense, we should be testing all the 
areas where people are sitting, just to be sure.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, basically, on this particular test, according 
to my predecessor, they actually intended to look at various 
critical positions because of the nature of the vehicle and the 
complexity of the vehicle.   
20 
 
Because we include the tarot as well where human lives 
sit as well.  But because we... it is just on the second test, it 
just failed the hull test.  But the intention was to look at 
other strategic positions within the vehicle to see if it passes 
or not. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 108 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  If it fails, one ...[intervenes]  
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...just like four people at the back.  Do 
you then have to take it back and they look at everything 
including people who would sit in the vehicle and in the 
front? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So in other words, you do not have to do 
all because ...[intervenes]  
MR NKOSI:   Depending ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...one is enough. 
MR NKOSI:   If you are failing in one, it is enough. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR NKOSI:   because all the lives on the vehicle matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR NKOSI:   Only one is enough.  So it would mean that, 
basically, the potential bidder ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR NKOSI:   ...will have to go back to... going back to the 
drawing board. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR NKOSI:   Go back to the tricky one and do simulations 
again and do their own test outside of our test before coming 
back to us again with confidence with the ...[indistinct], 
basically. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 109 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But wait.  In terms of which one you test 
whether it is people at the back or in the front, is it like a 
sample?  You just take anyone ...[intervenes]  
MR NKOSI:   No, but ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The manufacturers never know whether 
you test people in the front or people in the middle.  You just 
take anyone.  And if it fails, that is it. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, that is why it is important for Armscor to 
be the people who choose that because you do not want a 
situation whereby maybe potential... be it the particular area, 
10 
knowing very well that you will be testing that.   
 
So it is a decision by the national authority.  Armscor 
together with the CSIR would sit and look at the critical part 
within the specific vehicle.  At which point can they actually 
hit. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Okay. 
 
Thank 
you. 
 
Thank 
you, 
Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  And did Mr Beetge 
discuss this problem with the very first test that he had been 
involved in with you when you were... when he was handing 
20 
over to you? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, he discussed everything.  I saw the 
footage.  The beauty of it...  That is why if it is under the 
auspices of Armscor, we are... we have Armscor quality as 
well which is a critical division within our Armscor as well 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 110 of 211 
 
that that offers independent quality check of the vehicle.   
 
You need to check the baseline of the vehicle, the 
drawings.  Sometimes actually you need to measure.  You 
need to measure the weight of the vehicle.  You need to go 
and take pictures of all the angels.   
 
Wherever you can so that you can put it on your 
requisite for any possible ramification that had come after in 
years to show that you have done... you have taken pictures, 
you have done, you weighed the vehicle, this is the correct 
baseline and everything like that.   
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you refer in your affidavit to a 
report 
which 
came 
from 
the 
CSIR 
documenting 
the 
requirements of Armscor from the test.  This is the... I just 
want to confirm.  Yes, that is the first test.  This is in your 
affidavit, page 15.  If you look at the top left numbers, 15.   
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Paragraph 8.2.   
MR NKOSI:   15, 8.2.  Yes.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You refer to the report referring to LMT 
and not Patria as the provider of the item to be tested.  Do 
20 
you know...  Can you explain that? 
MR NKOSI:   Basically, the vehicle was provided to us by 
LMT.  I guess maybe the relationship with Patria, that I am 
not party to ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 111 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:   ... a sample was provided to us by LMT. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then you refer to an executive 
summary of the report in 8.4. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The third line of 8.4.   
“The test team passed the wheel-test but failed the 
hull-test due to great than thresholds.” 
 
What is the... the ...[indistinct] forces.   
“This objects prevailing the interior of assessed item 
and penetration of the hull by the blast.” 
10 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So was this your understanding of the 
reason why it failed this test? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes.  Yes, it is basically, is that.  Just, if you 
look at 8.5, the test was actually classified as catastrophic. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   Because there was fire(?) inside the vehicle.  
The hull ruptured actually. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright. 
MR NKOSI:   So it means that if it was a human being that 
20 
was there, it would have been the end of their lives. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The end of ...[intervenes]  
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Let me just have a moment to clarify 
something, please Chair. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 112 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I take you please Mr Nkosi to 
page 254?  Sorry, 255.   
MR NKOSI:   255? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.   
MR NKOSI:   Where is the page? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Do you have it? 
MR NKOSI:   255, where is the page? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Please turn to page 255.   
MR NKOSI:   I have... okay, 255.  Okay thank you. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Please just go to the page number I 
have given you. 
MR NKOSI:   255, okay.  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is this the CSIR report that you are 
referring to which was done for the first test with Armscor? 
MR NKOSI:   I just have to look at the document itself.  This 
is not the one here.  I think this is the second one that was 
done by CSIR. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that the second test? 
MR NKOSI:   That is the third test. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That is the third test? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes.  This is the one that was requested by 
LMT on their own accord. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   ....to by the CSIR. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 113 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, but you filed the various reports 
in your... as part of your annexures to your affidavit, not so? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  Sorry about the wrong 
reference, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Then the...  You then deal with 
a second test also conducted in 2005 on these vehicles, 
correct? 
MR NKOSI:   Let us be specific.  It is the third test because 
10 
there are two tests that they ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That is the third. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But we know that it is not the first. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You have clarified that. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  May I just take you back to 
your evidence so that we do not jump ahead to the third test.  
Let us get back to the end of the first test.  That was a 
20 
catastrophic failure. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   As you put it.  Now then there was a 
second test and that you deal with on page 16, your 
paragraph 9. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 114 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Again, it was conducted in 2005 long 
before you joined? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And what was the outcome...  Sorry.  
Who submitted the vehicles for the second test? 
MR NKOSI:   Because they failed the Armscor test, LMT on 
their own accord. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It was LMT? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, on their own accord, they fixed the 
10 
vehicle, basically.  They retro-fitted the vehicle that failed 
and they moved to the ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Just speak up, please.  And try to look 
towards the Chair. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, yes.  They basically removed... they retro-
fitted the vehicle.  They removed the part that was blown 
apart.  And apparently increased the thickness of the hull 
and went back to the CSIR to basically test the vehicle on 
their own accord without Armscor’s presence in terms of 
verifying the baseline, looking at the vehicle, taking the 
20 
masses, as it is a requirement by the standard. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So the question was, who sent it for a 
test?  The answer is LMT did. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And but did not involve Armscor? 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 115 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Should it have involved Armscor? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, according to the standard, they have to 
involve Armscor because as we stand currently, Armscor 
does not even have the correct baseline of this particular 
vehicle that was tested.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now where the first test that resulted 
in a catastrophic failure, you indicate in your affidavit, 
paragraph 9.2 ...[intervenes]  
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   ...that the...  It is not documented why 
the Patria vehicle was allowed to undergo the second test 
after there was a catastrophic failure of the first test.  Why is 
that? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, I do not know why... why was this... does 
LMT allow ...[indistinct] on the test.  Maybe it was before my 
time.  I am not sure about that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay you do not know.  It was not 
explained there. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, yes, yes. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But if I were to submit a vehicle for the 
TP2 test and it results in a catastrophic failure, does that 
mean I have to close down that business?  I can never carry 
on.  I can never improve or correct it? 
MR NKOSI:   I am not sure on the contractual conditions but 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 116 of 211 
 
on the documents that I have seen on the critical criteria, on 
the documents that I have seen, it means that the company 
has actually failed.  They need to restart again or maybe the 
whole process to actually restart again.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  Now what was the outcome of 
that second test? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, the second test.  Unfortunate to have 
someone who was part of the rest, who was... he was a 
...[indistinct] at the CSIR who was part of it.  They passed 
the test.   
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And from your study of the documents, 
was it appropriate that they passed the test? 
MR NKOSI:   Not according to France and not according to 
the CSIR because they have provided them with the 
specimen that was not even documented or recorded or 
weighed or even established on the adequacy of that 
particular test item that was on the vehicle, to present it.   
 
But with the CSIR, they have clearly stated that if you 
provide... if you bring the vehicle to them and say test, they 
would test scientifically and according to the RMS Standard.   
20 
 
But they are not sure on whatever thing that you 
provided because they did not really spend time with the 
vehicle, look at the data fact, what changes were made.   
 
Because if it fails, like the Armscor test, they are 
supposed to go back to do the TSP1, provide the simulation 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 117 of 211 
 
results to show that now they are ready again to test, 
provide the engineering test which is what the second... the 
third test was supposed to be.   
 
It is an engineering test just for them to get confidence 
again so that they can resume that they have actually failed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  And then in 9.3 you say: 
“The engineering test was subsequently interpreted 
to be a TP2 by Armscor.” 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Who in Armscor interpreted the 
10 
outcome of this test to be a TP2 test? 
MR NKOSI:   It was my predecessor. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Your... Is that Mr Beetge? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  Did he raise any concerns 
about the outcome of this thing? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, he actually raised so many concerns 
because from 2009 up to now, you could see that there was 
quite a lot of the movement because once they realised that 
this test was actually not correctly done according to like 
20 
RMS Standards.   
 
So they tried to apply it in all the hulls that are missing 
on that test so that it might look legitimate on an eye that 
does not delve on the details of it yet. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now ...[intervenes]  
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 118 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Does it say that they tried to criticise the 
test? 
MR NKOSI:   No, no, no.  Basically, after realising the 
inadequacies of this particular test that passed, there was 
later attempts to try and legitimise the hull operation by 
doing other additional simulation tests, basically. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR NKOSI:   On the vehicle. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now you say the inadequacies of the test. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, inadequacies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now that might mean the test was flawed 
not the vehicles. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it the test that had flaws or the test 
was fine by the vehicles were not manufactured according to 
the required standard.  That is why they failed the test. 
MR NKOSI:   Basically, if you do the test, there are many 
components on the test.  You look at flying objects.  As you 
20 
can...  If I can take you back to 8.4.2.  On the test 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Eight point four...? 
MR NKOSI:   8.4.2. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 119 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, basically, inside the vehicle, there are 
objects that once the vehicle is subjected to a landmine-test, 
they fly around.  Those are critical ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR NKOSI:   They can never remain ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
MR NKOSI:   ...or skewer the people inside the vehicle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR NKOSI:   All those particular items were removed on that 
test.  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Now I understand.  Thank you. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  So am I right in 
saying that in understanding that the TP2 test involves a 
number of elements? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And are you saying that some of those 
elements were not even tested? 
MR NKOSI:   They were not even tested. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   They were not even tested in the 
CSIR.  So they did some but not others? 
20 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, they did some but not the others. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now you set out a number of technical 
issues from 9.3.1 ...[intervenes]  
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   ...to 9.3.21. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 120 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   As being discrepancies that were 
identified. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   What are those discrepancies?  Does 
that refer to elements of the test not even being tested? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that right? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So in other words, the test was...  
10 
There was a test done but it was not a comprehensive test.  
They only tested for a few things. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, basically ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And whatever ...[intervenes]  
MR 
NKOSI: 
 
 
Just 
that 
whatever 
thing 
that 
they 
...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
MR NKOSI:   ...they requested them to test. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Now as a result of that test, was 
any certificate issued by Armscor? 
20 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, unfortunately, the certificate was issued 
by Armscor. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Even though that they should not have 
been bypassed by LMT going directly to CSIR? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes.  How they did it, I do not know. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 121 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And even though, also, the test by 
CSIR was not a comprehensive test and many of the 
elements were not even tested? 
MR NKOSI:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is the position that Armscor issued the 
certificates on the strength of the test done by the CSIR or 
did they also do the test or supervised the test and 
...[intervenes]  
MR NKOSI:   No, they were actually invited as guests. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, they were there as guests. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not to oversight? 
MR NKOSI:   Not to oversight.  To actually see the whole 
process.  Because what normally happens before the test.  
You actually go to the premises of the vehicle, the 
manufacturer, you... the exchanged document, the data 
packs.  You have sent the data packs.  You weigh the 
vehicle.  You take pictures just as evidence.  As evidence.  
That is critical in the whole process.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  They did not do this, that here? 
MR NKOSI:   No, no.  They might have done it with the 
CSIR, I am not sure. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 122 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR NKOSI:   But Armscor,  currently ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Armscor did not do it? 
MR NKOSI:   Armscor, currently, does not have that 
evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR NKOSI:   What vehicle was actually tested.  Because on 
the CSIR report it was evident that basically what happened 
was.  They basically took the vehicle that was blown 
catastrophically and basically cut a section that was torn 
10 
apart and retro-fitted a thicker... 
 
And took the vehicle back again to the test with the tarot 
baskets that have actually ...[indistinct] after the first test.  I 
am...  I wish, maybe, you could have actually be exposed to 
the pictures that actually happened on that test. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   So you can see how catastrophically the test 
was. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR NKOSI:   So basically it was just ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   It sounds like a cut and paste job.   
MR NKOSI:   Cut and paste job, like...  Honestly, it was a cut 
and paste job. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   I would not want to further describe it. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 123 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   But it does not follow engineering principles. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Can I ask you to turn in the bundle to 
page 46? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Just have a quick glance at that 
document and just confirm.  I want you to indicate whether 
10 
you are able to tell us whether this was the CSIR report for 
the first test or the second test or anything else. 
MR NKOSI:   Okay.  Page 46, basically, before the tests 
were taken, LMT or Armscor rather.  Armscor requested 
CSIR... 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes? 
MR NKOSI:   Apologies.  Armscor requested the CSIR to do 
a theoretically evaluation of the specimen before the test 
that happened, the first two tests that happened. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So this was before the first two tests? 
20 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So this was not the first test? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And maybe if I can ask you please to 
turn to page 138? 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 124 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That also seems to be a CSIR report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say 138? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   138.  Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   This one is dated the 14t h of June 2005 
which is a little after the other test we just looked at. 
MR NKOSI:   138, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Is this the test report for the first 
or the second test that you referred us to, the TP2 test? 
10 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Or ...[intervenes]  
MR NKOSI:   This is the...  If I look at it, if you can look 
carefully, approved by...  It is important to have an Armscor 
signature there.  There is a ...[indistinct]  Unfortunately, this 
one is unsigned but I can actually get you a copy of the 
signed one.  This should be the tests results of the first two 
tests that actually happened that were under the auspices of 
Armscor. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Of the first test? 
20 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  And if I can ask you now please 
to turn to page 255? 
MR NKOSI:   255, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That is also dated 2005.  August 2005.  
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 125 of 211 
 
Are you able to indicate whether this was the report for the 
second ...[intervenes]  
MR NKOSI:   Third test. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Was this the third test? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, that is an engineering test that was 
conducted by CSIR on behalf of LMT.  If you can look 
carefully on the signature page as well.  There is no Armscor 
involvement there.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That is page 256? 
MR NKOSI:   If you look at page 256, yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Okay.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Would Armscor...  Would that be a 
signature from somebody from Armscor there, even though 
on the face of it, it appears to be CSIR document? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, as it is the case with the test that we... 
that was conducted with Armscor being there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   So we work with CSIR as our technology 
partner. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
20 
MR NKOSI:   So that one would have a CSIR page as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   The other one would...  Even if for... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR NKOSI:   You can have Armscor person there or not. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 126 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   Depending on who requested the test. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the absence of a signature from 
somebody from Armscor ...[intervenes]  
MR NKOSI:   Yes, it ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...it reflects  different - it is not what it 
should be. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It does not carry the same status.  It is 
not valid. 
10 
MR NKOSI:   Not necessarily. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR NKOSI:  Not necessarily, but for the SANDF vehicles, 
Armscor signature has to be there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   Because Armscor quality, you have to 
[indistinct] 00.00.20 to take place, Armscor Quality having 
to oversee the process as well together with Armscor 
acquisition as well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the absence of Armscor would 
weaken the weight of this document. 
MR NKOSI:   In this instance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In this instance. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 127 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:   Ja, I will have to be specific in this instance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, okay. 
MR NKOSI:   Because CSIR on their own - they do validate 
that on their own and then issue certificates. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  But did Armscor later 
accept this test as having been passed? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, my predecessor accepted it which is a 
decision that he actually regretted because if you can look 
on some of the annexures, CSIR as well, together with 
10 
Frans Beetge, they had actually – it is Dr Izak Snyman and 
Dr Frans Beetge, they actually they wrote in their misgiving 
on the test that had actually happened but why did he sign 
the certificate I do not know because that certificate was a 
critical requirement in placing the contract, was a critical 
requirement in placing a contract if we have to put it on 
record. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Was passing the TP2 test a 
requirement of the contract in a sense of if you do not 
comply then you are in breach of contract? 
20 
MR NKOSI:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Alright.  Now you have said that you 
are not sure why Beetge acted in the way he did.  Did he 
express anything to you as to whether he was happy with 
how he had acted? 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 128 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:   No, in principle he told me everything was  
actually involved.  It is a matter of he says, she says, but 
basically the bottom line, whoever convinced him to sign I 
cannot divulge the names and things like that.  Basically 
he had promised that because the standard anyway still 
requires the TP3 test to be conducted. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   He should not worry about that because there 
is field, it is mining phase whereby this vehicle will still be 
tested and his reasoning for signing was based on those 
10 
assumptions. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So am I right in understanding what 
you are saying that he was fairly relaxed about agreeing 
that the passed the TP2 test because he took comfort from 
the fact that well, if there are any shortcoming they will be 
picked up at the TP3 stage. 
MR NKOSI:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you cannot deliver vehicles to 
the customer unless and until the TP3 test has been 
passed. 
20 
MR NKOSI:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But what do you say about that 
explanation or reasoning? 
MR NKOSI:   For me if we were together I was not going to 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 129 of 211 
 
actually issue the certificate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not have agreed to that. 
MR NKOSI:   I would not have agreed to the certificate 
because there is a lot of omissions that were not done on 
that test.  
CHAIRPERSON:   But he seems to have been told and 
what he seems to have agreed to does it not amount to not 
doing your job? 
MR NKOSI:   I cannot say that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you cannot say you cannot say it 
10 
because you are his successor, you know – would it not be 
your job if you are faced with the same situation?  Would 
you not be derelict in your duty if you did what he seems to 
have done. 
MR NKOSI:   Ja, it would have been – it would been 
tantamount to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR NKOSI:   But I do not know the reasons that actually 
compelled [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but on the fact of it… 
20 
MR NKOSI:   On the fact of it …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It would be a dereliction of duty as far 
as you are concerned and it is not something that you 
would do. 
MR NKOSI:   It is not something that I would have done in 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 130 of 211 
 
his position. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I just put to the witness a 
version that will be given by …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Beetge. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Dr Nell. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   From LMT. 
10 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Who has given us an affidavit and he 
has been referred to your affidavit and your comments you 
believe, as you have said in 9.4 of your affidavit, it was 
incorrect for Armscor to issue certificates for landmine 
protection.  Dr Nell will say before the Commission that at 
the completion of the LT – sorry, the TP2 test, Armscor 
congratulated LMT and issued certificates. That was before 
your time, correct? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, correct. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Does that give you any 
reassurance was to what was done, whether it was good or 
bad? 
MR 
NKOSI: 
 
 
Congratulations 
can 
mean 
anything, 
congratulation can mean that maybe thanks for having 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 131 of 211 
 
made – passed the engineering tests, see you again on the 
TP2 that is administered by Armscor.  Congratulations can 
basically mean anything. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
MR NKOSI:   Ja.  It does not mean that necessarily that 
they have been given a go ahead that you are the heroes 
of the revolution. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  So you have testified that 
Armscor did issue a certificate despite the fact that there 
were shortcomings in the test, how it was done, as you 
10 
have indicated.  Do those certificates last forever or did 
they last for a limited period? 
MR 
NKOSI: 
 
 
The 
certificates, 
oddly, 
the 
actually 
subsequently requested to be changed again in the year 
2009. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  So you deal with that in your 
paragraph 10. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   They were reissued in 2009.  What I 
am really asked for is an answer to this question.  Does 
20 
there have – is there an automatic expiry of a certificate?  
Why were the certificates reissued?  Why were they not 
just continuing?  
MR NKOSI:   I am not sure.  Maybe they picked up there 
was an issue – there was an error in the certificate that 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 132 of 211 
 
was issued in 2005 that I was not party to.  Fortunately, 
one of the persons that still – that issued his signature is 
still there, he still alive, maybe he can answer to that 
question why.  But, my understanding, there was an error 
with the Casspir(?) report that was stamped on the 
certificate so they were trying to rectify that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the norm is that when those – when 
such certificates are issued generally, do they – are they 
valid for certain specified periods or are they valid 
10 
forever? 
MR NKOSI:   It is a certificate that is valid – valid 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Forever. 
MR NKOSI:   Ja, valid forever, basically. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja because it relates to a particular 
time. 
MR NKOSI:   So one would ask himself because if you sign 
the certificate you need to have proper documents in front 
of you, would make sure that what appears on that 
20 
certificate is genuine as according to like the test, so 
whatever reasons that they actually changed, I do not 
know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Nkosi, may you please turn to 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 133 of 211 
 
page 302?   Do you have it?  I think that appears to be an 
Armscor certificate of product validation. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It says that it certifies that the mine 
protected Patria TP2 hull has been validated against an 8 
kilogram TNH surrogate landmine underneath the crew 
compartment.  It gives the test number, it says it has been 
verified by Armscor in accordance with test procedure and 
it give the particular test procedure. 
MR NKOSI:   Correct. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then it says – it gives the 
certificate 
of 
validation 
number 
for 
land 
mobility 
technologies LMT (Pty) Ltd.  Is that the LMT that you have 
been referring to? 
MR NKOSI:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   As the representative of Patria 
vehicles.  It was issued on the 7 September 2005. 
MR NKOSI:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Was that the first certificate that you 
were aware of arising from the TP2 tests in 2005? 
20 
MR NKOSI:   I will tell you now if – the first one that was 
issued was the VO.  If you turn to page 304. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   304. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, that is the chronology, you start with the 
VO. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 134 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   VO4 is dated …[intervenes] 
MR NKOSI:   Sorry, 303, 303, sorry. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   303, right?  So 303 is dated the 
same date.  
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The 7 September 2005. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So there were two certificates issued 
in 2005.  Correct? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes and both of those certificates 
you felt were wrongly issued. 
MR NKOSI:   No, no, no, the wheel test passed, the test 
that was conducted by Armscor. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see. 
MR NKOSI:   It passed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  So was that the one at page 
303? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, 303, that is the one that Armscor have 
all the necessary information. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So it passed that? 
MR NKOSI:   It passed the wheel …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, but the other one it did not 
pass and yet Armscor gave it a certificate saying it had 
passed. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 135 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:   The other one had failed the hull test. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   And subsequently they did an engineering 
test that Armscor converted to a TP2 test. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  And then the next certificate 
at page 304 is one issued in September 2009, 7 September 
2009.  Is this the certificate that your affidavit refers to as 
having been reissued? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes basically – they basically reissued the 
same two certificates, 303 and 304. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   So basically  303 now has been converted to 
304, if you can page on the document.  There is the wheel 
test. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
MR NKOSI:   Ja.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now …[intervenes] 
MR NKOSI:   And then the 302 has been – is the – ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Now was a further test 
actually done by LMT for this vehicle before the reissuing 
20 
of the certificate in 2009 from what you were able to learn 
from Mr Beetge or from the documents what were available 
to you? 
MR NKOSI:   There was no further test. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   There was no test. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 136 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   What – you have a comment on 
whether it was acceptable or not to reissue a certificate 
where there was no further test? 
MR NKOSI:   I think the reason for reissuing this statement 
was apparently having to do – to correct the test number.   
If you can look at the test number on page 303 and 304 
they are different.  They are trying to align that for 
whatever reason. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You are referring to the test 
10 
procedure on page [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
MR NKOSI:   If you look at the test number. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, hold on, Mr Nkosi, please do 
not talk over when I am putting a question to you. 
MR NKOSI:   Alright, fine. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Because the Chair will not be to hear 
and the microphone will not record if we are both talking at 
once. 
MR NKOSI:   Correct.. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So can I just put the question, you 
20 
are referring on page 302 to the number DEF. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   2005/166 or 504. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes.  Yes, exactly, so it was …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, which one? 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 137 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, the test number was subsequently 
changed to reflect that one for whatever reason.  Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I see two numbers on this page, Mr 
Nkosi. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Both start with DEF 2005. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The first number refers to /166 and 
the second to 504.  Which one should we be looking at for 
your purposes? 
10 
MR NKOSI:   I am specifically zooming at the test number, 
if you can …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, which one?  Is it 166? 
MR NKOSI:   The 159.  I am looking page 303. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Nkosi, will you not please 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are we on the same page? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, I am on page 303 and 304 now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, I think we are on 302. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I was putting to you questions 
20 
relating to 302. 
MR NKOSI:   302, correct.  Okay, ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  So on 302 which one should 
we look at?  The test number which ends in 166 or the test 
procedure which ends in 504? 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 138 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, they changed the test number. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, which one is the test number?  
Is it 166? 
MR NKOSI:   It is 166, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right and where did they change it? 
MR NKOSI:   This is the wheel – this is the hull test, this is 
the hull test. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, just show me where they 
changed it. 
MR NKOSI:   Okay. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You said they changed it somewhere.  
Where? 
MR NKOSI:   If you look at page 303. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   303, yes? 
MR NKOSI:   On the line test number. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, it is DEF 2005/159. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   159. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So that is the change …[intervenes] 
20 
MR NKOSI:   That is the change, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   166 instead of 159 that should have 
been the same? 
MR NKOSI:   No, it is not the change.  The change – if I 
may just take you baby steps. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 139 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja.  Ja. 
MR NKOSI:   Look at page 303 and page 304. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, I am not getting to 304 yet. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes.  Those are, if I may explain? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   They are the same – they are the wheel tests. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just come closer to the mic and raise 
your voice a bit?  Yes, okay, just start afresh, explain? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes.  303 and 304 are the wheel tests. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So 302 we can ignore because that is 
10 
the hull test? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, that is the hull test. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
MR NKOSI:   That is the point that I was trying to make. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So what was the problem with 303 
that they needed to change? 
MR 
NKOSI: 
 
 
They 
changed 
the 
test 
number 
– 
unfortunately I am not party to the reasons why did they 
20 
change the test number. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
MR NKOSI:   As you can see there is change on that, it 
says – say it is a wheel, it is a front wheel, on 304 they 
changed the test number on that. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 140 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
MR NKOSI:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So it was …[intervenes] 
MR NKOSI:   Basically they were trying to realign for 
whatever reasons that I am – that I was not party to. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay but it was not because they had 
retested the vehicle. 
MR NKOSI:   No, not. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And it was now passing. 
MR NKOSI:   No. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It was because they wanted to 
change the number for reasons you do not know. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  Thank you. 
MR NKOSI:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now in your affidavit you have a 
lengthy section that deals with your interactions with Mr 
Goosen, internal memorandum, a desktop study conducted 
in 2009 and a landmine blast analysis in August 2016 and 
then you go back to the internal memorandums.  In fact 
20 
later internal memorandums between you and Mr Goosen 
on a landmine protection issue. 
MR NKOSI:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now I would like you – you deal from 
paragraph 13.4. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 141 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:   Page number? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I am giving you that in a moment.  
Just bear with me, if you would? 
CHAIRPERSON:   13.4 is at page 20. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  From page 20 you 
deal with internal memo 1 and then memo 2 and then the 
affidavit goes on for some pages to deal with a whole lot of 
memos and so forth.  
MR NKOSI:   Yes, yes, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I do not believe, subject to the 
10 
Chair ’s guidance, that it is necessary for us to go into all 
the detail of the memos, they are all available and you 
have analysed for the assistance of the Commission. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Can you just tell us, if you would 
please, Mr Nkosi, what is being dealt with at a very 
summary level? 
MR NKOSI:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   What was your process or interaction 
with Mr Goosen?  What did the desktop study involve and 
20 
all these memos?  What was the purpose of these 
communications? 
MR NKOSI:   Basically I believe once they realised that 
there were some flaws on the tests they tried to conduct 
other desktop studies and simulation studies to try and 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 142 of 211 
 
move away from conducting a TP3 test and actually 
classifying 
the 
vehicle 
has 
actually 
reached 
a 
manufacturing baseline. 
 
So from 2014 Mr Beetge came to me, he was 
absolutely worried now …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   He was what?  Worried. 
MR NKOSI:   Worried. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Worried, yes? 
MR NKOSI:   Because there were rumours, there was a 
groundswell of evidence that there is manufacturings 
10 
happening across the country for whatever reason but they 
have actually not reached the point whereby …[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Try and speak up a bit please and 
please …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are lowering your voice. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, can you hear me now? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just go closer to the mic and try and 
raise it. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, can you hear me now?  Yes, can you 
hear me? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   The more you lean back the more I do 
not hear you. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, can you hear me now?   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR NKOSI:   Mr Beetge, whilst we still – I was still his 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 143 of 211 
 
understudy, he was actually worried with whatever is 
happening across the country when whereby there was a 
go-ahead being given to start building the hulls on the 
vehicle that has not been tested.   
So he was worried now that you know what, looks 
like they are busy building the hulls but we have not tested 
– we have not certified the vehicle.   
So that is why I was now busy writing the memo 
that Phillip, I still need the vehicle test before you can 
declare that reached the manufacturing base.  We have to 
10 
test the vehicle.   
So basically that was that because we tried to also 
introduce a simulation to show that the vehicle is – can be 
fit for people to use but the RSM was going to disappear, 
you cannot use simulations to certify.  So basically all the 
communications was to actually try to get the vehicle to 
Armscor to test be that is a phase that was – that has not 
been completed.  That, as an engineer, as a South African, 
I could not let that slide because it is our soldiers’ lives 
that are actually involved.  So that is why I was quite 
20 
vociferous on that, that you cannot – not under my watch. 
It could have happened in 2005 whereby the TP2 
had a lot of unanswered questions but on this specific one, 
because you will never know, it could my child who is 
actually on that vehicle and then I had given it a go-ahead 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 144 of 211 
 
without giving it a go-ahead.  So basically I – we fought, 
together with Frans Beetge because he realised that the 
tide now is actually moving towards the right before time. 
There 
was 
euphoria 
and 
excitement 
on 
the 
manufacturing before we had actually given the go-ahead 
that we have tested all the necessary points to now bless 
the manufacturing [indistinct – dropping voice] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was that change of attitude maybe 
because of your role that you were now playing in this 
whole thing which obviously you did not play in 2005 
10 
because you were not there? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, the role now it will be Phumlane Nkosi’s 
name that had actually led such is a critical requirement on 
the RSMA standard to be ignored so I could not allow that, 
together 
with 
Armscor. 
 
Armscor 
with 
my 
divisional 
manager, we started writing memos. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   To test the vehicle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   Because testing the vehicle cost a fraction of 
20 
the entire contract, it was – it is the right thing to do, so 
that we know we have done due diligence as Armscor 
employees, as engineers, as South Africans. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   What position does – is Mr Goosen 
still employed by Denel – by Armscor, I beg your pardon. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 145 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:   No, no, no, I think throughout these 
interactions I think somehow he decided to leave the 
employ. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   He left. 
MR NKOSI:   Ja, he left the company I think towards the 
end of 2017 for whatever reasons, I do not know. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  Ja, just try and – if you can, 
just try and direct your answer to the specific question.  My 
question was not why he left but I said is he still there. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So no. 
MR NKOSI:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So he has resigned.  What position 
before he resigned did he occupy when you were dealing 
with him in these meetings and the memos that are 
referred to in your affidavit? 
MR NKOSI:   He was the programme manager for the 
programme [indistinct – dropping voice] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  And if I understood your 
evidence earlier correctly, but please correct me if I am 
20 
wrong, these communications suggested to you that there 
were attempts to try and fix up a problem that had had 
already started as far back and 2005? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, they busy trying to ameliorate that. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   To ameliorate it? 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 146 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR NKOSI:   But putting things that are not scientifically 
proven to actually provide safety for the soldiers. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Try and keep your volume up please, 
Mr Nkosi. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Just like I am keeping my volume up.  
Try and keep it up, sometimes you start loud and then you 
sink down. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, your voice goes down, Mr Nkosi.  
So maybe you should keep much closer to the mic that 
would be normal. 
MR NKOSI:   That is fine, I will do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja because I think you easily slow down 
and then you become, your voice becomes …[intervenes] 
MR NKOSI:   Okay, can you put that question again? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  What position did he hold at 
the time?  You said programme manager. 
MR NKOSI:   Correct. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Was he trying to fix up problems with 
the TP2 certificates or was he trying to get a TP3 
certificate at that stage? 
MR NKOSI:   I think he was trying to get a TP3 certificate 
at that stage without actually testing the vehicle. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 147 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Without testing the vehicle? 
MR NKOSI:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Why do you say you think that is the 
case? 
MR NKOSI:   It is my opinion because they were 
…[intervenes] 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It is based on what? 
MR NKOSI:   It is based on what has been happening on 
Denel when there was apparently manufacturing baseline 
that has been reached that we are not familiar to. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now legally is it possible to – sorry, 
in fact we have dealt with that.  Sorry, Chair, may I just 
rephrase it?  Has Denel in fact been manufacturing these 
vehicles without a TP3 certificate? 
MR NKOSI:   My involvement is largely on the landmine 
protection.  If I may just answer it like that.  There has not 
been any TP3 test that has been done.  So you are correct 
that Denel has been manufacturing vehicles without a TP3 
test. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The fixing of a problem that would have 
20 
occurred or problems that had occurred in 2005, would that 
be a basis to suspect that maybe there was an attempt to 
conceal something or that would be going too far? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, I will be going too far, I am not sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are not sure. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 148 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, I am not sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, but certainly it was an attempt to 
fix the problem whether correctly or not correctly might be 
another issue. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now when it – and in fact your 
affidavit records also your confirmation now that Denel has 
been – has started manufacturing platform hulls. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You refer to DLS, is that Denel Land 
Systems?  Are they manufacturing the hulls? 
MR NKOSI:   That is what I heard, yes.  That is what 
actually spurred Fran Beetge to tell me that you know 
what, you cannot let this thing to happen because I am just 
about to retire, it cannot be – they are not supposed to be 
manufacturing the hull at this point before we actually give 
them a go-ahead by testing the vehicle, by certifying the 
vehicle to [indistinct – dropping voice] 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
 
Had 
they 
already 
started 
20 
manufacturing at the time that he left? 
MR NKOSI:   Basically there was a groundswell of 
evidence that …[intervenes] 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
 
Sorry, 
had 
they 
started 
manufacturing? 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 149 of 211 
 
MR NKOSI:   I am not sure. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    You are not sure. 
MR NKOSI:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  And as we sit or stand 
here today has there yet been a TP3 certificate issued for 
these vehicles? 
MR NKOSI:   Nope. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you refer – if I can take you in 
your affidavit to page 27.  Could you read for the Chair 
please your paragraph 14.6?  In fact, sorry, 14.5 to the 
10 
end. 
MR NKOSI:   “In short, TP3 test is a fundamental test, it is  
fundamental to test and evaluate all design changes 
implemented since the structural TP2 platform tests 
and to assess secondary fragmentation risks and 
reparability.” 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, carry on? 
MR NKOSI:   The RSMA standard TP3 test on the section  
variant 
would 
address 
the 
critical 
aspects 
of 
evaluating the assessed worst case scenario for 
20 
occupant survivability of the Hoefyster family of 
vehicles in order to secure the best results for the 
SANDF and the future users and operators of the 
Badger systems.  Lastly, it will ensure compliance 
with 
this 
RSMA 
standard 
as 
required 
by 
the 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 150 of 211 
 
SANDF.” 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Carry on? 
MR NKOSI:   “A TP3 test which was not addressed on the  
system 
specification 
document, 
Armscor 
has 
committed that they will allocate funds in order to 
conducts these tests.  In November 2013 Denel 
committed in complying with the request to conduct 
TP3 testing on this vehicle.” 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And your last sentence? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes. 
10 
“I am aware that Denel has started a manufacture 
platform hulls despite the fact that the vehicles 
have not been certified in the TP3 test.” 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Can you give just in a sentence 
maybe to the Chair your feeling as a citizen, as you put it 
earlier, and as a highly qualified mechanical engineer 
responsible for important issues in Armscor, can you just 
give you overall conclusion as to how you feel about this 
issue relating to the certification of these vehicles? 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, for me the results of the fight that 
20 
started on the memos on 2005 culminated in paragraph 
14.7 where Denel with the assistance of DVS Vehicles 
Systems they acknowledged the importance of this test and 
they had actually put a plan in place to make sure that this 
vehicle is actually tested but now the question remains, 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 151 of 211 
 
with all these hulls that have been manufactured, what will 
happen if the vehicle fails?  But if it passes then everyone 
is happy and there will not be issues but it is important to 
actually test. 
 
As a South African holding this position that I am 
holding, I would not have allowed this thing to slide without 
proper 
tests 
being 
conducted. 
 
Let 
alone 
whatever 
happened in 2005 with the TP2 test which was – it is 
important to bring the world-defined baseline to be tested 
because the vehicles [indistinct – dropping voice] like the 
10 
SANDF. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Just ask a final question on the same 
topic.  You suggested earlier that some of these changes 
or efforts that were being made, for example, the change in 
a certificate test number and in some of the efforts to re-
programme things to see if they could achieve progress in 
relation to a certification.  From a practical point of view 
what – are there significant implications that would flow, if 
it were true, that people are manipulating things, changing 
things inappropriately or is it just simply a question of 
20 
paperwork and test number not really mattering? 
MR NKOSI:   I am not at liberty to complain – to comment 
on the implications on people who are trying to do this or 
do that but what I can actually comment on are the 
importance of the test. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 152 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Importance of a test. 
MR NKOSI:   Yes, whether people were trying to hide or 
not, it is not my business to compare. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
MR NKOSI:   As an RSMA standard officer, as a Plus 
Specialist we have to conduct that test before we give it to 
our users. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  Chair, we have nothing 
further, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, Mr Nkosi, for coming to 
10 
assist the Commission, if we need you to come back and 
assist us you will be asked but thank you very much, you 
are now excused. 
MR NKOSI:   Thank you. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair, may we now turn 
to call, with your leave, the next witness? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Who is Mr Mlipha.  Do you want to 
take a short adjournment while…? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, let me take a five minutes 
20 
adjournment while everything is being prepared. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 153 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you ready Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you, yes we are Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So with your leave may we call as 
the next witness Mr Xolani Mlipha, for the transcribers’ 
benefit it is M-l-i-p-h-a, may he then be sworn in? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay which bundle? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Chair it is Denel Bundle 02 and it is 
Exhibit W12. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay please administer the oath or 
10 
affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:   Please state your full names for the record? 
MR MLIPHA:  Xolani Lincoln Mlipha. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you have any objections to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR MLIPHA:   I do not. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MR MLIPHA:  Yes I do. 
REGISTRAR:   Do you swear that the evidence you will 
20 
give will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing else but 
the truth, if so please raise your right hand and say so help 
me God. 
MR MLIPHA:   So help me God. 
XOLANI LINCOLN MLIPHA:  [duly sworn, states] 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 154 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   You may be seated.  Oh Mr Kennedy this 
is the witness who made a request? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes that has been resolved Chair, I 
have 
explained 
the 
position 
to 
the 
witness 
and 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And he understands? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   He understands the situation and will 
proceed, thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, we appreciate if you 
understand Mr Mlipha. 
10 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes Chair thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Good afternoon Mr Mlipha. 
MR MLIPHA:   Good afternoon Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Mlipha may I just ask you to look 
towards the Chair, rather than me, even though I am going 
to be putting most of the questions and try and keep up the 
volume of your voice and try to be clear and very brief if 
you may. 
MR MLIPHA:   Understood. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  May I just for the record 
confirm with you is it correct that you have signed an 
affidavit at the request of the Commission? 
MR MLIPHA:   That is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I take you in the bundle that is 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 155 of 211 
 
in front of you, that is Denel Bundle 02, Exhibit W12, there 
is a statement, it is called a statement, if I may ask you to 
look at the top left hand corner of each page for the page 
number, you see that. 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The page number on the first page of 
your statement ends in the digits 004. 
MR MLIPHA:   Understood. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But we are not going to use the 
zeros, we will just call it four. 
10 
MR MLIPHA:   Understood. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You confirm that this is the beginning 
of the affidavit that you signed? 
MR MLIPHA:   I do. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Can you turn to page 42. 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that your signature above your 
name? 
MR MLIPHA:   That’s correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you signed that on the 16 t h of 
20 
October in front of a Commissioner of Oaths. 
MR MLIPHA:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is it correct that you have been 
through this affidavit and you are satisfied that the 
contents are true and correct? 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 156 of 211 
 
MR MLIPHA:  That is correct Chair.  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  Chair may we then ask 
formally 
for 
the 
admission 
of 
this 
affidavit 
with 
its 
annexures, Denel Bundle 02, Exhibit W12 the affidavit of 
Mr Mlipha. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The statement/affidavit of Mr Xolani 
Mlipha starting at page 4 is admitted as Exhibit W12. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair, may I then proceed? 
CHAIRPERSON:   You may proceed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.  Mr Mlipha your affidavit 
10 
is very helpful in that it gives a lot of clarity and detail, I 
am going to try in the interests of time and also to avoid 
unnecessary reference to detail to focus just on particular 
areas with the Chair ’s leave and subject to his guidance 
may I take the witness just very briefly through his 
background. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   His professional background and his 
employment background. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you Chair.   Mr Mlipha you are 
20 
a mechanical engineer by profession? 
MR MLIPHA:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You hold as I understand a national 
diploma in mechanical engineering. 
MR MLIPHA:   That is correct Chair. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 157 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you originally worked for 
Naschem. 
MR MLIPHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And Naschem from there you moved 
to DLS to Denel Land Systems. 
MR MLIPHA:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   When was that that you moved to 
DLS? 
MR MLIPHA:   It was in 2004, right. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, and how long did you stay 
10 
there? 
MR MLIPHA:   I stayed there until 2008 end of year, 
December. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And where did you go from there? 
MR MLIPHA:   I joined Armscor. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And is that still your current 
employer? 
MR MLIPHA:   That’s correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So you joined when, in January 
2009? 
20 
MR MLIPHA:   That is right, on the 5 t h. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And what is your current job title at 
Armscor?  
MR MLIPHA:   Systems Engineer. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   When you were still at DLS between 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 158 of 211 
 
2004 and 2008 did any of your duties and functions involve 
the Hoefyster project? 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Just in a sentence or two please just 
be very brief, explain what sort of role you played in 
relation to the Hoefyster Project. 
MR MLIPHA:   At Denel I was part of the compilation team, 
I was working on the ammunition segment where we 
prepared the offer to submit to Armscor and on behalf of 
Denel to do the job. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Am I right in assuming that the 
ammunition segment is different from the hull element of 
these vehicles? 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes it is different, correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Were you part of the negotiating 
team from Denel in relation to the contract for the project 
Hoefyster being signed in 2007? 
MR MLIPHA:   No. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, now just tell us what in very 
brief terms your role at Armscor now in your current 
20 
capacity? 
MR MLIPHA:   Chair my role is to do the systems 
engineering work on behalf of Armscor and that basically 
entails 
checking 
all 
the 
verification 
against 
each 
requirement that the contract has requested from Denel as 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 159 of 211 
 
the contracted agency, so I ensure that requirements are 
met and I check that it is correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And this is the contract that was 
awarded by Armscor to Denel in what year? 
MR MLIPHA:   In 2007 if I am not mistaken. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now in your affidavit you refer, and 
here Chair may I just refer to the page number, in your 
affidavit Mr Mlipha you deal at page 12 with two stages, 
two phases rather for the Hoefyster Project, or Hoefyster 
Contract I beg your pardon. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   At what page Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   12. 
CHAIRPERSON:   12, okay. 
MR MLIPHA:   Page 12.  Yes Mr Chair? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you distinguish between two 
phases, you say that the Hoefyster contract was divided 
into 
two 
phases, 
the 
development 
phase 
and 
the 
production phase, just in non-technical terms if you are 
able to just explain briefly the difference between the two, 
what is the development phase? 
20 
MR MLIPHA:   Chair development phase would entail work 
that would be done to really start at times from scratch, at 
times not from scratch as you have heard that the vehicle 
was sourced from a different country, from a different 
company and we would make it suitable for South African 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 160 of 211 
 
needs, that is development work and then the – this other 
phase, that is the development phase, the other phase is 
the production phase where now what has been confirmed 
through development, the requirements that have been 
made are now producing many numbers of that particular 
product. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    And the second phase?  
MR MLIPHA:   Apologise Mr Kennedy, I thought – yes 
second phase would then be ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is the production phase, what stage 
10 
is the project at, at the moment? 
MR MLIPHA:   At the moment we are still in the 
development phase Chair because we have not obtained 
the baseline that says development is completed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And what is required to achieve that 
baseline still? 
MR MLIPHA: Chair what is required is to obtain a baseline 
that is referred to as the product baseline, abbreviated as 
PBL.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   That’s a PDM? 
20 
MR MLIPHA:   PBL, Papa, Bravo, Lima, PBL. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   PBL, I beg your pardon, now PBL is 
that specified anywhere as to what it requires?  
MR MLIPHA:   It would be – it is specified Chair yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And where would one find that being 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 161 of 211 
 
specified? 
MR MLIPHA:   Obviously in the contract it is also specified 
Chair 
but 
also 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
established 
engineering standards that definition would be given. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, if I can take you in your 
affidavit to page 16, one six. 
MR MLIPHA:   I am there Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You refer in paragraph 11 to products 
baseline, is that the PBL concept that you were referring to 
earlier? 
10 
MR MLIPHA:   That’s correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Won’t you please read out to the 
Chair what you say in paragraph 11.1? 
MR MLIPHA:   Apologies Mr Kennedy, 11.1? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry, we are page 19, paragraph 11. 
MR MLIPHA:   Okay, I will read. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   It follows the first line of paragraph 
11. 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes I will read. 
“The product baseline is an approved set of data 
20 
items, typically the product specification, integrated 
support plan, audit reports and results of reviews, 
which consolidates and documents the results of 
the design and development phase.”   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you.   Now the – am I right in 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 162 of 211 
 
understanding that the product baseline, the PBL, is just 
one of various baselines that have to be satisfied, if we 
look on the same page above the product baseline there’s 
paragraph 10, there’s allocated baseline. 
MR MLIPHA:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then below paragraph 11 you will 
see 12, manufacturing baseline. 
MR MLIPHA:   Correct. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   If we page backwards take one page 
back, we will see also that there are two other baselines, 
10 
paragraph 8, a requirements baseline an RBL, and a 
functional baseline, FBL. 
MR MLIPHA:   That is correct Chair. 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you have helpfully explained 
what each of these terms means.   Now may I take you 
again – I am sorry Chair – yes page 14, paragraph 5, it 
deals with the systems acquisition management process 
and you say in paragraph 5.1: 
“At Armscor the systems acquisition management 
process is governed through the DAP 1000 policy.” 
20 
And you have attached a copy of that, as one of the 
annexures, which is the SANDF standard for programme 
baselines 
during 
the 
system 
acquisition 
management 
process. 
MR MLIPHA:   That’s correct Chair. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 163 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   SANDF in this context – correct me if 
I’m wrong – I understand is the customer in the – ultimate 
customer in the Hoefyster Project? 
MR MLIPHA:   Absolutely correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So it is Armscor ’s customer, correct? 
MR MLIPHA:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But you are in turn procuring these 
items from Denel? 
MR MLIPHA:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But the SANDF lays down a DAP1000 
10 
policy, being their standard.   How is that used, what is 
that meant to achieve and how is that used? 
MR MLIPHA:   Chair that policy defines and provides 
guidelines as to how the acquisition is to be executed 
within the defence, particularly our defence industry. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, and you then set out some 
detail about milestones, phases and then you get the 
project baselines.   We are going to be looking specifically 
again in a moment at the product baseline, the PBL 
element  that is one of these various baselines, is that 
20 
regulated by  the SANDF DAP1000 policy? 
MR MLIPHA:   Chair the policy cites other standards, so 
the next applicable document that it cites is the RSA 
Military Standard Number 3. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is that referred to in your paragraph 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 164 of 211 
 
5.1 page 14? 
MR MLIPHA:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So am I right in understand there are 
– there is a policy together with other standards and they 
include the Standard 3, the RSA military standard 3 that 
you referred to? 
MR MLIPHA:   Absolutely. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, I interrupted you, and how 
does the PDL, does that relate to the standard, Mil 
Standard 3 standard or what? 
10 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes Chair PDL is reference are the same as 
Standard 3 as one of the baselines that have to be 
achieved as part of doing projects acquisition. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  Now I would like to go back to 
the idea of the PBL and you – take you to page 20 of your 
affidavit. 
MR MLIPHA:   Page 20, yes.  I am there Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Paragraph 15 is headed DLS’s 
tailored system acquisition management process leading to 
increased risk for Armscor.   Now before we get to the risk 
20 
for Armscor can you just explain to us please what the 
tailored element is of this.  Who tailored what and why? 
MR MLIPHA:   Chair stemming from RSA Standard 3 it 
states that a contractor, or anyone, whoever is doing the 
job, they are allowed to tailor, they may tailor.  In this 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 165 of 211 
 
instance the contract allowed and they tailored for a PBLA, 
let me call it that way and it is specified like that in the 
contract, so that is what was tailored. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Just give us that again, what PB? 
MR MLIPHA:   PBLA. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  PBLA?  
MR MLIPHA:   Papa, Bravo, Lima, Alpha. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right, and what does that stand for? 
MR MLIPHA:   It stands for they call it – it was a risk 
reduction before the authentic PBL that Armscor would 
10 
require. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think Mr Kennedy wanted to what P 
stands for and what L and A stand for, isn’t it Mr Kennedy? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I did yes thank you Chair. 
MR MLIPHA:   Apology Chair, P stands for Product, B 
stands – B and L stands for baseline. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And the A, so it is the same PBL we 
were talking about earlier? 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes Mr Chair, it is the same PBL we were 
talking about it is just now this is a tailored one. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And the A? 
MR MLIPHA:   The A is just a subscript that they – the A is 
a subscript that was provided to differentiate it from the 
one that we would want as Armscor, they call that one 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 166 of 211 
 
PBL1. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now was a PBL specified by Armscor 
before it was tailored? 
MR MLIPHA:   Chair I would say yes because RSA 
Standard 3 is an applicable document as part of this 
contract and one is supposed to do acquisition going 
through all these baselines yes, though one may tailor of 
course. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, now the contractor with whom 
10 
you contracted at Armscor or our colleagues did is DLS? 
MR MLIPHA:   Correct chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now is it normal and permissible for 
contractors to tailor a process relating to the PBL element? 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes it is permissible I suppose it is not only 
limited to a PBL as the contract also did not just limit the 
tailoring to PBL, there are other baselines, ADL, that were 
also tailored, they tailored yes Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And to what extent are contractors 
allowed to tailor these items such as a PBL, did they have 
20 
to comply with minimum standards or can they – is the sky 
the limit in relation to how they can tailor? 
MR MLIPHA:   Chair there is no prescribed way of tailoring 
but I would say it goes without misunderstanding that risk 
is part of tailoring that one must address firstly. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 167 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So the PBL that is laid down in the 
Mil 3 specification is the standard generally applicable one 
but that may be tailored by a particular contractor from 
time to time? 
MR MLIPHA:   Correct Chair.    
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And when a contractor such as DLS 
does tailor the PBL is that subject to approval by Armscor? 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So a contractor is not at large to 
simply tailor unilaterally? 
10 
MR MLIPHA:   That is correct Chair of course it would have 
to be accepted. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry Chair if I may have a moment.  
Now in relation to the Hoefyster project and the contract 
between Denel Land Systems and Armscor has there in fact 
been a tailoring that has been done? 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes there has been yes.  Yes Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And was that done with the 
permission of Armscor? 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes Chair. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Can I take you in your affidavit if you 
can turn please to page 20. 
MR MLIPHA:   I am there Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You say in your affidavit, para 15.1: 
“DLS 
tailored 
the 
process 
to 
their 
approach.  
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 168 of 211 
 
Numerous engagements with DLS ensued where it 
was attempted to highlight the risks associated with 
the tailored approach.” 
And then you say: 
“An extract of the DLS systems engineering master 
schedule, the SEMS which forms of the contract 
highlights how the acquisition process will be 
tailored during the project execution.” 
And then you refer to an annexure, and in particular 
specific pages, can you just tell the Chair please what is 
10 
the SEMS of DLS involved? 
MR MLIPHA:   Chair this SEMS, Systems Engineering 
Master Schedule is a document where the contractor plans 
at what point they would do engineering activities and this 
is where it is evident and one can see that from the onset 
at contracting that amongst others this tailored baseline 
was included. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And that was part of the contract? 
MR MLIPHA:   Correct that was part of the contract Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now if I can continue in your 
20 
affidavit, paragraph 15.3: 
“the 
processes 
to 
juxtaposed 
to 
the 
system 
acquisition process discussed in paragraph 5 above 
to highlight the difference in the sequencing of 
reviews and audits.  The intent is to highlight all the 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 169 of 211 
 
deliverables in the yellow block so that one can 
highlight the outer phase reviews and audits.” 
Just please explain that to us in hopefully non-technical 
terms as to what the point of difference was that came 
about by DLS introducing its SEMS as part of the contract?   
It is a difference from what? 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes, in particular I don’t know whether the 
SEMS is in front of you Chair, in particular there are 
reviews that were happening at a later point and audits 
that were happening earlier, that is what I attempt to show 
10 
here, yes that is what I am trying to say that one has to 
juxtaposed it with what is in the normal standard that is 
untailored when we compare the tailored version to the 
untailored version. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:    Now is the untailored version the 
PBL? 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes, in the untailored version that RSA 
Standard 3 one will see that there is a PBL there, and then 
Chair you will also notice that there are audits the FCA 
functional 
configuration 
audit 
and 
the 
physical 
20 
configuration audit it is important to for one to note when 
they happen. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So is it the timing of those specific 
steps that have to be taken under the PBL? 
MR MLIPHA:   That is correct Chair, the sequencing is 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 170 of 211 
 
important. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes and that is the standard PBL not 
the one that was later introduced in Denel? 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   I think you mentioned earlier that the 
one that was tailored and produced the Denel specific 
variation was called PBL A? 
MR MLIPHA:   The tailored version includes PBL A but also 
Chair, maybe I was clear, it does include the PBL 1 and 
PBL 1 would be the one that is equal to what Armscor 
10 
would desire. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Right.  So there are differences 
between the PBL 1 and PBL A? 
MR MLIPHA:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Were they significant differences in 
your opinion? 
MR MLIPHA:   They are Chair.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And we will get in a moment to why 
you say that and the risks that you expand on in your 
affidavit but you have mentioned that both the PBL A and 
20 
the PBL 1 were specified in the contract. 
MR MLIPHA:   Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now if there are differences between 
the PBL A and the PBL 1 which version did Denel, DLS 
have to comply with according to your understanding? 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 171 of 211 
 
MR MLIPHA:   Denel is compelled to comply with both of 
them, it is the – the PBL A is earlier than the PBL 1, PBL A 
is earlier than PBL 1, the reason for it is that they said 
they were reducing risk. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Sorry did you say earlier than? 
MR MLIPHA:   Ja it would happen earlier than PBL 1. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   So are you saying that there had 
compliance with PBL A once that was achieved only then 
could they then be complying with PBL 1 they had to go 
through both steps. 
10 
MR MLIPHA:   Correct Chair, they are both part of the 
contract.  Of course achieving PBL A then they would do 
work to also achieve PBL 1 and PBL 1 is the one is the one 
that Armscor is interested in. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, so the fact that there was a PBL 
A that initially had to be complied with before PBL 1 is of 
less significance to you at Armscor, you are concerned 
really with the PBL 1 as it was called? 
MR MLIPHA:   For me from the technical perspective PBL 1 
is 
important 
because 
that 
signifies 
as 
we 
read 
the 
20 
definition 
earlier 
that 
signifies 
the 
achievement 
of 
requirements and the end of development. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay, now I would like to take you 
please, because we need you to explain his, page 20, 
paragraph 15.4. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 172 of 211 
 
MR MLIPHA:  Okay Chair.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   This was my opinion at the time, I 
think it means it was my opinion at the time that the risk 
had significantly increased for Armscor as payments were 
linked on the yellow block deliverables whereas the 
hardware progress was lagging behind.  It is however no 
longer an opinion as the risk has indeed materialised in the 
sense that development was scheduled for five years 
ending in 2012, but it is currently 2020 and development is 
still not yet completed.    
10 
 
Can you just please explain that to us in practical, 
simple terms if you would.   You were indicating that, if I 
understand it, you were saying that by tailoring the PBL to 
PBL A introduced something which brought about risk, risk 
for whom, for Armscor or for DLS or for whom? 
MR MLIPHA:   In my opinion it introduced, it increased the 
risk for Armscor. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Did it introduce risk for the 
achievement of the Hoefyster Project itself? 
MR MLIPHA:  It is my opinion correct yes Sir. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But are you saying it introduced or are you 
saying the risk was always there but it increased the risk? 
MR MLIPHA:  Correct Chair I think you sum it well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It increased the risk. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 173 of 211 
 
MR MLIPHA:  The risk was there, the attempt was to reduce 
the risk. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MLIPHA:  Unfortunately it increased the risk for us 
because as it is said that I – as I stated that activities were 
linked to payments.  Lines were linked to payment activities 
so at execution of any line that released cash whereas the 
solution seemed to lag behind or the achievement of the 
requirement seemed to lag behind and now as we find the 
situation today yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And in what sense did it – it change the 
timing for the – for the payment of particular items?  Was 
that brought about by the introduction of the PBLA? 
MR MLIPHA:  Chair I have to be clear.  The contracting was 
set out from the start and it executing any activity or a 
contracted line the project had to – had to be followed. So 
the – at executing any activity it meant that – and if it was 
correct it meant that payment had to be made.  So that was – 
that was established as part of the contract.  It is in the 
20 
contract. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  If there had been – if it had simply 
been left at PBL1 rather than tailoring it to PBLA would that 
have improved the situation? 
MR MLIPHA:  Well my understanding is that if I can answer 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 174 of 211 
 
that in a way that I understand it to be technically correct is 
that what is – what we are interested in is achieving the 
requirements.  Unfortunately I do not deal with the project 
management side of works.  I am interested in achieving the 
requirements.   
So for me I am really interested that there should be 
point where requirements are met and that would be a PBL1.  
I hope that clarification. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And this – and in this case they – should 
they have been met by 2012? 
10 
MR MLIPHA:  It is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MLIPHA:  That was – the development term was set until 
that time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Must – must mean that there is something 
that – is there something that went terribly wrong that by 
2020 they have not been met? 
MR MLIPHA:  There were indeed challenges Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MLIPHA:  There were… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Serious challenges. 
MR MLIPHA:  Ja.  Technical challenges indeed yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 175 of 211 
 
MR MLIPHA:  Yes, yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And do you believe that the issues that 
you have raised and are – will still raise in relation to the 
PBL tailoring has contributed to that?  Has that been one of 
the challenges or the reasons for the delay in completion of 
the project timeously? 
MR MLIPHA:  Chair I – I – It is my opinion Chair that ja 
although I am not responsible for planning and phasing the 
project I think it contributed in the sense that financial 
10 
planning is – or financial activities are coupled to those 
activities and yes as part of also the contract I read that 
PBLA was one of the major decision points. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now as we speak in 2020 bearing in mind 
that the requirement should have been met in 2012 is there – 
what is the projection of when the requirements will be met if 
you are able to say?  Or is there no light at the end of the 
tunnel? 
MR MLIPHA:  Chair I think August this year we – oh ja I 
think end of August this year we sat with the contractor and 
20 
went through the compliance against requirements and the 
team or Armscor and DLS have merged towards a position 
where we agree what is – what is achieved and what is not 
achieved because we had a serious dispute relating to what 
was – what was complied with and what is not complied with.  
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 176 of 211 
 
So I think – ja in August we got to that point and the 
activities now are really trying to sum up the PBL1 that 
Armscor is interested in. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So if you look at Armscor’s view of what 
requirements 
have 
been 
complied 
with 
and 
what 
requirements still have to be complied with what is the 
projection of when all the requirements that Armscor regards 
as important to be complied with are likely to be complied 
with? 
MR MLIPHA:  Chair there are serious requirements that are 
10 
not complied with as we heard that have been put on the 
table to be discussed with higher authorities but at my level 
on technical level these are critical requirements that are not 
met and we have at least now with the contractor agreed that 
these are not met whereas in the past we were not agreeing. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That – that gives me the impression that it 
is not known when all the requirements that Armscor regards 
as important will be met? 
 MR MLIPHA:  I am… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is from your point of view? 
MR MLIPHA:  Chair I am careful maybe to speak… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I can see you are very careful. But I just 
want to have an idea this is something that should have 
happened by 2012 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 177 of 211 
 
MR MLIPHA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I mean in a different work stream or – of 
the commission I was dealing with certain government issues 
relating to communications and certain set boxes were 
supposed to be you know installed in houses or something 
supposed to have been done already in 2008 or thereabout 
and by last year that program was nowhere near.   
So now I am coming across another one where some 
things – you know all the requirements should have met in 
2012 and we are in 2020. 
10 
MR MLIPHA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I am wondering whether it is just one of 
those where there is just no light at the end of the tunnel as 
to where it will end. 
MR MLIPHA:  Chair the reason why I am careful is because I 
do not want to… 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not want your superiors to… 
MR MLIPHA:  And also the contractor has maybe made 
mention that they have exhausted their efforts so they are 
coming to declare what they have achieved and – so that is 
20 
why I am saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MLIPHA:  As early as August we have reached now an 
agreement of what we know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  No that is alright.  Mr Kennedy. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 178 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  Now Mr Nkosi you 
mentioned earlier that there was a risk for Armscor in 
relation to making payments at specific stages.  Am I right in 
understanding that you – that what you were saying was that 
there were changes brought about by PBLA which would 
have the potential that Armscor would have to pay for 
something before enough progress had been made or 
enough deliverables had been – had been delivered.  Is that 
and I may be oversimplifying it and I apologise if I am.  Is my 
understanding correct? 
10 
MR MLIPHA:  That is correct unless you want me to 
elaborate. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  We will deal with an elaboration in a 
moment.  Has Armscor in fact – has the risk materialised?  In 
other words has Armscor in fact been paying what might be 
regarded as prematurely in that it is paying too much up 
front for something that still has to be delivered? 
MR MLIPHA:  That is correct that is my stand point. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  And but Denel has benefitted from 
that? 
20 
MR MLIPHA:  In the sense that they were saying they do the 
work and they have to be paid – yes that is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Now I would like you please in 
paragraph 15.5 you say on page 21: 
“I will now identify specific instances where 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 179 of 211 
 
the tailoring with the system acquisition 
management process by DLS has resulted in 
a risk of delivering the Hoefyster Project” 
That is the project itself. 
“Increasing and you will support each item 
identified with evidence that includes internal 
memorandums, payments, emails etcetera.” 
And you then proceed to give your various examples of why 
you reach that conclusion.  Correct? 
MR MLIPHA:  Correct Chair. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now just before – I am not going to 
take you through all of the individual example or instances 
that you give but just explain to us why would this delive – 
why would this increase the risk of delivering the Hoefyster 
Project itself?   
Is it not just a question of Armscor is having to pay a 
bit early but if they get the items does it really matter?  The 
Hoefyster Project will still be delivered.  Or is it actually a 
more serious problem? 
MR MLIPHA:  Chair it becomes – Chair it becomes a serious 
20 
problem if I can make example of one.  If for example we do 
an audit prematurely – an audit of an item that we say is now 
ready to proceed into the next phase of the lives of the 
acquisition process.  
Let me make example of a physical configuration 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 180 of 211 
 
audit.  If we audit the physical item and say this is now the 
one before it has finished its development life we run a risk 
of repeatedly checking or auditing an item that is still 
evolving in its development life.  That is one of the issues for 
an example. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now may I take you through some of 
the instances that you have identified in your affidavit?  On 
page 21 you set out reviews and audits paragraph 16 and 
you 
give 
us 
one 
of 
the 
instances 
16.1.1. 
system 
requirements review.  Now just explain to us please what the 
10 
purpose is of the system requirements review? 
MR MLIPHA:  Chair the system requirements review is the 
review that if I can sum it up is the review that says you – 
one has the – the contractor or the developing – the 
developing agent understands the requirements that have 
been contracted to them.  And they will endeavour to achieve 
them.  So this review really goes into detail of saying you 
have 
captured 
all 
the 
requirements; 
there 
are 
no 
requirements that are missed.  That is the essence of this 
system requirements review. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And you then refer in 16.1.1.2 to your 
having realised something as recently as 2018 DLS was 
developing the product to meet its badger development 
specification not the Armscor specification? 
MR MLIPHA:  Chair this is true.  I prefer to speak in pictures 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 181 of 211 
 
because it is much easier.  At a higher level there is – there 
is a requirement specification and the developing agency – 
the contractor has to meet these requirements.   
And now in meeting these requirements a developer 
will maybe say okay they will compile their own specification 
which they will name a development specification that says 
each requirement is going to be made in this manner.  This 
is what they will do.   
Now with regards to what I am stating here is that 
when that was done as recently as 2018 in one of the 
10 
reviews I learnt that Denel informed us that they are not 
DLS; they are not developing to meet the Armscor spec – 
bless you Chair – they are developing to meet the Armscor 
spec but the development specification.   
This to me was an issue in the sense that obviously 
there would be a delta between the two and we must now 
make sure that this delta is covered in the sense that if the 
contractor is saying, I am only meeting my specification; 
yours 
you 
must 
now 
check 
whether 
having 
met 
the 
development specification you are satisfied as Armscor.  
20 
That was for me the issue. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right thank you.  Then if we may turn 
by way of another example to paragraph 16.2 page 25 to 26. 
MR MLIPHA:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Physical Configuration Audit PCA.  
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 182 of 211 
 
Chair I am afraid there are – there is more and more 
acronyms that keep coming up but I suppose that is the 
modern way. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no I have seen there are quite a lot. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Just explain to us again in layman’s 
terms if you would – lay people’s terms PCA? 
MR 
MLIPHA: 
 
I 
shall 
attempt. 
 
The 
PCA 
Physical 
Configuration Audit is an audit that says this bottle of water 
if I can – is – is made to contain so much water and it does 
meet with requirements that were set out.  So the PCA in 
10 
essence is an audit that is done after having achieved the 
functionality that is required.   
It is an audit that leads one into saying now you may 
build more or make more of these items.  So actually it is an 
outcome of an industrialisation process not a development 
process.  An audit that is applicable to the development 
process is the functional configuration audit for reasons I 
have explained earlier I say that if one would be concerned 
of doing a physical configuration audit on an item that is still 
evolving in its development life one is not achieving much 
20 
because the contractor would be allowed to change the 
design if the requirement is not met. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now if I can take  you please Mr Mlipha 
to paragraph 16.2.2 just read out that paragraph please. 
MR MLIPHA:   
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 183 of 211 
 
“I have reviewed the PCA’s which were 
conducted by DLS and it was noted that all 
PCA’s 
are 
planned 
and 
conducted 
sequentially incorrect.  This defeats the 
purpose of a valuable PCA where there is no 
value in the configuration as the design is 
still evolving.” 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now so DLS – DLS’s PCA’s are – have 
been done in an incorrect way.  Incorrect if we can go back 
to the idea of the PBL1 and the PBLA. 
10 
MR MLIPHA:  Yes Sir. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  What has been adopted by the parties 
themselves not just Denel but Armscor as well by adopting 
the PBLA is Denel complying with PBLA in relation to the 
sequencing and planning and conducting of these PCA’s? 
MR MLIPHA:  Chair they would not be in the sense that the 
PCA that would be done for PBLA – PBLA is a point or a 
base line where functionality has not been achieved or 
requirements have not been achieved.  So for one to be 
interested in those PCA’s in my opinion not everyone will 
20 
differ with me – in my opinion defeats the purpose. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  What I am really asking for is; is the 
problem that you identify in 16.2.2 the incorrect planning and 
sequencing of the PCA’s by Denel?  Is that attributable to 
the fact that the PBL was tailored to become PBLA or is this 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 184 of 211 
 
a separate problem? 
MR MLIPHA:  It is both Chair.  It is not – it is also 
attributable 
to 
that 
but 
also 
it 
is 
a 
problem 
in 
the 
understanding of the – the engineering sequencing and the 
essence 
of 
auditing 
something 
that 
is 
not 
yet 
fully 
developed. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Now you say in 16.2.3 the following: 
“The 
number 
of 
PCA’s 
contracted 
and 
planned is 54 which were expected to cost a 
total value of R110.5million and a number of 
10 
conducted and paid out PCA’s is 36 and they 
have cost R100 771 000.00 etcetera.” 
What is the – what is the point that you were trying to make 
there?  Why is that – what is the significance and effect of 
this? 
MR MLIPHA:  The significance of what I am trying to 
highlight here is that firstly it was before the PBL1 as per 
contractor language or PBL as per Armscor language.  It may 
have happened also before or after PBLA but what I also 
highlight is that so much money has now been exhausted in 
20 
auditing something that does not have a product base line in 
Armscor’s understanding. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And who bears the cost of that?  Is it 
an unnecessary cost to Armscor or Denel or who? 
MR MLIPHA:  Chair I am careful with this because it is 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 185 of 211 
 
contracted but technically if you ask me it helped – it did not 
help me. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
And 
you 
refer 
in 
16.2.4.2 
a 
memorandum internally at Armscor where you have raised 
the issue of the value lacking PCA’s which have been 
conducted on the Hoefyster Project.  Is it correct that you in 
fact have raised this particular concern and many others that 
you refer to by way of example in your affidavit? 
MR MLIPHA:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  And your annexures also bear out that 
10 
you have sent various memoranda and emails and so forth? 
MR MLIPHA:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes.  Have you reached a resolution 
within the organisation – within Armscor? 
MR MLIPHA:  Yes Chair I received support from my 
immediate superior with particular to this one where he also 
agreed to say this is not in line. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Who is that? 
MR MLIPHA:  Mr Dave Erasmus. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Erasmus? 
20 
MR MLIPHA:  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  But is it correct that you have 
not reached unanimity within Armscor?  There are different 
views. 
MR MLIPHA:  At – yes – yes correct Chair. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 186 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right.  I have skipped through a 
number of the other examples that you have given is there 
anything specific that you feel is of major importance that 
you would like to highlight to the Chair before we move off 
these examples? 
MR MLIPHA:  Would it be pertinent to mention the – the 
critical design review? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  The critical? 
MR MLIPHA:  Design Reviews the CER. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes. 
10 
MR MLIPHA:  The review. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Yes where do you deal with that here? 
MR MLIPHA:  I see it is.. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Is that 16.1.4 at the foot of page 22 
going onto the next page?  Is that what you referring to page 
22 to 23? 
MR MLIPHA:  Yes.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right just explain to us what these 
critical design reviews involve? 
MR MLIPHA:  Chair this is also one of the points that are – 
20 
of contention in the sense that when one reads the standards 
or when one looks at RSA-Mil standard 3 I hope Chair has a 
picture of the process one will see that the CDR is pictorially 
painted close to PBL.   
One who maybe does not read the wording may 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 187 of 211 
 
understand that this review is conducted to close out the 
development phase meaning that it is the last review before 
achieving PBL which is not correct.   
The CDR as the word says it is the critical design 
review but when one reads the definition of it it is very easily 
for one to understand that – to misunderstand that they are 
talking of production.  Whereas the critical design review is – 
is referring to the permission to build now the test item that 
will undergo testing.   
Now the words that are used at times there is 
10 
fabricate 
– 
permission 
to 
fabricate. 
 
Now 
one 
may 
misunderstand it and think it is now talking – it is now 
permission to go into production whereas no it is not that.  It 
is just permission to – to build the test item.   
Later we show it is – that is what we would call an 
engineering development model.  That is the one that will 
face now qualification. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Alright.  Then in paragraph 17 on page 
27 to 28 you deal again with the PBLA not existing in the 
RSA-Mil standard 3.  You appear to here be referring to the 
20 
point we have already dealt with that PBLA does not appear 
in 
the 
RSA-Mil 
standard 
3 
document 
but 
tailoring 
is 
permissible.  It was agreed to with Armscor.  Your problem 
though with the PBLA is that it has increased the technical, 
financial and other risks in relation to this project.  Is that 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 188 of 211 
 
right? 
MR MLIPHA:  Correct Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Right thank you.  I am going to just 
touch very briefly on paragraph 18 the training system.  
What does this relate to?  You are referring in the text here 
to a training simulator just explain to the Chair why you have 
dealt with this in your affidavit?  What is the concern that 
you have raised here in relation to training simulators? 
MR MLIPHA:  Chair as part of the complete project with all 
elements that have to be delivered it was stipulated in the 
10 
contract that there should be a training segment.  Now the 
training segment includes – in fact the contract also 
stipulated that there should be a training simulator.   
A training simulator Chair is a training tool.  It is a 
tool that enables one to train on a replacement product 
instead of the actual product.  In this case they computerise 
it, they make it out of computers and it is listed in the 
contract what they are supposed to deliver.   
The issue that I tried to raise here is that though one 
is supposed to deliver these training tools the training 
20 
requirement as a whole – the training system is not limited 
only through a training tool but one should address the 
whole requirement regarding training.   
And at the time when – very early on when I was also 
asked to be a Project Manager for one of the variants I had 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 189 of 211 
 
an issue that the contractor was going straight into simulator 
building without really compiling as I said earlier there is a 
requirement and there is a development specification that 
says how one will meet these requirements.  This training 
development spec was not there.  In fact it was compiled 
much later.  That was my one issue.   
 
And then the second issue is that these training 
tools, the simulators were now running far ahead of the 
actual product.   
 
Now one has – will have a problem that now you have 
10 
to correct the training tool if the product is still – to a point 
that the tools – the simulators are delivered. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Okay thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:  Thank you Chair.  Paragraph 19 is 
headed PBL has not been achieved.  Again I am not going to 
go into the detail of this.  Here are you referring to PBL1 or 
PBLA it is not ...[intervenes]  
MR MLIPHA:   Sorry, Mr Kennedy.  We are ...[intervenes]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Paragraph 19, page ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Page 20.   
MR MLIPHA:   Yes.  Correct, yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you have set out your reasons for 
saying that.  And then you say: 
“There are differences of view on the part of DLS.  
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 190 of 211 
 
They believe TBL was established in 2016.” 
MR MLIPHA:   Correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  Now again, just briefly, could 
you sum up your evidence relating to paragraph 20 from the 
foot of page 32.   
“Concessions and deviations used as a means of 
justifying non-compliance.” 
 
Who is non-complaint? 
MR MLIPHA:   Chair, requirements, if they are not met, we 
classify them as non-compliant.  Now what transpired.  Until 
10 
recently when it was addressed with the help of our 
management in support, was that.. 
 
It is my understanding that whenever Denel was facing 
challenges of meeting the requirement, they would put in a 
deviation.  People would differ with me.  It is my opinion.   
 
Now, deviations were used in a way of reaching an end 
to say now they meet the requirement.  Now in normal 
language, deviation means you are not... its otherwise of 
what you are supposed to get.   
 
However, in engineering it is that but it also means that 
20 
one must... whenever one requests a deviation.  Firstly, one 
should request a deviation before testing.  If you do it after 
testing, it is now after the fact.   
 
And if you request a deviation, it is also understood it is 
temporary.  It is not a permanent state to say now I am not 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 191 of 211 
 
required to meet this requirement or because I got a 
deviation, I now meet the requirement.   
 
That was the strange understanding.  And that is what, 
in essence, I am trying to explain to say.  Deviations were 
used in a way of saying they meet the requirement.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Does that mean they were deviations 
which were supposed to be exceptions were, ended up being 
regarded as the norms? 
MR MLIPHA:   You can put it that way, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
10 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes, yes.  You can put it ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Because they are supposed to be 
exceptions. 
MR MLIPHA:   Not only ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Not all the time. 
MR MLIPHA:   Not only... if I check... if I may check, Chair?  
Exceptions, yes, as you put it that it is just for this instance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MLIPHA:   You are expected to correct this issue and 
come back and meet the requirement. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
MR MLIPHA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MLIPHA:   H’m. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now Mr Mlipha, may we then turn to 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 192 of 211 
 
paragraph 21?  That refers to industrialisation.  And 
industrialisation is particular stage.  Is that correct?  Once 
development test and evaluation has been successfully 
completed. 
MR MLIPHA:   You may call it that Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MLIPHA:   Phase is the correct term. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   The phase? 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you for the correction. 
10 
MR MLIPHA:   H’m. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Now is there a problem in relation to 
this aspect of the Hoefyster Project and the relationship 
between Armscor and Denel? 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes, Chair there is a problem in this issue 
because 
for 
one 
to 
industrialise, 
you 
would 
want 
to 
industrialise a product that has met the requirements.  Now 
if one would industrialise a product that has not met the 
requirements, you run the risk of repeating the ...[indistinct] 
[laughing] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   You must help me now in case I have 
missed this somewhere.  Industrialisation would mean what 
in a lay person’s language in this context? 
MR MLIPHA:   Apologies Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 193 of 211 
 
MR MLIPHA:   Industrialisation means in, for example, in 
this type of this project, you have to now set up a factory.  
You have to set up production lines ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR MLIPHA:   You have to train or you have to get process 
engineers that will build the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So if we go back to the example you gave 
earlier on of the bottle... this water bottle. 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is something you do after you have 
10 
go ahead that the bottle needs all the requirements for the 
purpose for which it is made? 
MR MLIPHA:   Chair, you ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Now you can go and make more bottles 
because you have to make them in accordance with these 
requirements or specifications. 
MR MLIPHA:   Chair, you are absolutely correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Okay continue. You are 
dealing with industrialisation and I interrupted you because I 
just wanted to make sure I understood what it means in 
20 
paragraph 21.1.   
MR MLIPHA:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You might need to remind you of 
Mr Kennedy of the question he was dealing with because I 
interrupted him now.   
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 194 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes, thank you.  So in relation to 
industrialisation, is there an issue currently between Armscor 
and Denel as to industrialisation? 
MR MLIPHA:   Chair, there is an issue.  In fact, Denel 
approached Armscor and they said they would like to declare 
both the product baseline and at the same time confirm 
industrialisation on the enter production.   
 
Now at one particular meeting, I asked the question to 
say it cannot be.  And in particular, with regards to the 
vehicle hull that if there are now industrialising and 
10 
preparing to build many, what floor are they building or what 
product?  Because we have not verified everything.   
 
Ja.  Yes, so there is that dispute and... Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May I ask you now please Mr Mlipha to 
look at paragraph 22 which refers to the manufacturing 
baseline.   
MR MLIPHA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Is manufacturing baseline different 
from the concept of the industrialisation phase or are they 
the same? 
20 
MR MLIPHA:   The baseline is a culmination of the 
industrialisation phase.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you refer in paragraph 22.2 to a 
criticism that make you of DLS.   
“It is establishing two baselines at the same time, 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 195 of 211 
 
termed hitting two birds with one stone.” 
 
Which 
of 
the 
two 
baselines? 
 The 
manufacturing 
baseline and what else? 
MR MLIPHA:   They were referring to the product baseline, 
PDL and the MBL. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And were they suggesting that the two 
should happen at the same time? 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes, they said the two have been achieved. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Have already been achieved? 
MR MLIPHA:   Ja. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you then... your paragraph 22.4 
says to this date, the project has not reached the PDL, let 
alone the MBL.   
MR MLIPHA:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And you say that the MBL must come 
after the PDL? 
MR MLIPHA:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay.  Now I would like, if I may, to 
deal to just touch on the next paragraph, the Patria vehicle 
selection.  You have referred in some of your paragraphs 
20 
here to the testing and deficiencies and shortcomings in 
relation to the Patria vehicle not passing the Landmine 
Protection Hull Tests in the year 2005.  You were not 
involved or were you? 
MR MLIPHA:   I was not involved Chair, yes. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 196 of 211 
 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  And the Chair has already heard 
evidence earlier today from Mr Nkosi in relation to that.  Is 
there anything specifically that you want to raise that you 
believe is particularly significant for the Chair to know, 
bearing in mind that he will have the opportunity to read all 
the detail of your affidavit in this regard? 
MR 
MLIPHA: 
 
 
Chair, 
the 
essence 
goes 
with 
the 
requirements that were set out from the onset and the fact 
that this requirement – in fact, it is split into two.   
 
It is at a lower level, it refers to a hull or and wheel 
10 
detonation as we have heard previously.  That the hull or the 
shell of the vehicle should not rapture and hit... a landmine 
hit under a wheel should also not result in a rapture. 
 
Then the second level of requirements refers to the crew 
survivability when the vehicle is exposed such a threat.  It is 
a requirement that the crew should survive.  It is a 
requirement.   
 
So that for me is the essence of it.  And then when one 
now goes into the criteria or the criteria that was set from... 
as part of the contract to say which is a critical criteria. 
20 
 
A critical criteria is to be understood as that criteria that 
one has to meet and not meeting that requirement, the 
person should be disqualified.   
 
And from reading evidence that is presented or that we 
had to do as also part of my work of the requirement 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 197 of 211 
 
verification 
and 
thorough 
work 
and 
seeing 
that 
with 
authenticities achieved here. 
 
One observe that the first test for this landmine was 
failed as you heard earlier Chair.  Now at that instance, it is 
my understanding that because it is a critical criteria, that 
there should not have been any progress. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Mr Mlipha.  May I just 
touch on one final aspect before we end our questions of 
you.  Can you turn please to page 408? 
MR MLIPHA:   408.  Four, zero...  Ja, 408. 
10 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Do you have that? 
MR MLIPHA:   I have it.  I have it, sir.   
ADV KENNEDY SC:   This is headed with the Armscor logo 
and the heading is Functional Configuration Audit Report, 
Project 
Hoefyster. 
 And 
under 
summary, 
the 
heading 
summary, it says: 
“This document contains the functional configuration 
audit 
results 
of 
the 
requirements 
baseline 
for 
Project Hoefyster conducted in June 2020.” 
 
It is dated... the date of issue is August 2020 and your 
20 
name appears on the following page 409 at the top.  Is that 
correct?  As having been prepared by you. 
MR MLIPHA:   Correct, Chair.  This is the document that I 
compiled recently. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And if I might just draw your attention 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 198 of 211 
 
to a couple of passages.  Page 416. 
MR MLIPHA:   416? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes, I am there Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Just before we look at the text that 
appears there.  What was the... what is the purpose of the 
document and basically, what were you trying to achieve in 
undertaking this audit and setting out the report? 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes, Chair.  As I assumed that you have the 
acquisition process in front of you.  Firstly, the functional 
10 
configuration audit is a document that is an input to the 
audits that is conducted by Armscor Quality Division. 
 
It is an input to that audit, QES.  They refer to Quality 
Engineering Services.  Because that division will say that the 
baseline is indeed correct and has been established. 
 
The issue ensued when the contractor was stating that 
they have audited themselves and they say they are good.  
Now I think it is understandable that one cannot audit 
oneself because you will be biased in auditing yourself. 
 
So then as part of the reviews, we said as the minimum 
20 
– because referable there should be an independent body 
that audits.  As the minimum, we will compile an audit that 
we will share with the contractor and inform them this our 
official position. 
 
That is the reason why I compiled the document.  It is 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 199 of 211 
 
now not the norm...  [cell phone ringing]  Apologies Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
MR MLIPHA:   Sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
MR MLIPHA:   It is not the norm for one to... for Armscor to 
write audits and share with the contractor.  QES Division 
gets involved and does that.   
 
But because of the technical disagreements that were 
happening 
between 
us, Armscor 
and 
Denel, 
I 
felt 
it 
important, together with the Armscor Team, that let us 
10 
compile a report. 
 
And audit the report and share with them that this our 
position, official position, so that we could inform our 
leadership to say this is where we stand. 
 
This document I compiled with the permission.  I 
informed my immediate manager and I informed also the 
leaders to say we as the project, we will write the report. 
 
And we share it with the contractor and the contractor 
did not object heavily to it.  Yes.  That is the history of this 
document.   
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you for that.  I just want to take 
you to two brief references in that body of your report.  Page 
416.   
MR MLIPHA:   416, yes.  Yes, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes.  Half or two thirds way down the 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 200 of 211 
 
page, 
your 
report 
says Appendix A 
contains 
detailed 
breakdown of the score by Tables 1, 2 and 3.  4.1.1.1 – 
Observation. 
“Development was conducted against an updated 
batch of development specification which was no 
longer in line with the contracted development 
specification, SU3.  Corrective action, DLS was 
advised to reflect their development against the 
contracted batch of development specification.   
3.  Observation.  Most deviations were requested 
10 
after DLS had failed to meet requirements implying 
that these deviations were applied for after the fact.” 
 
Is this the reference to your earlier evidence in this 
regard? 
MR MLIPHA:   It is correct Chair.  This is now as a summary 
of what now had been happening over the years and to say 
now we are putting it in this audit report.  And just showing 
to them that this is what we will compile in our report.  Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then the other examples I would 
just like to take you to.  Page 417, the next page, non-
20 
compliance.   
MR MLIPHA:   Yes.  Yes, Chair. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   You refer there to catastrophic.  And 
did you make any findings in your audit report as to whether 
there were any catastrophic non-compliances on the part of 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 201 of 211 
 
Denel and DLS in particular? 
MR MLIPHA:   The outstanding requirement with regards to 
crew protection liability and others...  I do not know if am at 
liberty of going into the detail of the requirements?   
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Kennedy will ask you a few things.  
The details are important.  Ja, continue. 
MR MLIPHA:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes, there are requirements that are critical 
and may result in catastrophic outcomes.  So yes, those 
10 
definitions, I included there as a means of guiding everyone.  
Because we had to now guide everyone to say what is meant 
by catastrophic events, what is meant by a critical event 
that... et cetera.   
 
If the product is not meeting such a requirement.  If the 
requirement is of a critical of catastrophic consequence, 
what does that mean.  For an example, the crew survivability 
in the event of a landmine threats.   
 
Now the details surrounding that issue is that the 
contractor does say that they were not contracted for TP3 as 
20 
you heard earlier Chair.   
 
Now it becomes a bit problematic for my side, technical 
compliance, in the sense that now, now will we address this 
crew survivability requirement?  Because...   
CHAIRPERSON:   These vehicles cannot be used if there is 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 202 of 211 
 
that risk. 
MR MLIPHA:   How do... Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MLIPHA:   How do we – what do we say? 
CHAIRPERSON:   What do you do with them?  What is the 
purpose of having them?   
MR MLIPHA:   Yes, Chair.  What do we say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MLIPHA:   [cell phone interruption]  Sorry, Chair.  Yes.  
Well, then the contractor said they...  Since that requirement 
10 
is not yet contracted, they are willing to do the test but they 
want 
that 
requirement 
to 
be 
contracted 
now 
to 
say 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But what would have been the... would 
there have been a useful purpose for these vehicles to be 
manufactured if they would not meet that requirement?  I 
mean, how do you get into a contract for the manufacturing 
of those vehicles without including that requirement?   
 
Or is the position that it is so obvious that even if you do 
not include it, the manufacturer should never think that they 
20 
should build or manufacture vehicles like this without that 
requirement because it is such a fundamental requirement.  
Or what do you think is the position? 
MR MLIPHA:   Chair, the position from the contractor is this.  
They have met the first lower level requirement as you heard 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 203 of 211 
 
earlier of protection against hull breach anywhere under the 
vehicle or wheel shots.  They have met that one.   
 
The TP3 is that requirement that is now equivalent or 
will verify the crew survivability.  Now if it is not done, how 
would one then now say the crew inside the vehicle is okay?   
 
Because we have not done this test to really see if, for 
example, items that are mounted inside the vehicle are 
dislodged and they become projectiles towards passengers 
that they hit them.   
 
Or as earlier, you heard that there even may be even be 
10 
skewered by or stabbed by certain...  Because one must 
appreciate the environment that one is in.  It is a very 
confined environment inside the vehicle.  So ja, I...   
 
Chair, when you asked me that, I also do not know what 
you say because it is such a critical requirement.  Although, I 
must highlight Chair that as part of negotiations, contract 
negotiations way before I was involved.  It was stated that a 
TP2 test would be used to validate the vehicle.   
 
Now as you have heard earlier Chair.  A TP2 test is a 
lower, is of a lower level and may not be used to really 
20 
confirm that the crew is safe inside.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Could it be said that a vehicle that has 
been manufactured without meeting that requirement is fit for 
purpose?  For the purpose for which these vehicles are 
made? 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 204 of 211 
 
MR MLIPHA:   Chair, I would be careful to say that without 
objective evidence supporting that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MLIPHA:   So I would be inclining to say ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You cannot... 
MR MLIPHA:   One must be careful then. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you...  It is possible that some people 
might think it would not be properly fit for purpose.  But 
10 
maybe others would say it is fit for purpose. 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is like there is room for these different 
views. 
MR MLIPHA:   You are correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MLIPHA:   There are divided camps. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MLIPHA:   And the fact of the matter is that when we 
look at requirements clinically, there is that requirement who 
20 
would say this requirement has not been verified for crew 
safety. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But even those who might say it is fit for 
purpose.  In saying so, they would not be... they would have 
to accept that there is a serious risk to the passengers. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 205 of 211 
 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes, Chair you are absolutely correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MLIPHA:   There is a serious amount of uncertainty. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR MLIPHA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  A final question 
from, if I may Mr Mlipha?  What has happened to this audit 
report that you have prepared? 
MR MLIPHA:   Chair, as I mentioned that Denel, DLS 
10 
responded obviously with objections and I did inform them 
that we... I accept their objections in particular the reference 
to the landmine that they are not contracted to it.   
 
But as the report says, then that we are sitting with the 
dilemma of not being in a position to classify the vehicle in 
terms of safety or not.   
 
And we are leaning more towards saying that one has to 
be careful as you heard from Mr Nkosi.  And that is where 
the report is and the intend of the report, as it is stated 
earlier, is that it will be submitted to the...   
20 
 
It is an input to the QES audit.  And once it is received 
by that division, they will then consider everything that is on 
the table and they will make a decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The purpose of the report is to state your 
position and people may have... other people may have their 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 206 of 211 
 
own views about the issues that you cover in the report but it 
reflects your position. 
MR MLIPHA:   Correct, Chair.  Amongst others, for example, 
compliance.  The compliance...  The contractor was saying, 
they achieved 99% compliance against our requirement.  As 
you see in the report, we disagree with that.   
 
And we went into numerous workstations where we have 
now, for example, we removed all those, the compliances 
which the contractor said they complied because they have 
deviations.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MLIPHA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, ja.  Alright. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  We have completed 
the questions we wish to put to this witness.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, Mr Kennedy.  Thank you very 
much, Mr Mlipha for coming to assist the Commission.  We 
appreciate it very much.  If we need you to come back, we 
will ask you again but thank you very much.  You are now 
excused. 
20 
MR MLIPHA:   Thank you, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Mr Kennedy. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Chair, we are at a stage now.  It is 
quarter to five.  We do not have another witness immediately 
available.   
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 207 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   We initially planned in the original 
schedule to have somebody to follow today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   But there has been an issue which I 
would like to raise with you in chambers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   In relation to some logistical problems. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   May we put you on that score? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And then ask in the meantime that we 
adjourn for the hearing to resume tomorrow? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   We have scheduled three witnesses 
tomorrow.  Would it be perhaps...  I cannot remember Chair 
if you indicated the starting at ten o’clock would be a 
problem for you tomorrow because ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think that ten o’clock will be a problem.  
But I have indicated that tomorrow to sitting until beyond five 
20 
might be a problem. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I think as I see this situation now, we 
could sit up to six tomorrow. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 208 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So there is room for that unless 
something changes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So in terms of starting let us start at ten. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   At ten. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But there is a possibility of being able to 
go up to six if necessary. 
ADV 
KENNEDY 
SC: 
 
 
Thank 
you, 
Chair, 
we 
will 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   If we have to – if you cannot go beyond 
10 
five we will adjourn at five but in that event I would be 
willing to explore the possibility of starting quite early on 
Friday. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And when I say quite early, depending 
on everyone’s situation, maybe started at even half past 
eight. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   On Friday? 
CHAIRPERSON:   On Friday. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Half past eight or nine, depending on 
where we will be because on Friday also we need to – we 
will not be able to use the whole day because of my 
commitment. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Yes. 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 209 of 211 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So we could explore how early we could 
start. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Certainly, Chair.  On tomorrow’s 
situation, if you – I know you have other commitments and 
challenges later in the afternoon. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   And there are other counsel involved 
as well, I know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   We are amenable, if it suits you, 
10 
Chair, to start early tomorrow perhaps at nine o’clock if 
that suits you and that may give a bit more flexibility for 
your other commitments but we are in your hands. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, tomorrow morning we cannot 
start before ten. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But on Friday we could start earlier than 
ten.  If there are problems obviously in the afternoon for 
counsel to be here beyond five or thereabouts, so even if I 
am available we will accommodate counsel. 
20 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright.  So the witnesses for 
tomorrow, who have we got? 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Mr Drevin, he is a programme 
manager of DLS.  Mr van den Heever, also from DLS, 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 210 of 211 
 
Production Planner, and Ms Carene Geldenhuys who was 
at the time – she was still employed there, she has left, 
she was then the DVS Legal and Commercial Executive.  
So they will deal with specific aspects of the DLS or the 
DVS procurement processes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine. 
ADV KENNEDY SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, we will adjourn for the day.  We 
adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 29 OCTOBER 2020 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
210 
28 OCTOBER 2020 – DAY 293 
 
Page 211 of 211 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
