 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 301 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 243 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 3 of 243 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 07 NOVEMBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON: 
  
Good 
morning 
Ms 
Hofmeyr, 
good 
morning everybody. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Good morning Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Good morning Ms Kwinana.  
Okay.  Are we ready? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  We are indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay please administer the oath again or 
affirmation. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
10 
MS KWINANA:  Yakhe Kwinana. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MS KWINANA:  No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath to be binding on 
your conscience? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you swear that the evidence you will give 
will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing else but the 
truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so help 
20 
me God. 
MS KWINANA:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV HOFMEYR:  Good morning Ms Kwinana. 
MS KWINANA:  Good morning Advocate. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 4 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ms Kwinana I would like to start today if 
we may by just going back for a moment to the decision 
that the board took to award the components tender to the 
Joint Venture of AAR and JM Aviation.  
 
You will recall in your evidence on Tuesday you had 
been drawn – your attention had been drawn to the fact 
that they actually should have been disqualified from the 
bid and in fairness to you Ms Kwinana you – you conceded 
in the end that they ought not then to have proceeded and 
if they had – that had been known to you at the time you 
10 
accepted that they could not have been awarded the 
tender. 
 
What I did not traverse with you was the board’s 
actual decision at the time to award the contract to the 
Joint Venture of AAR and JM Aviation and so I would like to 
just deal with that briefly because I just want to be – to 
explain why. 
 
As I understand your evidence at the time you had 
no idea about the fact of the communications that they had 
had with Ms Memela and so you did not know that they 
20 
ought to have been disqualified, is that correct? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So I would like to go to the reasons the 
board gave for actually approving their appointment for the 
contract.  And we need to go there because what had 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 5 of 243 
 
happened was you have got a recommendation have you 
not from the acting CEO which was not to award the 
contract to AAR and JM Aviation.  It was to award the 
contract to Air France, is that correct? 
MS KWINANA:  Sorry I can hardly hear you can someone 
reduce the –  
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh the air conditioner. 
MS KWINANA:  Yes please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  They will attend to that.  Ja 
sometimes it makes it difficult to hear people. 
10 
MS KWINANA:  Sorry can you repeat your question Chair? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Certainly. So.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Safdas [?] maybe do not switch it off 
completely in case it becomes too hot but you know let it 
be low.  Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Is that clearer for you Ms Kwinana? 
MS KWINANA:  Not the air conditioner Chair but the 
sound. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You need the sound a bit louder do you? 
MS KWINANA:  No the sound a bit higher. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Oh too loud. 
MS KWINANA:  Too hard yes.  It seems as if it has got an 
echo Chair.  Echo.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.   
ADV HOFMEYR:  Is this a bit better?  Can you hear me 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 6 of 243 
 
better now? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I will also try and drop my voice maybe a 
bit. 
MS KWINANA:  Not too much. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Not too much, no indeed because I have 
to reach it there and – so Ms Kwinana what I was just 
confirming with you was the decision was taken as I 
10 
understand it on the 9 May 2016, does that accord with 
your memory? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And what happened is before you at that 
board 
meeting 
as 
I 
understand 
it 
you 
had 
a 
BAC 
recommendation.  You had a recommendation from the 
acting 
CEO 
and 
by 
that 
stage 
their 
combined 
recommendation was that the contract should go to Air 
France, correct? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  If you will just speak a little bit louder so 
that the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  And remember to look this side. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So they were recommending Air France 
but in that meeting on the 9 May 2016 the board decided – 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 7 of 243 
 
we will get to the reasons in a moment to award to a AAR 
and JM Aviation, correct? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Now Ms Memela testified previously and I 
just want to check that you can confirm this part of her 
evidence.  When those submissions come to the board you 
do not get all of the bid documentation or anything like that 
do you? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair we do not. 
ADV 
HOFMEYR: 
 
So 
you 
have 
really 
just 
got 
the 
10 
submissions and is that all? 
MS KWINANA:  Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes. 
MS KWINANA:  The submissions. 
ADV 
HOFMEYR: 
 
Okay 
so 
you 
have 
got 
the 
BAC 
recommendation; 
you 
have 
got 
the 
acting 
CEO’s 
recommendation and at this meeting you decide to not go 
in accordance with their recommendation but to go to – for 
AAR and JM Aviation.  Can you explain to us why the board 
took that decision? 
20 
MS KWINANA:  The reasons Chair in fact Air France was 
number 3.  Lufthansa was number 1.  And AAR was number 
2.  And then there was a recommendation of number 3.  
Now we asked questions as to why not number 1 and 
management gave reasons for not selecting number 1.  And 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 8 of 243 
 
then we asked why not number 2.  Why are you jumping to 
number – to number 2?  And then… 
CHAIRPERSON:  To number 3. 
MS KWINANA:  To number 3 yes.  And then they stated the 
reasons which basically were not acceptable to the board.  
It – from top of my head without looking at the minutes but 
one of the reasons was that AAR never did business at 
SAA and therefore they do not know SAA.   
And we said then if that was one of the criteria they 
should have said it from the beginning when the tender 
10 
was going out.  So we rejected that reason.  And then the 
other reason was that AAR had a lower price – much lower 
price compared to Air France and then there was a concern 
that AAR may be low balling.   
And then the board requested for a mitigation to say 
is there a mitigation if for instance they are low balling can 
we not fix the price? And then we said – then this should 
be awarded to AAR subject to them fixing the prices if that 
is the low balling.   
And we gave it back to management.  That was the 
20 
reason basically why AAR was selected.  But maybe I need 
to go back to what we talked about in respect of the 
proposal – the attachment of the proposal that was sent to 
Ms Memela.   
And I had an opportunity of again reading the 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 9 of 243 
 
transcript of what was the reasoning for Ms Memela.  And 
the reason for Ms Memela basically was that – oh in fact I 
do not even have to state her reasons again.   
But she said the – she is not part of the cross-
functional team and therefore there is no way that she 
should have seen the – the line in the tender document 
that says bidders can only contact the project managers – 
the project manager.   
And therefore because that is not a policy a SAA 
policy it is a policy within a specific set of people which is 
10 
the cross-functional team.  So basically as I was saying it 
would depend on the circumstances.  Thank you Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ms Kwinana that is again a reversion to a 
version that you gave on Tuesday that we moved past – 
you had given your fair concession that it should not have 
been awarded in the circumstances I am not going to go 
back to that.  I am interested in the decision for which you 
were responsible which was the board’s decision. 
 
So let us go to the minutes of the meeting if we 
may?  For that purpose you will need Bundle DD22[f].  I am 
20 
just going to ask my colleague to assist you.  [f] yes and 
we will be opening it at page 2304.  Correct.  And Ms 
Mbanjwa it will be page 2304.  Ms Kwinana do you have 
that? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 10 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And Ms Mbanjwa have you got it?  Okay.  
So Ms Kwinana this is minutes of the special meeting of 
the South African Airways Technical SOC Limited board of 
directors 201603 held on Monday 9 May 2016 at 8:30 and 
in attendance it seems to indicate that you were present.  
Can you confirm that you were present at this meeting? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And then if you go over from that first 
page to page 2305 you will see there is an item there 
under 4 Matters for consideration or approval, do you see 
10 
that? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Now that is where the issue of the 
awarding of the components contract was dealt with.  And I 
would just like to read into the record also for your benefit 
to refresh your memory what is minuted here as being the 
basis for the board’s decision.  It reads as follows: 
“The submission was tabled and considered.  
According 
to 
the 
submission 
management 
recommended that the tender awarded to Air 
20 
France. A discussion on the matter ensued and 
the board made the following comments: 
a. Management rationale for recommendations 
at Air France be awarded the tender was 
not substantive.  Considering the bidders 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 11 of 243 
 
resistance 
to 
align 
itself 
to 
SAAT’s 
developmental 
agenda 
i.e. 
supplier 
development.  Furthermore the benefits as 
outlined by the submission as a result of 
selecting Air France where not compelling 
enough 
to 
position 
the 
latter 
as 
the 
preferred bidder.” 
And then it goes on  
“The concerns regarding JM/AAR especially 
management’s view that this bidder was low 
10 
balling could be mitigated by reducing each 
parties’ obligations as well as terms and 
conditions to writing.” 
And the resolution is recorded. 
“Resolved that the request for the approval 
of the award of a tender for the aircraft 
components support and services on ATA 
chatter for both the Boeing and airbus fleet 
for a period of five years to JM/AAR be and 
is hereby approved subject to the mitigation 
20 
of 
all 
the 
risks 
highlighted 
in 
the 
submission.” 
So I would like to focus just on one or two aspects there.  
As I read this recordal one of the reasons for not going 
with management’s proposal is reflected there as Air 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 12 of 243 
 
France’s 
resistance 
to 
aligning 
itself 
to 
SAAT’s 
developmental agenda i.e. supplier development.  What 
was that reason based on Ms Kwinana? 
MS KWINANA:  One of the criteria Chair was that the – the 
bidders should have – should comply with BEE and 
therefore basically Air France in fact should not even have 
been there because they did not have the BEE.  So 
basically Air France was not even supposed to here. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  What does have BEE mean? 
MS KWINANA:  Like to be BEE compliant. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes that was a requirement of the tender 
– they were BEE compliant. 
MS KWINANA:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So how could you possibly have rejected 
them on the basis that they did not have the requisite BEE 
status? 
MS KWINANA:  That was the critical criteria Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes. So they could not have… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am not sure if you are not speaking at 
cross-purposes.  You said Ms Kwinana that you rejected 
20 
the recommendation that Air France awarded the tender 
because they did not have effectively BEE credentials 
which were required.  And then Ms Hofmeyr said to you but 
what does that mean?  And I think you agreed that it 
means it relates to being BEE compliant.  So she says to 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 13 of 243 
 
you, but they were BEE complaint so what were you talking 
about?  That is where she is.  So how could you reject 
them on the basis that they were not BEE compliant when 
in fact they were BEE complaint? 
MS KWINANA:  I – Chair my understanding according – 
also according to this is because they – they were not BEE 
compliant.  So if for instance they were BEE compliant then 
I would have to go further and check what score did they 
get in respect of BEE.  And secondly Chair that was not the 
only reason why Air France was not selected. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay that… 
MS KWINANA:  Air France was in fact number 3. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let – before we go into other 
reasons let us just make sure we are all on the same page 
on this one.  So if it can be shown that they were BEE 
compliant would you accept that the reason reflected here 
is the reason why the board rejected them?  Or the reason 
which you gave that they were not BEE compliant would 
therefore not be applicable if in fact they were compliant? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair.  Yes Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  I am going to – the 
reason why I asked you what does – were not BEE mean is 
because the way that that requirement played out in this 
tender was in a particular way that we spent some time 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 14 of 243 
 
traversing in Ms Memela’s evidence.  But what you did you 
have before you was the CEO’s submission which gave you 
a summary of the rankings of the bidders on this aspect.  
Right? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And I would like to take you to that for a 
moment because it is just further back in the bundle you 
have DD22[f] and we just need to go back to page 2274.  
Do you see that? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Now that is the acting CEO of SAAT 
recommendation to the SAAT board dated 26 April 2016 
and this is where the recommendation is made that Air 
France Industries be awarded the tender.  I would like to 
take you to what was recorded there as the rankings on 
price and BEE evaluation for the tenderers and you will 
find that at page 2280.  As I understood your evidence a 
moment ago Ms Kwinana – sorry you getting there.  You 
said AAR was – sorry Air France was not BEE compliant 
and so they should not have even proceeded through the 
20 
tender process, is that right? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes that was your understanding at the 
time. 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 15 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  If that was so if other tenderers were not 
BEE compliant they should not have been awarded the 
tender either, should they? 
MS KWINANA:  What – what they did here Chair putting 
the price at 90% and BEE 10% they are 100% correct.  And 
now considering that all of them were not BEE compliant 
that is fine they did not get the scoring for that.  Then now 
they would have to be scored on other things on the 90% 
being technical and [00:19:32] or something like that. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes.   Indeed.  So BEE could never be a 
10 
reason to choose one over the other of these suppliers 
could it? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes.  But the board gave that as one of 
its key reasons that was irregular was it not? 
MS KWINANA:  Chair well if that was a critical criteria that 
means if they all do not meet the requirement they all do 
not meet the requirement and if it is a critical criteria then 
we need to check if the BEE was a critical criteria.  So can 
you check that for me Chair? 
20 
MS KWINANA:  No MS Kwinana you see I am working just 
with the board’s own reasons.  The board’s own reason 
which 
we 
looked 
at 
a 
moment 
ago 
is 
that 
despite 
management and the bid adjudication committee coming to 
the board as SAAT and saying Air France should get this 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 16 of 243 
 
tender.  The board did not go with that recommendation.  
And the recorded reason is because Air France had 
resistance 
to 
align 
itself 
with 
SAAT’s 
developmental 
agenda ie. Supplier development.   
So I began by asking you, what was underpinning 
that reason and your testimony this morning is Air France 
was not BEE compliant so they should not have even 
progressed in the tender process.  Ms Kwinana you have 
now been shown that none of these tenderers were BEE 
compliant.  We have now seen that at page 2280.   
10 
I am saying that quickly because there is another 
explanation I am coming to.  But this is what is before you.  
So I put it to you you cannot possibly then reject 
management and the BAC’s recommendation for Air France 
not select them select AAR and JM Aviation when none of 
these parties were BEE compliant.  How could that be a 
reasonable decision to make? 
MS KWINANA:  Chair that was not the only reason.  Air 
France was number 3 that is number 1 and secondly when 
management 
comes 
and 
recommends 
– 
make 
a 
20 
recommendation to the board the board do not just 
rubberstamp and say now management otherwise there 
would 
be 
no 
reason 
for 
management 
to 
recommend 
anything to the board. And therefore I am confident as I am 
sitting here that whatever was discussed there which 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 17 of 243 
 
basically is not the only thing that was discussed that is in 
the minutes.  If you have got a recording of that I would 
very much be willing so that you – to get people to hear it 
so as to confirm that that is not the only requirement, the 
only thing that made us to decide to appoint AAR.  And as I 
have said again management – the reason why they come 
to the board for the recommendation – they recommend we 
just do not rubberstamp.  We put our heads together and 
discuss and we have fruitful and rigorous discussions 
before we come to any conclusion.   
10 
Chair I said on Monday when I came here I do not 
regret a single decision that I made during my tenure at 
SAA and SAA Technical.  And again this tender resulted in 
fact in the saving of R800 million between Air France and 
AAR.  There was a lot of saving here and that is why I am 
saying I do not regret this decision.  Air France was 
number 3.  Air France was not number 1 at all.  And Air 
France … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on Ms Kwinana.  Two or three 
things.  One I want to give Ms Mbanjwa a chance to say 
20 
something.  She raised her hand.  But I just want to say 
this because you have said something that Ms Myeni said 
yesterday 
as 
well. 
 
Nobody 
says 
that 
when 
a 
recommendation is made by management to a board the 
board 
is 
bound 
by 
– 
or 
must 
rubberstamp 
what 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 18 of 243 
 
management says.  Nobody says that.   
But it is expected that management would apply 
their minds and obviously if they do not agree with the 
recommendation – if they do not go along it is expected 
that they would be able to give reasons why they do not go 
along.  So nobody says they are expected to rubberstamp.  
But also I think Ms Hofmeyr wanted to engage you on the 
reason that you gave.   
At a certain stage if you have other reasons that 
you want to say those were also other reasons she will 
10 
engage you on those.  But it is important to get clarity on 
this particular reason that you – you gave earlier on and 
what is recorded.  So it is not as if you will not be allowed 
to articulate other reasons if there were other reasons but 
she will engage you on that.  Alright.  Ms Mbanjwa – oh 
has your issue fallen away? 
ADV MBANJWA:  Thank you Chair.  I am just going to 
make – to draw the attention of the Chair and Ms Hofmeyr 
to the fact that this term supplier development when it was 
explained by Ms Memela she did not explain it as BEE she 
20 
explained it as NIP obligation.  I just want that to be also 
taken into account.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. I think – okay Ms Hofmeyr let me 
rather – ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  No I… 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 19 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Say nothing. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed.  Look I am well aware of Ms 
Memela’s testimony that is why I have been saying this 
morning there is a different way in which it was working in 
this contract and that is effectively what Ms Mbanjwa as I 
understand it is highlighting because that is clear from Ms 
Memela’s evidence.   
But I am working with the evidence of the witness 
today and Ms Kwinana the Chairperson of the board of 
SAAT at the time was one of the people who took this 
10 
decision recorded on page 2305.  The reason that we are 
focussing on that was given by the board was that Air 
France management and the BAC’s chosen successor for 
this bid was to be rejected because they had resistance to 
align themselves with SAAT’s development agenda i.e. 
supplier development.   
And Ms Kwinana has given her understanding of 
that and I have shown her and I conclude by putting this to 
you Ms Kwinana that if your reason for rejecting Air France 
was that they were not BEE compliant that is a wholly 
20 
irrational reason because we have just seen from the 
scoring that no party then was BEE compliant.  So that 
reason cannot be a basis for favouring one over another.  
Do you accept that? 
MS KWINANA:  And then let us go to the supplier 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 20 of 243 
 
development. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  No can I have my answer – your answer 
to that question?  It is wholly irrational to choose one 
bidder over another on an aspect that they are all in 
exactly the same position on.  What is your response to 
that? 
MS KWINANA:  Chair you have just brought it to my 
attention that much as I am saying Air France was not BEE 
compliant all of these were not BEE compliant and in fact 
you have also brought it to my attention that in the minutes 
10 
we were not talking about BEE we were talking about 
supplier development. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Oh – I will argue in due course that Ms 
Kwinana has been given two opportunities to answer the 
question whether it is irrational on the reason she gave 
this morning to have made the decision that she did.  And 
she has failed on two occasions to give a clear answer to 
that.  I am happy to move on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I just want to say it is important Ms 
Kwinana that you be judged in your own right on your own 
20 
evidence what a witness you are okay.  But there may be a 
perception that before Ms Mbanjwa made the remarks that 
she made earlier on you had taken a certain approach with 
regard to what this reason recorded here meant.  But after 
she had spoken now you seem to say or seem to want to 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 21 of 243 
 
shift from that.  Now I am just saying that it is very 
important that as far as possible, you are seen to be giving 
your own answers as you understand the position in terms of 
evidence.  That is important.  Ms Mbanjwa. 
MS MBANJWA:   Thank you, Chair.  Chair, I want your 
assistance and direction in this regard so that in future I do 
not raise a hand if it is a similar situation.  So I would put it 
hypothetically.   
 
What happens in a situation where there is a board 
resolution that says that the reason for the board to act was 
10 
X?  And the witness gives an incorrect reason.   
 
On which must she give an answer?  Must she give an 
answer on the incorrect reasons she is giving here at the 
Commission?   
 
Or must she give an answer on the reason that was 
given at the board meeting or by the board resolution? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, a witness who...  Every witness is 
expected to speak the truth and give her understanding of 
the position.  She just needs to give her understanding, 
depending what the question is.  She needs to give her 
20 
understanding.   
 
But when you re-examine, you are free to see if there is 
a clarification that is necessary in regard to an answer that 
she gave.  But as long as she gives what, to her mind, is the 
truth as she understands the position, that is fine.   
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 22 of 243 
 
 
If it happens to be different from what is written 
somewhere, that is fine.  She must stay within her oath to 
speak the truth.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Kwinana, Supply Development was 
going to be dealt with in a very particular way in this tender.  
What was your understanding of it at the time? 
MS KWINANA:   The little I understand...  I now do not even 
know if I should state the little I understand because if I do 
not read as if you have there, then you will take me 
otherwise.  So I am just so uncomfortable to...  Maybe I need 
10 
to Google as to what does that mean.  So basically, I do not 
want to say in my own words this is what it is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, as I have just explained to 
Ms Mbanjwa.  Ms Kwinana, a witness is simply expected to 
give evidence as she or he understands the position or as he 
or she understood it at a particular time and to the best of 
her recollection. 
 
You just say:  At that time, this was my understanding.  
If it so happens that it differs from somebody else’s 
understanding, as long as you are genuine to say:  This is 
20 
how I understood the position.  Then you are fine.  
 
If you understood it in a certain way and you are asked 
what was your understanding at that time and you Google 
and say:  I understood it like that after Googling.  When 
actually, that is not how you understood it, then that is not 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 23 of 243 
 
truthful. 
 
So you just need to say the truth to the best of your 
ability, to the best of your recollection.  Nothing more than 
that is being asked of you or any witness.   
MS KWINANA:   Thank you, Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.   
MS 
KWINANA: 
 
 
My 
understanding 
of 
the 
Supply 
Development is that a supplier must be able to develop 
another upcoming supplier.  That is my understanding. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And as the board, the reasons are 
10 
recorded there, you rejected Air France because on your 
understanding it was not able to support an upcoming 
supplier.  Is that correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You see, the way that Supply Development 
was going to work in the tender – and we confirmed this in 
Ms Memela’s evidence. 
 
Chair, for the record.  It is... the task(?) of the 
12t h of February 2020, page 53, lines 6 to 11. 
 
The way that the tender was structured is.  Each of the 
20 
tenderers 
had 
to 
indicate 
a 
commitment 
to 
Supply 
Development and they would be assessed on the basis of 
whether they made that commitment or not. 
 
The tenders would then be evaluated and thereafter they 
could give their proposals of how precisely they would 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 24 of 243 
 
commit 
to 
and 
what 
their 
plans 
were 
for 
Supply 
Development. 
 
That was Ms Memela’s evidence.  The reason she gave 
it was because...  Well, amongst other things, she was 
shown that AAR and JM Aviation only submitted their Supply 
Development plan after they were awarded the tender. 
 
And I, in fairness, found that a bit striking because if it 
is a requirement of the tender, it should have been there 
before. 
 
But she corrected me and she said:  No, no.  All that 
10 
was needed was an indication in the bid that you were 
committed to it and then thereafter, you could fill it out with 
the details.   
 
Now that was the Head of Procurement’s understanding.  
I understand you to say, you rejected Air France on the basis 
that they did not in this bid exhibit the requisite requirements 
to Supply Development. 
 
But what I then want to put to you is.  Air France was in 
exactly the same position as JM and AAR.  Both had 
indicated a commitment.  Nothing more was required from 
20 
them at the time of evaluation. 
 
So I want to understand form you Ms Kwinana how that 
could then had been the reason to reject Air France?   
MS KWINANA:   As I said Chair.  There were many things 
that we talked about that resulted in us rejecting Air France.  
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 25 of 243 
 
It would be good if we could listen to the discussions that we 
had in that meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but Ms Hofmeyr wants us to make 
progress to say you have... there is this one reason that has 
been given.  Can we get to a point where we know whether 
you agree that that reason could not be a valid reason to 
reject it, to reject Air France?   
 
Then once we are done with that reason, we can go... 
we can move to one or more, the other reasons that you say 
were also reasons why it was affected.   
10 
 
She just wants us to make progress to say:  Okay, are 
we on the same page with regard to this reason that this was 
not a sound reason to reject?  Let us move to the next one.   
 
So she wants you to indicate whether you accept that 
since they were all... their compliance with regard to this, 
was the same.  It would... it was irrational to rely on that to 
reject them.   
MS KWINANA:   I am not going to agree Chair.  I am not 
sure as I am sitting here if Air France had committed to 
Supply Development.  If the minutes are saying Air France 
20 
failed to commit.  Or let me read it correctly so that I do not 
get misinterpreted.  What page is that Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe, before we do that.  But assume 
that Ms Hofmeyr will take you to where we will see that if, 
indeed, Air France in regard to Supply Development was on 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 26 of 243 
 
the same level as the other ones.   
 
Would you accept that it would not be rational?  It would 
irrational to reject Air France on the basis of something that 
you could find with everybody or you could not find with 
everybody?   
 
In other words, it is like if Ms Mbanjwa and my registrar 
here, they put in a tender for something.  You reject my 
registrar’s bid and you say it is because he is black but 
Ms Mbanjwa is black too.  It cannot be rational.  It is that 
kind of argument.   
10 
 
So if, indeed, Air France had made a commitment which 
had been made by everyone else with regard to Supply 
Development.  Would you accept that, to rely on that reason 
to reject Air France would be irrational? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You accept?  Okay.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
MS KWINANA:   May I have a comfort break, please? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Let us have a break of ten 
minutes.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS FOR A SHORT BREAK: 
20 
INQUIRY RESUMES: 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay Ms Hofmeyr, I think we have made 
some progress? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 27 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So I am going to leave the Supply 
Development reason which Ms Kwinana you had in fairness 
conceded was an irrational reason.  And I am going to move 
to the other reason that was given in the board’s resolution 
which is the one that I think you also referenced yourself in 
your explanations. 
 
You will find that resolution at page 2305 of the bundle 
in front of you, DD22(f).  You need to go to two-thousand 
three-hundred-and-five. 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say 2035? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   2305.  Apologies Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing]   
ADV HOFMEYR:   I might have mixed them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   I do that often. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think this time it was me.  [laughing]   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay.  [laughing]   
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing]   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Well, the record will show Chair in due 
20 
course.   
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing]   
ADV HOFMEYR:   [laughing]   
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe I was right on both...  [laughing]   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Maybe, maybe.   
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 28 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   2305. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Kwinana, you...  So the first reason is 
really recorded at the beginning of 4.1(a).  Right?  That is 
the one we have been focussing on.   
“Management’s rational for the recommendation that 
Air 
France 
be 
awarded 
the 
tender 
was 
not 
substantive, considering the bidder’s resistance to 
align itself with SAAT’s Developmental Agenda i.e. 
10 
Supply Development.” 
 
That is...  I am going to call that the first reason.  It is 
the one we have been dealing with.  And then it goes on and 
it says: 
“Furthermore, 
the 
benefits 
as 
outlined 
by 
the 
submission as a result of electing Air France, were 
not compelling enough to position the latter as the 
preferred bidder.” 
 
Now I understand your evidence today to be, what is 
really living in that second reason is this price concern that 
20 
you had.  That Air France was actually more costly than the 
AAR/JM Aviation bid.   
 
And that selecting AAR/JM Aviation over Air France, they 
were a saving to SAAT.  Have I understood your evidence 
correctly there? 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 29 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   Maybe Chair, we need to go these benefits 
outlined in the submission. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, we will do that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   She wanted you to confirm whether her 
understanding of your evidence is correct before we go to 
that.   
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You want her to repeat? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, please Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You see, I understood you earlier to say, 
the other big factor for you in making this decision to go for 
AAR and JM Aviation and not Air France was because AAR 
and JM Aviation was going to be cheaper than Air France 
and I think you gave a savings of about R 800 million.   
 
Was that the key reason why you decided not to go with 
Air France and rather to go with AAR and JM Aviation? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair.  And I said the other day.  Air 
France is an airline and it gets its components from AAR 
because AAR, basically, is the components manufacturer.   
20 
 
And therefore, as we have been using Air France for the 
past many years at SAA, we have, in fact, been using the 
middle-man.   
 
So that is why, basically, Air France was more expensive 
than AAR.  So we have considered a lot of things.  And in 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 30 of 243 
 
fact, we also did consider the risks of taking onboard AAR, 
considering that it is a new supplier.   
 
So that is why Chair I am saying, it will be good if you 
could listen to our interactions as the board members 
including management. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Kwinana, you gave that evidence.  I 
remember it about AAR being the sort of world supplier, the 
other day, of these parts.  And I recall you saying that that 
was some of the information you learnt when you did your 
due diligence trip in the US.  Is that correct? 
10 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  Because that was fact was not 
disclosed in the bids of Air France.  So you are aware of 
that? 
MS KWINANA:   No. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No?  Are you aware of that? 
MS KWINANA:   Why...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I think she did not hear.  I think she did 
not hear the question ...[intervenes]  
MS KWINANA:   [Indistinct]  
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Oh, sorry.  I thought you were asking a 
follow-up question:  Why does it matter?  I thought you said 
so. 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, I am saying.  Are you aware that that 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 31 of 243 
 
fact that Air France secures its parts from AAR was not 
disclosed in any of the bids? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, that is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   So you were making your decision then on 
the basis of something you have learnt on the due diligence 
trip to the US, correct? 
MS KWINANA:   We made the decisions based on what was 
recorded here in the minutes.  So the fact that AAR is an 
original manufacturer is not here and it was not one of the 
10 
reasons.   
 
But I am saying, the reason why Air France was higher is 
because of that but that is the reason that was put here.  
Yes.  And therefore, the reasons that I am telling you about, 
confirm that the decision that we made were the best 
decisions Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Kwinana, I will argue in due course 
that informing your decision not award Air France, despite 
management’s recommendation that they should be awarded 
this tender and rather to go with AAR and JM Aviation, was 
20 
based on information that you obtained when you went on a 
trip to the US and received various benefits from AAR.  Do 
you have a response to that? 
MS KWINANA:   Let me repeat Chair.  When management 
brings a recommendation to the board, we apply our minds.  
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 32 of 243 
 
We made the best decision of the company.  I am repeating 
again Chair.  We do not rubberstamp.   
 
That is why I am saying it would be good if you had the 
recordings, so that you can show how best we made the 
decisions at the time.   
 
So Chair, management did make a recommendation and 
therefore, 
we 
did 
not 
have 
to 
agree 
with 
the 
recommendations.  Based on the discussions by the board, 
we agreed that the award should go to another company. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair, just to note that there was no denial 
10 
in Ms Kwinana’s answer to my question that that was 
information that she obtained when she was on that trip 
...[intervenes] [Parties intervening each other – unclear]   
MS KWINANA:   I deny that ...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   ...justification was given for why the 
decision was made. 
MS KWINANA:   Chair, I deny that.  I am saying, the reasons 
that were put here in the document are the reasons.  But I 
am saying, as I am sitting here with the information that I 
know, it was still the best decision. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Let us go, if we may, to what you were 
going to do to alleviate the concerns that management had 
raised about given the tender to AAR and JM Aviation 
because that is the third thing that is recorded on this page 
2305.   
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 33 of 243 
 
 
And you will see that under that paragraph 4.1(a), there 
it records: 
“The 
concerns 
regarding 
JM/AAR 
especially 
management’s view that this bidder was low-balling, 
could 
be 
mitigated 
by 
reducing 
each 
parties’ 
obligations as well as terms and conditions to 
writing.” 
 
What does that mean Ms Kwinana? 
MS KWINANA:   In simple terms Chair.  It means that if, for 
instance, AAR said they are going to supply spares to the 
10 
extent of one million or one billion, then they cannot come 
back and say:  We did not cost for these spares.  We did not 
cost for these spares.  They need to give us exactly what 
they said they were going to give us.   
 
Because, you know, with tenders, you would low-ball and 
then when you are inside the client, then the cost escalates 
and then you find out that, after all, it was not the cheapest.   
 
So basically, when we were saying Chair that needed to 
be reduce in writing.  We were saying, as AAR said they are 
going to give us things at this price, we are not going to take 
20 
any interest.   
 
So basically, that was what was said when we were 
saying reduce it in writing.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Low-balling is a concern.  If you will see 
in the management’s recommendation that we were looking 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 34 of 243 
 
at previously.  And if you want to find it, it is at page 2281. 
MS KWINANA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   You will see there, management’s report 
under the heading JM/AAR under the second bullet that... 
this is a section where they are identifying risks, identified 
within the tender.  
 
And in respect of JM/AAR under the second bullet, 
management’s concern was: 
“Sudden drastic cuts to the tender prices with a 
reduction of more than 40 million Dollars raised the 
10 
fear of low-balling to get the contract and doubts on 
sustainability.” 
 
Do you see that? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  So that was the concern.  And as I 
understand it, you were not too worried about that concern 
because you would try(?) them into a contract that would 
ensure that they would not wiggle out of their commitments.  
Is that a fair summary? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  If we just look at...  Yes, that low-
balling that happened.  If you go over the page to 2282, you 
will see at the top of the page the cost impact is recorded 
there.  And you will see there... if you go across it, supplier 
is in the far left-hand column. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 35 of 243 
 
 
You have got Lufthansa, JM and AAR and Air France.  
Air France is sort of shaded because that was management 
selected preferred bidder. 
 
And then if you go across.  The columns are fleet value 
per annum in US Dollars, value per annum in ZAR, value for 
five years in US Dollars, value for five years in ZAR. 
 
I would like us just to look at the value for five years in 
US Dollars.  Do you see that JM/AAR price is about 
82 million US Dollars and Air France is 88 million US 
Dollars.  Do you see that? 
10 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And so that difference is really just a 
difference of about 6 million US Dollars.  Correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  And the concern was that, to get JM 
to this 82 million...  Remember, they had been back and 
forth.  They kept going back to the bidders to say revise your 
pricing, revise your pricing. 
 
What had happened was, to get it to this 82, it had 
dropped its prior price by 40 million.  That is a considerable 
20 
drop, is it not? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   H’m.  So did you share management’s 
concern that low-balling was a real issue if they had dropped 
as much as 40 million in the last round? 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 36 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  And they were very close, actually, 
when they ended up.  I mean, in order of magnitude, they 
were just 6 million less than Air France, correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And there was no concern expressed, as I 
recall it, that Air France was low-balling, was there? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So given ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, there was?  Yes, there was not?  
10 
[laughing]   
ADV HOFMEYR:   There was no concern that Air France was 
low-balling, was there? 
MS KWINANA:   There was no concern Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   There was no concern. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  [laughing]   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay thank you.  I understand the 
ambiguity potentially. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, they say it is a South African thing.  
[laughing]   
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   We say, ja-nee. [laughing]   
ADV HOFMEYR:   [laughing]  Okay so they drop by 
40 million but despite that, the board resolved that if it went 
into the contract and they were tied to the contract terms, 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 37 of 243 
 
then everything would be okay.  Correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And did you take any steps to ensure that 
that 
was 
then 
implemented 
in 
the 
contract 
that 
was 
concluded? 
MS KWINANA:   As we said Chair in the minutes.  We said...  
Let me read it again.  What was said there, was said in the 
board meeting that we need to tie them.  Yes.  And now, 
when you say:  Did we...  Did I see the contract?  I did not 
see the contract Chair.  The reason being that, the contracts 
10 
– after the award...   
 
In fact, that is also what I was trying to explain with 
Swissport.  After the award is done, the legal team goes and 
draw the contract.   
 
So now, whether the minutes of the board do agree with 
what is in the contract.  Then that is basically outside us.  It 
is now the duty of other assurance bodies within the 
organisation.  Therefore, Chair I did not see the contract.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   H’m.  And Ms Kwinana, you will remember 
that Mr Phiri’s evidence that we looked at the other day on 
20 
affidavit, says that you did see the contract.   
 
That you actually at a meeting demanded that it be 
signed and that arrangements be made to go and retrieve it.  
And he said that you had said, at a point in that meeting, 
that people were not to leave the room until the agreement 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 38 of 243 
 
was signed.   
 
I understand your evidence previously to be that you 
deny that you were ever at that meeting.  Correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Chair, I was saying.  After the award of this 
contract, there was a lot of unhappiness from the people who 
were not part of this process at all.  We had...  I received a 
letter of complaint from the chairperson of the board   
 
I received a letter from National Treasury and the 
chairperson and they all...  And then there was also the 
media.  And rightly so, because this is a big contract.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, I am going to interrupt you 
Ms Kwinana.  Remember, the question was whether you 
confirm that your position is that you were not at that 
meeting that Mr Phiri talked about.  That was the question. 
MS KWINANA:   I am trying to answer it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS KWINANA:   I am saying ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Try and go straight to it as much as 
possible because your answer maybe:  No, I did not say here 
I was not at that meeting.  Or:  Yes, my position is that I was 
20 
not at that meeting. 
MS KWINANA:   Okay, I ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I just want us to make progress. 
MS KWINANA:   I was at a meeting ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 39 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   ...where I sat with management to say, 
there is this concern.  Please, put together all the files.  Put 
together the contract.  Take it...  Take everything to National 
Treasury.  Yes, I was in that meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS KWINANA:   Where, basically, we were addressing this 
unhappiness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you.  But you deny having at that 
meeting demanded that no one leaves the room until the 
10 
agreement was signed.  Is that correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Definitely. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And you did not ask for it to go and be 
retrieved.  Is that correct? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And Mr Phiri also said that before he 
signed ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  I am sorry.  Is it correct?  You 
say no.  Is it no, it is not correct?  No, it is correct.  I just 
want to...  I want to make sure we all understand your 
20 
answer in the same way.   
MS KWINANA:   Chair, I was at a meeting which was 
addressing the specific issues.  Yes.  So. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of unhappiness.  I think Ms Hofmeyr, you 
might have to repeat your question.   
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 40 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that...  And then, when you answer, I 
just want to make sure that when you say yes or no, that my 
understanding is what you intend to convey.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   I think it will be helpful if I change the 
faming of the question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Kwinana, at that meeting, did you 
demand that no one leave the room before the agreement 
was signed? 
10 
MS KWINANA:   I did not demand because my understanding 
was that the agreement was signed.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Did you at any point, prior to that meeting, 
push for it to be urgently concluded, the drafting process? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Who is Ms Kuki Constance Mbeki? 
MS KWINANA:   She is the Head of Legal.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Where? 
MS KWINANA:   Then she was the Head of Legal at SAAT. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right.  Do you remember having an 
20 
interaction with her during the drafting process for this 
contract? 
MS KWINANA:   No. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Because she has previously given an 
affidavit to the Commission.  It was dealt within Ms Memela’s 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 41 of 243 
 
evidence.  I can take you there so that you can read it 
yourself or I could just read you...  Would you like to see it 
in front of you? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Certainly.  We will need...  Chair and 
Ms Mbanjwa, DD 25(b).  And you will open it.  The first page 
of the affidavit is page 464.   
LEGAL TEAM:   [No audible reply] [microphone on mute] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  And page 464 is where it 
commences.   
10 
MS KWINANA:   [No audible reply] [microphone on mute] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   25(b), 464.   
LEGAL TEAM:   [No audible reply] [microphone on mute] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, I just...  It should be in 25(b), page 
464.   
LEGAL TEAM:   [No audible reply] [microphone on mute] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   464. 
LEGAL TEAM:   [No audible reply] [microphone on mute] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  Oh, some pages fell out.  [laughing]  
Thank 
you. 
 
Ms Kwinana, 
do 
you 
recall 
having 
any 
20 
interactions with Ms Mbeki about the drafting?  Because I 
understood your evidence previously to be, once the board 
makes the decision you leave it to management to execute it.  
Is that right? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 42 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So, am I understanding correctly, then you 
would not have been following up with the drafting team or 
anything like that.  Is that right? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And is your evidence that after the board 
gave that... made that resolution on the 9 t h of May, you did 
not thereafter become involved or follow up about the 
drafting at all? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No? 
10 
MS KWINANA:   Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And you have already told us, you dispute 
Mr Phiri’s version about that meeting.  So I am leaving that.  
Now what Ms Mbeki, who was one of the people involved in 
drafting the contract, has said in her affidavit here and we 
can pick it up at page 473, paragraph 25.   
MS KWINANA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   And if you go to page 25, she...  Sorry, 
paragraph 25, she has been dealing with various processes 
in the drafting and about two thirds of the way on paragraph 
20 
25, she says that she had a conversation with Ms Memela, 
Advocate Memela.  And she says – there is a sentence about 
two 
thirds 
of 
the 
way 
down: 
 
During 
the 
telephone 
discussion.  Can you see that Ms Kwinana? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 43 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes. 
“It 
is 
during 
the 
telephone 
discussion, 
Advocate Memela told me that she received a 
complaint that I keep on raising issues which were 
already discussed before I joined the team the 
previous day, and as a result of my conduct, the 
discussions were taking longer than necessary. 
She also told me that this concern was also raised 
with the then Chief Executive Officer of SAAT, who 
was also the acting Group Chief Executive Officer, 
10 
Mr Moosa Zwane. 
I admit that indeed I have been alerted by the team 
that a lot of the issues I was raising were already 
raised, discussed, resolved the previous day.” 
 
And then she goes on at 26 to say: 
“On the same day that Advocate Memela told me 
about the concern from the contract negotiation 
team, I had a telephone discussion with Mr Zwane 
who informed me that he was in a meeting with the 
then Chairperson of SAAT Board, Ms Yakhe Kwinana 
20 
and that I am on speaker phone. 
He told me that I am informed that I am slowing 
down the contract negotiation process by raising 
issues which had already been dealt with and that 
he was requested to intervene.” 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 44 of 243 
 
 
Do you recall this conversation that you were placed on 
speaker phone? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you deny that it took place? 
MS KWINANA:   I do not remember Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So it is possible that it could have? 
MS KWINANA:   Not with contract negotiation ...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   You would not have been involved? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So, your answer is, you were not involved 
10 
in this conversation? 
MS KWINANA:   I was not involved. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Because if it was just you and Mr Zwane 
and he said that he had been requested to intervene.  Do 
you agree that it is a fair assumption that that would request 
would have likely come from you? 
MS KWINANA:   No, that...  It did not come from me. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   H’m.  And she goes on and she says: 
“He told me that the purpose of his call was to 
ascertain what was going on and that he wanted to 
20 
hear my side of the story. 
He gave an opportunity for me to explain my 
frustrations.” 
 
And then she goes on and talks in some detail about the 
issues, et cetera.  What I am interested in is.  This reads 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 45 of 243 
 
Ms Kwinana as yet another member of the SAAT Team, now 
on the legal side, saying that you were involved in following 
up about the drafting of this contract.  Is she giving false 
evidence by placing this version before this Commission? 
MS KWINANA:   She is Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   H’m.  And Mr Phiri also, correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Mr Phiri is also.  And in fact, Chair.  Maybe 
I should have been given Rule 3.3 here so that I can answer 
adequately.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Were you alerted to the fact that it would 
10 
be part of what was referred to today because it comprises 
part of Ms Memela’s bundle.  But you have given your 
answer.  Is there anything that you feel that you have not 
been able to say? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair but I am angry that knowing the 
processes, how would I go and say how far is the contract?  
The board is not involved there.  In fact, that is what I have 
been 
explaining. 
 
The 
board 
is 
not 
involved 
in 
the 
documentation of the contract. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Kwinana, let me in fairness to you say.  
20 
I absolutely accept that.  When processes are running 
correctly, the board should never be involved in that.  It may 
on occasion.  And I think this is a point that the Chair raised 
previously.   
 
If it is really important that something be in a contract 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 46 of 243 
 
when the board approves it, it may be appropriate from a 
corporate governance and a procurement perspective that 
the board checks again that it is there.  But actually being 
involved in driving the process, in rushing it along, is 
something that board members should never do.  Are we – 
agree on that? 
MS KWINANA:   H’m, h’m.  Agreed. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  What we are probing today is why 
many people at SAAT – many might be exaggerating – at 
least two people at SAAT say you were playing a role in this 
10 
contract which is contrary to the proper role of a board 
member.   
 
And we are exploring it today because the theme that is 
emerging from all these bits of evidence is that you played a 
role that is not an appropriate role for a board member to 
play.   
 
And if you received any benefits out of this contract, it 
would indicate that you were pushing for these bidders to be 
favoured and the contract to be signed so that they could be 
secured, their revenue stream.   
20 
 
And that is why I must, in fairness, put these to you.  I 
just wanted you to be clear about why I am going there.  
Chair, I then propose to move from this aspect ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  One second.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Oh, sorry. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 47 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Mbanjwa. 
MS MBANJWA:   Chair, thank you.  Chair, I decided to raise 
this concern after the witness has answered because I take 
cognisance of your warning to me the other day to say, I 
must not be seen to be assisting the witness.   
 
What I know have Chair is a concern with the manner of 
questioning by Ms Hofmeyr specifically on this question.  I 
will not be long so that I can take it to re-examination.   
 
I just want to state my concern so that in future...  
What Ms Hofmeyr does.  She reads a statement that does 
10 
not say that the witness was there.  And it does not say that 
she was there, it is hearsay, somebody saying I am with Mr 
X. 
 
And secondly, when that person speaks, that person 
does not speak in the plural, it is in the singular which 
means that – I do not mind Ms Hofmeyr putting the 
questions to the witness but I object to Ms Hofmeyr making 
the statement to be what the statement is not because this 
is what is causing difficulty with this witness to answer. 
 
So if she can in future just be careful of that.  If the 
20 
statement does not say I, as Yakhe Kwinana am saying 
this, somebody says there was a hearsay to that and then 
she is bombarded and conclusions are made that we 
cannot answer cross-examination. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, just – do you want to draw my 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 48 of 243 
 
attention to the specific part that you are talking about? 
MS MBANJWA:   Thank you, Chair.  If I can use, for 
instance, this paragraph that we are at now.  It is DD25 
8473. 
CHAIRPERSON:   47...? 
MS MBANJWA:   Yes, it is this …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   474? 
MS MBANJWA:   No, it starts at 473. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MBANJWA:   And then I am reading from paragraph 26.  
10 
It says: 
“I had a telephone discussion with Mr Mzwane who 
informed me that he was in a meeting with the then 
Chairperson at SAAT. 
It goes over to page 474. 
“...who informed me that he was in a meeting with 
the Chairperson of SAAT.  This person did not see 
Ms Kwinana there.” 
She says somebody phoned me and say I am in a meeting 
with the Chairperson of SAAT, that is Yakhe Kwinana. 
20 
“He informed me that he was informed...” 
And then it continues, it says: 
“He told me that the purpose of his call...” 
Without arguing, Chair, I know this is not the time, we can 
see that Mr Zwane here is speaking in the singular.  He 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 49 of 243 
 
does not say that - this lady does not say he told me that 
the reason for their call.  So even on Mr Zwane it is 
[indistinct] 02.24 to this question, the witness was not part 
of that conversation.  That is clear from this affidavit and 
now here as well my concern is, my concern is what now 
Ms Hofmeyr does is to say this statement which clearly 
does not say the witness said anything is confirmation of 
the fact that the witness – I do not mind if she makes like 
that but what worries me is when she pushes it and 
presses it and makes it a said.  If she can – if we can just 
10 
get [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair, I was quite careful to be very 
faithful to Ms Mbeki’s words and it was in response to her 
very words that I asked Ms Kwinana for her version and all 
that I did thereafter was to explain to Ms Kwinana that, in 
essence, answers about the way boards usually operate is 
not where we are going here.  I wanted to establish with 
Ms Kwinana that we are on common ground with that.  
What is being explored is the extent to which there is 
20 
evidence from others that suggest a greater involvement 
and in fairness to Ms Kwinana I must put what Ms Mbeki 
said, in her own words.  If Ms Kwinana would like to give 
the answer that Ms Mbanjwa has just given which is well, 
look, you cannot even rely on this because it is Mr Zwane 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 50 of 243 
 
saying that I was in a room that I was not in, that is – she 
is fully entitled to give that answer.  What is difficult is, 
again with respect to my learned friend, a situation where 
the type of answer that it might have been useful for Ms 
Kwinana to give is then brought in to what it essentially 
argument or re-examination. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So my request, Chair, would be that we 
do reserve it for that purpose. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   We are going to have a re-examination 
session today.  My suggestion is these proceedings are 
going to move much more efficiently if we go that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us move on. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right, so Ms Kwinana, I would like to 
leave 
the 
decision 
that 
the 
board 
took 
and 
your 
involvement thereafter in awarding the contract to JM and 
AAR and I want to go back to actually where we left off on 
Tuesday which is these monies that you received from JM 
Aviation, its bank account into Zanospark’s bank account, 
20 
Ms Hendricks who directly deposited money and the 
evidence that you have given the Commission on that 
score. 
 
Now, Ms Kwinana, I must say after Tuesday’s 
evidence it became clear to me certainly and please tell me 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 51 of 243 
 
if you disagree, that you really are I think probably from 
about the time you left SAAT you have been running quite 
a serious forex trading business.  Is that a fair summary of 
what you have been doing? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And you did indicate in your evidence 
that you have ensure in conducting that business that you 
are FICA compliant, that is compliant with the Financial 
Intelligence Centre Act, correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Sorry, can you repeat the question? 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes. I understood your evidence the 
other day to be that you have ensured that you are, as a 
business, FICA compliant, is that correct? 
MS KWINANA:   I said the business is FICA compliant but I 
do not need to have a licence to do forex trading.  
ADV 
HOFMEYR: 
 
 
Yes, 
no, 
no, 
I 
understand 
that 
difference.  You dispute the evidence from the FSCA, we 
looked at their affidavit, you said notwithstanding what 
they say about the licences needed, I do not need that 
licence.  You and I agree on that.  What I understand you 
20 
to say, though, is you do accept that you are an 
accountable institution under FICA and so you must be 
FICA compliant, correct? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair, I am not an accountable 
institution.  The accountable institution – let me get it for 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 52 of 243 
 
you in my red file which institutions are accountable in 
terms of FICA. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Sorry, just – could I just ask why would 
you need to be FICA compliant if you were not an 
accountable institution under FICA? 
MS KWINANA:   No, FICA that I am talking about is the 
normal FICA that everybody must comply with like for 
instance the copy of the ID and the proof of address but let 
me read to you the companies that must comply with FICA 
as the financial institutions, it is the insurance companies.  
10 
Zanospark is not an insurance company.  Hedge Fund 
Managers, Retirement Fund Managers, Credit Ratings 
Companies, Capital Market companies, Forex Brokers.  We 
are not forex brokers, we are forex traders and therefore, 
we do not have to comply with FSCA requirement. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   This is the Financial Intelligence Centre 
Act, right? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So you are not a forex broker, you are a 
forex trader. 
20 
MS KWINANA:   Yes and in fact even the forex brokers, it 
is not a mandatory requirement that they must comply 
because there are forex brokers that will not comply and it 
is not a requirement but it is advisable that they can 
comply. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 53 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I am going to come back to FICA in a 
moment.  Just tell me – but you said you do have an 
obligation to get IDs and other things.  Where does that 
obligation come from? 
MS KWINANA:   From our own requirements because we 
need to put everything in place. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   But then why do you call it FICA 
documents or FICA compliance. 
MS KWINANA:   Maybe it is the loose term. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right. 
10 
MS KWINANA:   Like, for instance, when you go to the 
bank they say they want to FICA you, they want proof of 
address, they want the ID.  So …[intervenes] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes because they need to be – they are 
accountable institutions under FICA, right? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So I understand your evidence to be you 
are 
not 
an 
accountable 
institution 
under 
FICA 
…[intervenes] 
MS KWINANA:   I am not. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   …but you are just engaging good 
practice, is that right? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right, okay.  Under FICA – sorry, sorry, 
let me move on from that, I will come back to the FICA 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 54 of 243 
 
aspect in a moment.  On Tuesday you did say, though, and 
I think it is part of your good business practice that you get 
– know you client documents from your clients like if you 
were obliged to do so under FICA you would have been 
obliged to get, correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  And those documents you have not 
provided to the Commission, correct? 
MS KWINANA:   No. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No.  And were those – is that because 
10 
they were on that server that was confiscated? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  Okay.  Now that server, as I 
understood your evidence earlier, was confiscated for non-
payment in February 2020, is that correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  And similarly, the annual 
investment statements that you say that you prepare, you 
do not ever email because of confidentiality concerns, you 
print them out and then you go and hand deliver them, is 
20 
that correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And you also indicated that you deliver 
them in January of every year, correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 55 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And those documents you also could not 
provide to the Commission because despite the summons 
that you received, because of the confiscated server – 
have I got the evidence other day correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You did say, however, in your evidence 
that you were not certain that the confiscation happened in 
February 2020, is that right? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair.  I even said the date may be 
wrong. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes. 
MS KWINANA:   But the confiscation is correct. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It did take place, indeed.   So if we had 
been in contact with Onero, who said was your service 
provider  and they indicated that the confiscation actually 
occurred in April of 2019, would you dispute that? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So – right, let us move on from that for a 
moment.  On Tuesday in your evidence we looked at the 
JM agreement that Ms Sikhulu sent to Ms Memela, do you 
20 
remember that when the bid was still open and she was 
asking for Ms Memela’s input on it?  Do you recall that? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And in terms of that JV agreement you 
would have seen in the email JM Aviation was going to 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 56 of 243 
 
earn 5% on all the invoices generated by AAR.  Were you 
aware of that at the time that these decisions were being 
taken? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I just want to get a sense of how much 
value this contract was for JM Aviation and I know that you 
are an accountant, which I am not, so you might be able to 
assist me.  I did – the value of the components contract, 
we have received evidence previously in the Commission is 
about over the five years a 1.5 billion, does that accord 
10 
with your understanding? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Now 5% of 1.5 billion on my calculation 
is 75 million, does that sound right to you? 
MS KWINANA:   Ja, maybe. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   We could do the – I mean, I did do it but 
sometimes when I have had accountants here they can do 
it in their heads so I am always just a little bit cautious.  
So 5% of the total value of that contract, if I have done my 
calculation 
correctly, 
is 
about 
R75 
million 
worth 
of 
20 
business for JM Aviation.  Do you accept that calculation? 
MS KWINANA:   Let me get my calculator, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You cannot trust these lawyers, Ms 
Kwinana, on figures. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Not on that [inaudible – speaking 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 57 of 243 
 
simultaneously] numbers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I cannot blame you. 
MS MBANJWA:   Sorry for interrupting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
MS MBANJWA:   I would just like to be given the page.  If 
Ms Hofmeyr can kindly give me the page where the 5% of 
…[intervenes] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Oh.  I am going to have to just 
remember where it is.  It is in that email, so it will be in the 
Memela bundle.  I will be able to find the reference, sorry, 
10 
let do that. 
MS KWINANA:   So I am calculating 1.253?  1.253. 
CHAIRPERSON:   5% of 1,5 billion, I think.  Is that correct, 
Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   5% of 1,5 billion. 
MS KWINANA:   But this is 1.253 636 151. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Sorry, 5% of 1.5 billion is what? 
MS KWINANA:   Where is 1.5, Chair? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, the value of the contract over the 
20 
five years is 1.5 billion, so I just want a calculation of what 
5% of 1.5 billion is. 
MS KWINANA:   The value of the contract, Chair, 
according to DD22H 2282 is 1.253 …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, 5% of 100 million is 5 million and 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 58 of 243 
 
…[intervenes] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Oh, sorry, I understand where Ms 
Kwinana and I are at odds.  You are absolutely right.  On 
that page when the submission was made to the board it 
was valued at about 1.25 billion, right?  The evidence of Mr 
Human who appeared before the Commission who is – well, 
at the time was employed at SAAT was that there had been 
overruns on the contract and that it was in the end going to 
be 1.5 billion, so that is why I give you that figure. 
MS KWINANA:   Oh, I see. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   We are on the same page.  So can you 
just give me a calculation of 5% of 1.5 billion? 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think you are about 75 million. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I think so too but I want to give the 
witness and opportunity. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am not an accountant but I think you 
are right because 5% of 1 billion would be 50 million, I 
think. 
MS KWINANA:   That is 75 million. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, so we are agreed on that. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   So lawyers are not so bad with figures, 
Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, sorry, Ms Mbanjwa had the request.  
I can give it to you, Ms Mbanjwa, the reference is DD18 
page 339 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 59 of 243 
 
MS MBANJWA:   If maybe we can also be assisted with 
one other thing, Chair, because for us it will help with re-
examination as well.  According to also what Ms Kwinana 
raised is also what I saw because I thought that the value 
of the contract was supposed to be in the submission, in 
that board submission.  Now is it Ms Hofmeyr ’s conclusion 
that actually that value that was in the board submission 
was an incorrect value? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, no, no, no, no, Ms Mbanjwa, it is the 
evidence of Mr Human.  He said – there is nothing that is 
10 
wrong, he said as the contract has developed over time it 
has become more costly.  So in the end – because it was 
running currently – I understand it has now been cancelled 
but it was running currently and so what it was going to 
end up costing SAAT was about 1.5 billion.  That is why I 
am using that because if that is what it did end up costing 
SAAT then JM Aviation had a look through to 5% and that 
is about 75 million. 
MS MBANJWA:   You know, Chair, I really do not want to 
hold up, I hear this evidence of Mr Human but can we be 
20 
referred to something that proves that at the end this was 
the value? 
ADV 
HOFMEYR: 
 
 
Chair, 
this 
is 
really 
not 
the 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, she is saying Mr Human’s evidence, 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 60 of 243 
 
Mr Human came and gave evidence and that is what he 
said.  Obviously if you want to calculate 5% of the amount 
that is reflected there you are free to do so. 
MS MBANJWA:   No, I think I have held you up enough so 
thank you, you may continue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MS MBANJWA:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us move on.  Thank you, Ms 
Kwinana, for confirming that the lawyer was right about 
figures. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay, so out of the AAR JM Aviation 
contract.  JM Aviation stood to receive revenue about 75 
million.  If Mr Human is right, that is its ultimate value of 
1.5.  If it is a bit less, 1.2, we can do the calculation and it 
will be some tens of millions less than 75 million.  Do you 
accept that as well, Ms Kwinana? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  And then they also benefited from 
the sale of the GPUs to them and then their ability to on-
sell it to Swissport, is that correct? 
20 
MS KWINANA:   What was your question? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   That JM Aviation also benefited from the 
fact that SAAT sold its GPUs which it was then able to sell 
on to Swissport, correct? 
MS KWINANA:   I cannot confirm this one. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 61 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you not have knowledge of that? 
MS KWINANA:   I do not know if they on-sold and 
benefitted. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Oh, okay, let me help you again.  The 
evidence is that SAAT sold it to JM Aviation at about 3 
million, it was 3.3 or something, and the next day 
Swissport paid for those same GPUs at about 9.8.  So I 
have always worked with a difference being about R6 
million.  Do you accept that if JM Aviation bought them for 
about 3 million and the next day they could sell them for 9 
10 
million they benefitted by the difference which I am going 
to say is about 6 million.  Do you accept that? 
MS KWINANA:   There was also a board submission in 
respect of this. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, may question is do you accept that 
if they bought them for 3 million and sold them for 9 million 
the next day they made 6 million out of that transaction? 
MS KWINANA:   There was a board resolution in respect of 
this Chair and in this board resolution there were some 
also questions that were raised in this …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but hang one, Ms Kwinana, she is 
just asking you whether you accept that reasoning.  She is 
saying if you buy something for 3 million today and you sell 
it for R9 million tomorrow, do you accept that it means you 
have made R6 million profit? 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 62 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   Not necessarily, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Why not? 
MS KWINANA:   It is because - if I make an example an 
example of a car.  You sell a car – you buy a car today, 
Chair, for 200 000, it gets registered today and you sell it 
tomorrow, you sell it tomorrow, you can sell it tomorrow at 
150 because of the depreciation. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed, indeed, but the facts are they 
bought it on day one for 3 million and they did not sell it at 
10 
a depreciated value, they sold it the next day at 9 million.  
How could they possibly not have benefitted in the order of 
6 million?  There is no depreciation issue.  Buy on day one 
at 3 million, sell on day two at 9 million. 
MS KWINANA:   Still, Chair, it also depends on a whole lot 
of things.  I am talking about the depreciation.  We all 
know that the car depreciates it the moment it gets out of 
the showroom, it has already depreciated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but you see you are responding to a 
general principle.  You are saying in effect that is not 
20 
always the case, there are circumstances where you might 
have to sell something for lower than the amount you 
bought it the previous day. 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You made the example of a car.  But 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 63 of 243 
 
what she is talking about, is where it is a fact that they 
sold it for more than the price they paid for it, so your 
example does not apply.  They have bought it for – they 
bought this for 3 million today, tomorrow they were able to 
– the following day they were able to sell it for 9 million.  
How can it not be that they made a profit of 6 million?  
How can you not agree with that? 
MS KWINANA:   Again, Chair, in the example of the car 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but leave out the example of a car, 
10 
talk about what she is talking about. 
MS KWINANA:   You talk about the GPUs? 
ADV HOFMEYR:    Talk about any purchase …[intervenes] 
MS KWINANA:   Then let me talk about …[intervenes] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Day one 3 million, tomorrow sell for 9 
million.  
MS KWINANA:   Then let me talk about the purchase of a 
car, Chair, let me make an example of the purchase of a 
car. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, but …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   But your own evidence says in the case 
of a car you will not sell the car for higher, for a higher 
price than the one you bought it for.  That is your own 
evidence. 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 64 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   But she is saying to you if you buy 
anything today and you are able to – for R3 million and you 
are able to sell it for R9 million tomorrow, obviously you 
have made R6 million profit. 
MS KWINANA:   If you have not made any improvements, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, if you have not incurred any 
expenses or …[intervenes] 
MS KWINANA:   If you have not incurred any other 
expenses. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then you agree. 
MS KWINANA:   The answer is yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Alright, one second?  Ms Mbanjwa? 
MS MBANJWA:   Thank you, Chair, I just want to remind 
Chair of the difficulty.  You will recall, Chair, that this was 
the same question that was placed in front of Ms Memela 
and then what we had said then, we had said that the 
determination of the …[intervenes] 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair, can I – I am so sorry, Ms 
Mbanjwa. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I really do want to place on record now 
that we will argue in due course and that is the only reason 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 65 of 243 
 
I am interrupting Ms Mbanjwa because I have to interrupt 
to tell you that if at this point you have interjected in a way 
that is going to be viewed as coaching this witness, we are 
going to make that submission in due course.  I need to tell 
you that that is what I am going to do in fairness to you but 
please proceed if you would like to carry on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But as I have been saying also, Ms 
Mbanjwa, I am very concerned about that and it is not 
doing …[intervenes] 
MS MBANJWA:   But it is not that …[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is not doing justice to Ms Kwinana who 
I believe can mostly answer questions on her own. 
MS MBANJWA:   Yes but Chair you are going to listen to 
my – to what I am going to say and you will see that it has 
nothing to do with the answer of Ms Kwinana. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
MS MBANJWA:   Actually, Chair, maybe this way I think I 
play a joke, I am not making light of this, she is actually 
Mrs Kwinana.  There is somebody who tweeted oh, Mrs 
Kwinana, no wonder, they are not even married, they are 
20 
gangsters, so maybe we should emphasise that she is Mrs, 
she has married for more than 20 years.  Thank you, Chair. 
 
But, 
Chair, 
what 
I 
wanted 
to 
say, 
with 
your 
permission, when Ms Memela was giving evidence the last 
time we requested a specific affidavit.  The affidavit of 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 66 of 243 
 
Jules Aires and Jules Aires was at Swissport.  One of the 
things – and that affidavit we confirmed with Ms Hofmeyr 
that she is in possession of that affidavit.  That affidavit 
expressly stated and we drew the attention of Ms Hofmeyr 
to that, it expressly stated that the GPUs that were sold, 
some of them were broken and they were taken for repairs 
which means costs were incurred.  I was just reminding the 
Commission that the issue of whether it was 6 million, the 
profit, is fully set out in that affidavit.  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Hofmeyr, please move on. 
10 
MS KWINANA:   Thank you.  The issue of Ms Kwinana, Ms 
or Mrs Kwinana, I have understood that Ms is for both Mrs 
and Miss but I may be wrong.  Ms Hofmeyr, what is your 
understanding?  Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I had certainly understood that to be the 
case.  Sorry, I was writing myself a note so that if Ms – 
Mrs Kwinana wants me to refer -  you see, I have written 
Mrs because it is my tendency to always use Ms do that it 
mutually covers both but if it is important to Mrs Kwinana 
that I refer to her as Mrs Kwinana then I will endeavour to 
20 
do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Guide us? 
MS KWINANA:   It really does not matter to me, Chair. 
 CHAIRPERSON:   It does not matter to you? 
MS KWINANA:   No. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 67 of 243 
 
MS MBANJWA:   No, I was just putting in a light moment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, but it is important one, does 
need to be sensitive to some of these things.  Okay, 
alright. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I wanted to think now whether to say Mrs 
Hofmeyr or Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, no, I far prefer Ms, so I am not 
[inaudible – speaking simultaneously]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Alright, ja. 
10 
MS 
KWINANA: 
 
 
Excuse 
me, 
Chair. 
 
I 
am 
even 
embarrassed to ask for another break, maybe it is this 
water, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, another break.  Oh, okay.  
Okay, let us take another break.  Ten minutes? 
MS KWINANA:   Five minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Five minutes will do? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, five minutes.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
20 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us talk about when we think we can 
finish, what is your estimate of how much more time you 
need Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Sorry Chair I would think you know it 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 68 of 243 
 
does take longer with the interjections. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So what I can tell you is without 
interjections I am looking at about an hour. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, okay no that is fine.    
MS KWINANA:   Ms Mbanjwa no interjections please, I 
must be out of here in an hour. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you see Ms Mbanjwa you are under 
instruction now by the client, otherwise you will be fired. 
MS MBANJWA:  Thank you Chair and can I say something, 
10 
it has got nothing to do with this, I want to stand when I am 
saying it.  I just want to say Chair I was shocked, that 
there are many negative comments that come, I do not 
mind them, but there this comment that worried me and I 
decided to apologise.   
Somebody is saying I disrespected the Deputy Head  
Judge, I was 
so embarrassed, and if Chair by my 
interjections I was taken to have disrespected you I 
sincerely from my heart apologise, that was never the 
intention.   You are one of the people we as black people 
20 
look up to, you are a trail leader and I am sure you know of 
that, so seriously my apologies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no that is fine, thank you. Now I 
just wanted to also talk Ms Mbanjwa about re-examination 
so that as Ms Hofmeyr continues you can have an idea of 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 69 of 243 
 
how much time I have in mind I would give you.   
You might when the time comes maybe ask for more  
and I will hear what you have to say but it might help that 
you have an idea of what I have in mind so that you can 
work on the basis that if that’s the time I will give you, you 
try and identify really important issues that you want to re-
examine on because if I tell you later you might say had I 
known before I would have tried to limit but I worked on too 
many things because I thought I was going to have more 
time.   
10 
Now the time that I would like to give you is not 
more than an hour, let me tell you why I have that in mind I 
have looked at how much time lawyers who have appeared 
for witnesses seem to generally taken re-examination since 
we started in August 2018.  As far as I can recall there are 
no more than two who have taken about two hours most of 
the time a lot of lawyers who represent witnesses will say I 
just want to ask one or two questions and then they take a 
few minutes some do not even re-examine. I recall for 
example some time earlier I think last year if I am not 
20 
mistaken Mr Wim Trengove was representing I think Mr 
Jonas.           
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When it was his turn to re-examine he 
said Chairperson I am not going to re-examine the 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 70 of 243 
 
examination 
by 
the 
Evidence 
Leader 
has 
covered 
everything. 
 
There 
are 
many 
others 
Mr 
Mpofu 
was 
representing somebody sometime back.  He did not take; I 
think he did not take more than fifteen minutes in re-
examination.  Mr Nbesha was here last week or the week 
before he asked two or three questions in re-examination 
and said he was covered.   
So generally you know lawyers who represent 
witnesses they have felt covered by the questioning and 
the evidence that comes out when a Commission Evidence 
10 
Leader has been asking questions.  So I am just saying 
you know an hour should if one looks at what lawyers 
generally have taken you know should be fine.   
So - but if when you start re-examining you 
complain you want more let us talk then but I just want to 
give an idea so that as you, as Ms Hofmeyr continues for 
the next hour or so you are able to say okay if I do not get 
given more than an hour this is what I want to cover 
because this is what I consider to be important.    
MS MBANJWA:  Thank you Chair, it would be fair Chair as 
20 
much I thought with Ms Memela I would need more because 
the submission was different up till now I think an hour will 
be sufficient.  The only thing which I would ask with your 
permission Chair is after Ms Hofmeyr has finished can we 
maybe time the re-examination to be just after lunch so 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 71 of 243 
 
that I can talk to the witness about a few things.  I do not 
know if that is possible and I know it is a Saturday and 
there is time constraints on your part so if that is not 
possible maybe I can just have I do not know the break 
that Chair can be prepared to give before we embark 
immediately on re-exam.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, look let us see how it goes I had 
hoped that we would be done by 1 o’clock but I do not 
think we will be done.  Let us see when Ms Hofmeyr is 
done and then take it from there. 
10 
MS MBANJWA:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright, Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you Chair, Ms Kwinana I want to 
just get your confirmation of certain facts we have 
traversed them over the last two days but they an 
important background to where I am going in the questions.  
So it is just helpful to remember also because we have had 
this break of three days.  You we have seen this morning 
were involved in the SAAT Board decision to award the 
components contract to AAR and JM Aviation, correct?    
20 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   And you were also involved in the SAA 
Board’s decision to approve the contract with Swissport 
that was that resolution we looked at the other day of 
March 2016, correct?   
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 72 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   To approve as I said Chair this 2012 that 
was 2012 and you refused Chair that I should go back to 
2012.  In 2016 the contract was awarded in 2012 so in 
2016 what happened is there was a Board submission to 
approve the terms and conditions of the 2012 award.  So 
Chair again when the submission comes it does not come 
with a contract but it come with the terms and conditions 
and then the same as I was saying at AAR after that the 
people go and do the contract but that contract the terms 
and conditions that we approved were relating to the award 
10 
that was done in 2012.    
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Kwinana I know that you have given 
evidence about the old 2012 award.  I just want to get 
confirmation that you were part of the Board that decided 
on the 14 t h of March and I am reading from the resolution 
now so that there can be no dispute between us to approve 
the contract to be entered into with Swissport South Africa 
for the duration of five years commencing on 1 April 2016 
to 31 March 2021.  Do you confirm that?      
MS KWINANA:   What page is that Chair? 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It is in Exhibit DD19 page 132.43 let us 
get that in front of you.  Oh apologies it is 19A and it is 
132.43.   
MS KWINANA:   Oh yes, Chair.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Super, thank you.  Now it was pursuant 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 73 of 243 
 
of this contract that the sale of the GPU’s took place.  You 
would recall that I took you to the contract the other day 
and I showed you clauses 8.1 and 8.2.  Do you accept 
that?   
MS KWINANA:   What were these clauses saying, can you 
remind me? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, there the clause 8.2 says that it is 
a requirement of the contract that we have just looked at 
that was approved – that Swissport purchased SAAT’s 
GPU’s.  
10 
MS KWINANA:   Oh yes, yes.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right, so what that means Ms Kwinana 
is that, if you will just give me a moment…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Ms Hofmeyr I do not know 
why my registrar is taking ages.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Oh I do apologise and I had moved on 
Chair I did not realise.  What was useful is that Ms 
Kwinana read it and then gave me the confirmation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.    
ADV HOFMEYR:   That as the resolution reads that the 
20 
Board had approved the contract to be awarded for the five 
years.  
CHAIRPERSON:   I might not have to look at it. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I certainly do not think so.  
CHAIRPERSON:   No thank you, let us move on.  
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 74 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So what that means is that you were 
involved in two decisions one in your capacity at the SAAT 
Board and one in your capacity at the SAA Board that 
generated revenue for JM Aviation and we have looked 
previously at what that revenue looked like.  It is about 
R75million even if you – let us say R60million if you take 
the R1.25billion rather than the R1.5billion and it is 
R6million in the GPU.  So those two decisions generated 
revenue let say in about R60million for JM Aviation.  Do 
you accept that?    
10 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair I would not know how much 
revenue was generated so basically that would be based 
on the assumption.  So I cannot say with certainty that JM 
Aviation benefitted on that because as I was saying the 
profit on GPU’s there were some issues in respect of the 
profits on GPU’s and the 5% of AAR I do not know what 
contract they enter into and therefore I would not be in a 
position to confirm the revenue of JM Aviation.  They would 
be in a better position to confirm their revenue.    
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay let me – we had gone through all 
20 
of this to lead up to this point because it is understood you 
accepted 5% of R1.5billion was R75million.  I am going to 
change tact, do you accept that these two decisions meant 
that SAAT and well it is just SAAT actually SAAT paid JM 
Aviation money?    
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 75 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   I do not know if SAAT paid money to JM 
Aviation.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Well you are actually right SAAT paid 
money to AAR which AAR then paid onto JM Aviation in 
terms of their joint venture agreement which was part of 
the way in which they bid.  Are you saying that you dispute 
that JM Aviation generated anything because of the 
business with SAAT?    
MS KWINANA:   I am not disputing Chair but I am saying I 
do not know those are the things that I cannot confirm.  
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I understand it is the figures is that right 
but you will accept with me that a bidder who gets awarded 
a contract generates revenue from the contract.  Do you 
accept that? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, right now from June 2016 
your 
company 
Zano 
Spark 
received 
money 
from 
JM 
Aviation 
and 
people 
linked 
to 
JM 
Aviation 
like 
Ms 
Hendricks 
who 
you 
understood 
at 
the 
time 
was 
an 
employee.  Do you accept that?  
20 
MS KWINANA:   Chair my company received money from 
JM Aviation from August 2016 Zano Spark received two 
amounts from Ms Hendricks, Ms Hendricks I do not know, I 
did not know until this Commission that she is married to 
Mr Ndzeku even with that Chair if you look at the 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 76 of 243 
 
procurement process JM Aviation and Swissport had gone 
through a rigorous process starting from the approval by 
BFS Team and therefore for these companies to be in the 
doctrine.  I really do not think that I would have influenced 
from the beginning up to the end of the process and 
secondly in the Board I am not the only Board member of 
SAA Technical there were other Board members at SAA 
Technical and therefore there was no way that I would 
influence any of these contracts and therefore Chair and 
another thing when I was still at SAA and SAAT.  I did not 
10 
have 
a 
business 
relationship 
with 
both, 
a 
business 
relationship with both happened after I left SAA Technical 
so I…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Business relationship with?            
MS KWINANA:   With Mr Ndzeku. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  
MS KWINANA:   Yes, it happened after I left SAA Technical 
the business relationship and so Chairperson to say that I 
influenced maybe I may not put it exactly the way you said 
it but to say that I influenced the process.  I think at cross- 
20 
functional sectional team that is bid evaluation there are 
about fifteen or sixteen people from different areas of SAA 
and SAAT, fifteen people and then from there even if I can 
be so influential and if I had influence to those people they 
would also come to the Zondo Commission to say I spoke 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 77 of 243 
 
to them, I spoke to them.   
So what I am saying Chair the process that is being 
followed makes it so difficult to influence the process it is 
the same with Swissport.  We did not award that tender; 
what we were doing we were regularising the contract.  
How we regularised the contract from 2012 to 2016 that 
was on a month to month basis because it was never 
signed because of the disagreement between Swissport 
and SAA.  So they were on a month to month contract that 
caused a lot of uncertainty because Swissport is one of the 
10 
major customers of SAA.   
If Swissport goes on strike SAA would not fly and 
therefore, Chair also that process followed the rigorous 
process of FSTC and that FSTC is even you cannot even 
say you will influence them because it depends who gets 
called at the moment depending on what the tender is and 
who is playing which role and therefore Chair let me repeat 
again I do not sit alone in the Board Chair whatever 
decisions that we do is a Board decision.                
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Kwinana what was my question? 
20 
MS KWINANA:   Remind me Chair.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   The question was do you except that 
from June of 2016 your company Zano Spark received 
money from JM Aviation or people linked to JM Aviation?  
MS KWINANA:   I am saying Chair that money that we 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 78 of 243 
 
received that is another thing that I should explain Chair 
again. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but let us start with is it yes you 
accept or what are the proposition that Ms Hofmeyr is 
putting or do you not accept it then we can talk about the 
basis for not accepting it or there needs to be a 
qualification to saying you accept it.  If we want to make 
progress and finish within a reasonable time it will help if 
as far as possible, crisp questions are answered with crisp 
answers obviously I accept that sometimes there needs to 
10 
be some qualification or explanation but it will help 
progress if you are able to answer yes or no to a question 
that seeks that.       
MS KWINANA:   Chair the reason why in this question I am 
reluctant to answer yes or no is because in previous 
hearings Advocate Hofmeyr said I accepted – I was 
involved in a corrupt scheme I accepted bribes and 
kickbacks, that is what she said and in fact now her 
question will be and I do not know what will be the follow 
up question, that is why. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but do not worry about the follow 
up question you will deal with it when it comes.  First she 
just wants to find out do you accept that your company 
received money from Ms…[intervene]         
ADV HOFMEYR:   JM Aviation or people linked to JM 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 79 of 243 
 
Aviation.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MS KWINANA:   Maybe she should tell me Chair that I 
received money for what.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well that can come later but if your 
company did not receive money at all then there might be 
no need to go into for what but if you say yes it did receive 
the money.    
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair it did receive the money. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright take it from there.    
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, then I would like to pick up 
just for a moment on something you did say earlier about 
that distinction that money before you left SAAT came from 
Ms Hendricks and it was only after you left SAAT that 
money came from JM Aviation, do you recall drawing that 
distinction?  
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, it is a distinction that I confessed 
to Mr Ndzeku when he was giving evidence that I could not 
understand.  You did watch his evidence did you not or did 
20 
you look at his transcript which was it? 
MS KWINANA:   I did, I looked at the transcript.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right, so do you recall me raising that 
with him? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair.  
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 80 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, because you see his evidence 
before this Commission is that it was him, it was his 
investments and he was simply asking his wife to make the 
payments that first 2.5 and the 605, do you recall him 
giving that evidence?  
MS KWINANA:   I will not say I recall specifically that.  
ADV 
HOFMEYR: 
 
 
No 
that 
is 
fine 
let 
me 
tell 
you…[intervene] 
MS KWINANA:   However.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  
10 
MS KWINANA:   However even if the money was coming 
from Mr Ndzeku the money was not to my benefit the 
money was for his investment that is why – let me finish.  
The money was for his benefit not for my benefit yes and 
secondly there could be like for instance if there was – let 
me talk about the disclosure and conflict of interest without 
being asked that but I need to cover it.   
The money the first money was paid on 1 s t of July 
that was the first money.  Now assuming that it was Mr 
Ndzeku or yes assuming the worst case scenario was that 
20 
it was Mr Ndzeku.  Now when would I disclose the interest 
at SAA there are two specific circumstances where we can 
disclose the interest.   
We have got annual disclosures and if Zano Spark 
is not there that means I was not part of the Zano Spark 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 81 of 243 
 
but I do not want to go there but what I do I have got 
access to CIPC where all my directorships are there.  I 
print that and send it to the company secretary that is the 
annual disclosure and then the second disclosure is when 
you see a pack in front of you, you going to the meeting 
and then you think that your decision will be impaired here. 
When those monies including the one that was put 
by Ms Hendricks when those monies were put there was no 
time where I would say now let me disclose my interest 
because the company that I am linked to being Zano Spark 
10 
is also doing the work with the company that we doing work 
with like SAA and Zano Spark.  So there was no 
circumstances like that and therefore Chair the monies that 
we received firstly from Ms Hendricks whom I did not know 
that she was Mr Ndzeku’s wife.  We did receive it as a 
company I agree with that, we also received monies from 
JM Aviation those monies were for forex trading.  So to 
answer your question yes Zano Spark did receive those 
monies…[intervene]           
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you Ms Kwinana.  
20 
MS KWINANA:   But they were not for bribe and corruption 
and kickbacks as you said it before.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Kwinana at this point I am just 
getting confirmation that you accept that you received it.  I 
do want to go back because you keep emphasising that you 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 82 of 243 
 
only learnt that Ms Hendricks was Mr Ndzeku’s wife in the 
evidence before the Commission.   
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   But remember we dealt with that the 
other day you knew that she was linked to JM Aviation.  
MS KWINANA:   Yes.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   That you knew right so when you 
received the payment on the 1 s t of July 2016 when you still 
a director of SAAT and SAA you know that Zano Spark your 
company is receiving R2.5millon from a person linked to 
10 
JM Aviation, correct?   
MS KWINANA:   Let me make one slight correction Ms 
Hendricks I knew that she was a colleague of Mr Ndzeku.  I 
did not know; I do not know if she is linked to JM Aviation.    
ADV HOFMEYR:   We will go and get the transcript of the 
other 
day 
you 
referenced 
particularly 
that 
she 
was 
employed or I do not know if you used the word employed 
or a company at JM Aviation.    
MS KWINANA:   Yes, she was a colleague of Mr Ndzeku 
which company I do not know.  
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   We will go back to the transcript.  
MS KWINANA:   Another thing Chair Mr Ndzeku is involved 
as I said before, is involved in many companies.  So when 
he says Ms Hendricks is a colleague then and in fact even 
if he said, Mr Ndzeku said Miss Hendricks is a colleague 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 83 of 243 
 
from JM Aviation for the reasons that I have just explained 
I really would not see anything wrong.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   You would not okay, you would not see 
anything proper.  So then I was just going back to this 
change right it comes from Ms Hendricks while you still at 
the Board of SAAT but then when you leave it comes 
directly from JM Aviation and I was telling you that in Mr 
Ndzeku’s evidence I queried with him why if it was his 
investment that change needed to take place.   
It did not make sense to me and I actually said to 
10 
him in fairness to him it starts to look like you are trying to 
hide who the real payer is by interposing somebody else 
when it is actually him, it is his money and it is money 
owed to him by JM Aviation and he did not really give much 
of an answer to explain that.   
I want to put to you what occurred to me when I was 
looking at that change preparing for your evidence.  You 
see remember right at the beginning on Monday I had 
asked you about your resignation on the 22 n d of August 
2016.  Do you remember discussing your resignation?        
20 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, you see that resignation falls 
directly between this change you see until you resign on 
the 22 n d of August it his bank account but after the 22 
August and you have resigned it is JM Aviation paying into 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 84 of 243 
 
the bank account.  Do you accept that difference? 
MS KWINANA:  I would not know the internal arrangements 
that they have this Ms Hendricks and Mr Ndzeku and 
therefore I will not want to comment as to whether the money 
came from.  From my books yes the two amounts came from 
Ms Hendricks. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes before you resigned. 
MS KWINANA:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And all of the JM Aviation amounts come 
after you resigned, correct? 
10 
MS KWINANA:  Yes but as I said I would not know their 
internal arrangements. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  No.  I accept that.  I accept that but what 
struck me as quite stark is that Ms Ndzeku says he is 
investing in forex with you.  He says it is his investments.  
But he uses his wife with the name Hendricks to send you 
the money – deposit the money in Zano Spark before your 
resign from SAAT.  And he then has no difficulty using JM 
Aviation after you resigned from SAAT.  And that coincidence 
indicated to me and that is why I put it to you that the 
20 
concern about why he would use Hendricks before you left 
might be linked to the fact that no-one would then while you 
were there be able to link the payment to JM Aviation and 
that you were free after you left SAAT to get them directly 
from JM Aviation.  Was that what was going on Ms Kwinana? 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 85 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:  Chair you said we cannot raise questions 
but I am thinking from the top of my head that if that was the 
case – if Mr Ndzeku wanted to hide that would he not 
continue to hide it under Ms Hendricks or had they already 
divorced when – when now JM Aviation directly pay me.  
Because really if he wanted to hide it he could also have 
continued to hide it and use Mr Hendricks that is basically  
Ms Hendricks basically that is what I am thinking.  But now 
why would he change because now Ms Hendricks is the wife 
and therefore there is nothing to hide in her being the wife.  
10 
So what I am saying is if he wanted to hide anything I would  
think that he could have continued as Ms Hendricks if Ms 
Hendricks’ transactions – in any way? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Ms – well Ms Kwinana you – you said 
earlier on if I understood you correctly.  You raised the point 
that you only received payment from JM Aviation after you 
had resigned, is it not? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And it seems to me that the point you 
sought to make was there was nothing wrong for you to 
20 
receive money from JM Aviation after you had resigned.  Is it 
not – is that not the position?  Is that not the point you 
wanted to make? 
MS KWINANA:  Chair even – even before I resigned there 
was nothing wrong.  There would be nothing wrong in me 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 86 of 243 
 
receiving the money from JM Aviation. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS KWINANA:  The reason being that there is nothing in the 
SAA Policy and also even in government that I do business 
with there is nothing wrong that says you cannot do 
business.  What it says is that disclose and therefore had I 
stayed at SAA I would still do business with JM Aviation but 
disclose. 
CHAIRPERSON: But – but then disclose and take part in 
decisions making – in decision making affecting JM Aviation. 
10 
MS KWINANA:  No.  What needs – needed to happen is if 
the submission comes and it has JM Aviation … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Would not take part in a decision making is 
it not? 
MS KWINANA:  This is how it happens Chair.  When I see a 
company that I am doing business with that I need to make a 
decision I know you will come to keep… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Do not worry about what she will come to. 
MS KWINANA:  I – I know you will … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You will deal with it when it comes. 
20 
MS KWINANA:  CWC and good. But what happens Chair 
when I see that there is JM Aviation that is going to be here 
and any other company that I am doing business with I would 
disclose and say I do business with this company. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then proceed to take part in the – in 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 87 of 243 
 
deciding in a matter involving them or you then recuse 
yourself – which one do you – would you do? 
MS KWINANA:  It also depends Chair.  In this – in this case 
– in the case of – can I say make an example of these three 
companies?  In the case of JM Aviation where basically I 
know that Mr Ndzeku is a director here and Mr Ndzeku is 
investing his money with Zano Spark the company that I am 
linked to. Then I would recuse myself.  In the case of me 
approving the audit fees of Nkonki and PwC doing business 
with them on a contract by contract basis which is normal 
10 
which I am not getting the money from Nkonki and PwC but I 
am getting money from PRASA; I am getting money from 
Transnet; I am getting money from Postnet.  Then I would 
not recuse myself because the decision to award us that 
tender is not dependent on Nkonki and PwC and it is also not 
dependent on me.  So I do not know Chair if this makes 
sense. Because in the case of PwC the monies that were 
received were the monies from PRASA.  The monies that we 
received from PwC – from Nkonki were the monies from 
Transnet and therefore Chair there was no conflict of 
20 
interest.  And in JM Aviation at the time I was not doing 
business with JM Aviation.  And if I was doing business with 
JM Aviation I would have disclosed my interest. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And you would not have been entitled to 
take part in any decision relating to JM Aviation? 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 88 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  But Ms Kwinana the point that you keep 
emphasising is exactly the one that troubles me because it is 
precisely because the first two payments as I understand 
your version did not come directly from JM Aviation.  That 
you did not have to make the disclosure, correct? 
MS KWINANA:  Not only that but as I was saying again even 
if the monies were coming from JM Aviation I have stated the 
two circumstances where you disclose your interests – your 
10 
conflict of interests.   
 
The first disclosure of the conflict of interest is the 
annual disclosure.  The second disclosure and the annual 
disclosure we would get – we disclose it towards the end – 
the year end.  That is the first disclosure.  The second 
disclosure is when you have to make any decisions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well Ms Kwinana you may have annual 
disclosures and whatever disclosures the fact of the matter 
is if a matter comes before the board of which you are a 
member that involves certain people or certain entities which 
20 
gives rise to a conflict of interest you cannot not disclose 
that there is this conflict of interest and you cannot take part 
in decision making involving that situation where you have 
conflict of interest, is it not? 
MS KWINANA:  That is correct Chair. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 89 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes so it does not depend on the 
circumstances.  Are you aware of the provisions of Section 
75 of the Companies Act? 
MS KWINANA:  What does it say? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  It is about directors and personal financial 
interests and when they must disclose and when they must 
recuse themselves.  Are you aware of those provisions? 
MS KWINANA:  Whose personal financial interests? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  No I am asking are you aware of the 
10 
provisions of Section 75 of the Companies Act? 
MS KWINANA:  Whose personal financial interests?  Whose 
personal financial interests?  Because… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hang on, hang on, hang on Ms Kwinana.  
Just listen carefully to the question.  Ms Hofmeyr is asking 
you whether you are aware of Section 75 of The Companies 
Act and you asked her what does it say. She has now told 
you what it says.  Go back to the question say yes I am 
aware of no I am not aware? 
MS KWINANA:  I am aware. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Okay so… 
MS KWINANA:  But Chair I am aware but I do not want you 
to say – in fact I want you to put it in your mind Ms Hofmeyr. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No do not deal with what she has not 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 90 of 243 
 
raised yet. 
MS KWINANA:  No I am – no I want Chair I want to correct 
this.  I want to put it in her mind that I did not have a 
personal interest – I did not have a personal interest in… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well she thought -  she said the Act relates 
to personal finances, is that right? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Personal financial interests yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Personal finances. 
MS KWINANA:  Personal financial benefit. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Interest. 
10 
MS KWINANA:  I did not – personal financial interest okay.  I 
did not have the personal financial interest.  What they are 
doing they are investing in forex trading.  I am investing for 
them. I do not have a personal financial interest.  If I have 
the personal financial interest I will only have the personal 
financial interest on maturing of when they say on this date I 
want my money based on the agreement then that is when I 
am going to have a personal – a financial interest.  As I am 
sitting here I do not have a personal financial interest Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No Ms Kwinana.  They are doing business 
20 
with you.   
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is good for you.  You want their 
business. 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 91 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Actually you would be happy if they gave 
you more business. 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are going to sit – you cannot see it 
now and make a decision that could disappoint them 
because they might not give you more business in the future.  
They might even take away the business that is there.  They 
will not – they do not have to wait until maturity.  Right there 
and then you have an interest in them continuing to give you 
business while you are faced with this decision that must be 
10 
taken about them.   
MS 
KWINANA: 
 Yes 
Chair.  
But 
remember that 
Ms 
Hendricks… 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you do have an interest because they 
are making an investment that may result in you getting 
money in due course and you want them to keep this 
business with – relationship with you.   Actually you would 
be happy if they could give you more business.  So you have 
an interest. 
MS KWINANA:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr. 
MS KWINANA:  But – yes Chair I have – I have an interest 
when they have put the money in my business.  But for SAA 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 92 of 243 
 
Technical JM Aviation put it money after I left SAA Technical.  
Let us go back to Ms Hendricks. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no let us not go back because we 
have heard… 
MS KWINANA:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have heard what you say. 
MS KWINANA:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ms Kwinana I – I absolutely understand but 
you will correct me if I got it wrong that your version about 
10 
why these payments are not suspicious at all that came from 
JM Aviation and Ms Hendricks is because you did not benefit 
from them, is that correct? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  We have just clarified with the Chair that 
you did benefit in the sense that you benefitted from their 
business 
and 
I 
understand 
that 
that 
involves 
some 
remunerative consequence for you, correct? 
MS KWINANA:  That is fine let us agree.  Let us agree that I 
benefitted. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Right. 
MS KWINANA:  But when did I start to benefit and when was 
I supposed to disclose this interest? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  No Ms Kwinana that is why disclosure is a 
little bit of a red herring you see.  The way that bribery and 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 93 of 243 
 
corruption sometimes takes place is it does not have to 
precede the decision making.  That might be too obvious a 
way to design the scheme.  It does not matter at all that it 
comes later.   
If the people who are engaging in the bribes or the 
corrupt activity devise a very clever scheme that there are 
going to be benefits given by contracts being awarded but 
they are going to be quite careful they are going to be sure 
the money starts to flow only after – well through people that 
will not make it obvious that there is a connection and then 
10 
later after you have left.   
That does not stop at being part of a corrupt scheme.  
The timing does not prevent it being part of a corrupt 
scheme.  So your consistent emphasis about the fact that the 
money only comes in at a point when you had already made 
decisions or the money only comes in from Ms Hendricks 
until you leave I put it to you is not an answer if the 
overwhelming rest of the evidence indicates that there was 
an arrangement that was reached in order to influence your 
decision making at SAAT.  Do you have a response to that? 
20 
MS KWINANA:  Where is this overwhelming evidence?  Can 
I have access to this overwhelming evidence Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:  She will point it out to you. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I am going to take you through it now.  So 
your – your version previously has been you did not benefit.  
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 94 of 243 
 
Now you are accepting some benefit and then you emphasise 
time.  And I say there is a – there is evidence there that 
suggests that there might have been a scheme.  So I want to 
put all of that evidence to you Ms Kwinana so that you have 
an opportunity to respond. 
 
The first is that Ms Memela a person who I do not 
understand you to have regarded in any way suspiciously 
unlike Ms Sambo who you have been very clear before this 
commission was a pathological liar in your view.   
 
Ms Memela in an unguarded moment in an email 
10 
communication in 2017 referred to the fact that you amongst 
others tried to solicit a bribe from AAR.  That is a first piece 
of evidence that suggests that there were bribes going on. 
MS KWINANA:  Sorry – sorry – can you start again what is 
this piece of evidence?  Ms Sambo? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  No it is Ms Memela in a whatsapp 
communication with Ms Sambo referring to the fact that she 
had knowledge that you were involved at a point in time 
seeking to solicit a bribe from Cheryl Jackson who is 
associated with AAR.  And I add that she is not a person that 
20 
you before this commission has indicated should not be 
trusted or you resisted the conclusion that she is a 
pathological liar.  So I say that is the first piece of evidence.  
Do you have a response? 
MS KWINANA:  So your evidence is Ms Memela’s whatsapp.  
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 95 of 243 
 
Let me just hear you … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh you want her to… 
MS KWINANA:  Correct what is the evidence there.  The 
evidence is Ms Memela’s – the evidence is Ms Memela’s 
whatsapp is it what you are saying? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes but I cannot do it without your answer 
because the questions are going to follow depending on the 
answer.   So can I have your response to that?? 
MS KWINANA:  Ms Memela’s whatsapp cannot be the 
evidence I dispute that. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Right.  Then you emphasise that there was 
a genuine business relationship between yourself and Ms 
Ndzeku and Ms Hendricks, correct? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Right.  That business relationship is not 
supported by a single document that you can produce to the 
commission.  And I want to couple that with the proposition 
that legitimate business relationships generate documents. 
MS KWINANA:  Sorry Chair.  Can you be slower I am – I am 
writing. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Sure.  Of course. 
MS KWINANA:  Today I do not want to say I do not – I would 
have forgotten your question. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Of course.  So it is the business 
relationship that you say existed between yourself and Mr 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 96 of 243 
 
Ndzeku and Ms Hendricks has not generated a single piece 
of paper – a single document that you can place before this 
commission.  And usual genuine business relationships 
generate documents.  So I put it to you that the fact that you 
cannot bring to this commission a document you were 
summons to produce these documents exactly two months 
ago.  The 7 September 2020 and we sit here today on the 7 
November 2020 and we have not a single document 
evidencing what you say is a genuine business relationship.  
And I say on the probabilities that indicates there is not a 
10 
genuine business relationship.  What is your response to 
that? 
MS KWINANA:  Much as I did not submit the documentation 
Chair because of the server.  I would think that your 
investigators could have gone to [00:19:55] and find out what 
is there.  And secondly I did as I said before submit the 
documents to Mr Ndzeku – the statements – the annual 
statements to Mr Ndzeku.  So it is not correct to say – of 
course it is correct to say we did not submit the documents 
here but the businesses that we are doing does have the 
20 
documents and Mr Ndzeku has also got the documents. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Can I tell you what the problem with that 
is? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  We have established that the servers were 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 97 of 243 
 
confiscated in April of 2019.  On your version you generate 
annual statements for each of your clients and provide them 
in January of each year.  The confiscation of the server Ms 
Kwinana is not a reason for you not to be able to produce to 
this commission your January 2020 investment statements.  
What is your response to that? 
MS KWINANA:  Chair I submit the annual statements on an 
annual basis.  I submit the December statements and submit 
them in January that is exactly what I do. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes so where are the January ones from 
10 
this year?   Why did you not respond to a summons – the 
consequence of failure to respond to it is that you commit a 
crime and let me just be very clear this point has been made 
repeatedly in correspondence with your attorney where on 
each occasion there is an effort to avoid complying with the 
summons.   
 
The first effort was to take a service point that it had 
not been properly served.  When we produced the return of 
service we then said we remind you again the law requires 
you ten days from service of the summons to produce the 
20 
documents or an affidavit.  And since then there has never 
been this document produced.  It is a legal obligation on you 
Ms Kwinana to do it.  We have discovered through the 
evidence from Tuesday to today that the servers were 
confiscated in April of 2019 and you have still not produced 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 98 of 243 
 
the annual statement that you say are created in January of 
every year.  We say that that is overwhelming evidence Ms 
Kwinana that this is not a legitimate business relationship 
because the justifications you give keep being pulled apart. 
 
Where 
is 
the 
January 
2020 
annual 
investment 
statement that a summons issued by this commission 
required you to provide ten days after the 7 September this 
year? 
MS KWINANA:  I have got the January statements Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes but when you give it to us tomorrow 
10 
you may have fabricated it.  That is the problem.  Your 
evidence previously is that you did not have it and that 
precisely Ms Kwinana is the difficulty. 
MS KWINANA:  I said Chair I submit the statements on an 
annual basis and I said the last statement that I submitted 
was January 2020. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The question Ms Kwinana which Ms 
Hofmeyr has repeated probably more than three times is, you 
were required by way of a summons to produce it to the 
commission.  Already that was - –he summons was served on 
20 
you in September.  Why did you not submit it if indeed you 
had it? 
MS KWINANA:  Chair the statement – the statements I have 
got the statements. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why did you not submit it in compliance 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 99 of 243 
 
with the summons if it existed? 
MS KWINANA:  Chair this information was required with a 
whole lot of other information which basically went missing 
like – were taken with the server.  So maybe… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did it exist or did it not exist in September 
this year and in October this year – we are now in November.  
Did it exist during these two months? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Why did you not then produce it to the 
commission? 
10 
MS KWINANA:  The commission Chair requested the whole 
lot of other information which I do not have. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja but you had this one why did you not 
produce this one? 
MS KWINANA:  No Chair I was thinking that I needed to 
produce the whole bunch of the information that was 
required. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No Ms Kwinana that cannot be – that 
cannot be.  That cannot be true.  That cannot be true.  If you 
get a legal document – a summons saying produce five 
20 
documents to the commission – bring five documents and 
you know that you do not have three – they do not exist but 
you have got two you tell me that you would not come to the 
commission and say, I have only got these two.  You would 
withhold these two because you do not have the other – the 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 100 of 243 
 
three.  Cannot be true. 
MS KWINANA:  That is an omission on my part Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry. 
MS KWINANA:  That is an omission on my part. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja but it is something so obvious Ms 
Kwinana it  cannot be true.  What you – what anybody would 
do is to say commission I will give you what I have.  These – 
this is what I have.  Anything else that you wanted from me I 
do not have.  That is what any – everybody would do.  It 
cannot be an omission.  You are being asked to pro – to 
10 
bring – to produce five documents.  You do not have three – 
they do not exist anymore you have got two.  You cannot sit 
back and say I am not going to give the commission even 
these two that I have.  It would not make sense would it? 
MS KWINANA:  Now that you say that Chair sorry. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ja the problem is on Tuesday your version 
was that you do not have the January 2020 statements 
because they were taken by the server.  So Ms Kwinana we 
are going to argue in due course that you are a dishonest 
witness.  You are a witness who turns the facts each time 
20 
they become difficult for you.   
 
Ms Kwinana the next bit of evidence is that your 
explanation for the way in which you were conducting this 
business to try and get a response to the fact that you have 
produced no documents under the summons relies on a 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 101 of 243 
 
remarkable confidentiality policy that you say exists in a 
business which if I understand it correctly means you could 
never email your clients.  And I want to put it to you that in 
2020 to be conducting an investment business involving 
forex trading and having a confidentiality policy in place that 
never allows you to email a client is nothing short of 
preposterous.  What is your response to that? 
MS KWINANA:  Our policies – our policy Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair if I could just take a moment.  Oh 
10 
yes.  One of the last things we did on Tuesday was we were 
looking at not only the 4.3 million that you got from JM 
Aviation and Ms Hendricks but also that extra 800 and a bit 
thousand and you gave us an explanation that it came from 
Janipath 
a 
supplier 
to 
SAAT 
because 
of 
some 
quite 
complicated I have to say.  It took me a while to follow it at 
the time but I think I have got it now.   
 
The version is Janipath paid that amount into Zano 
Spark because you had engaged Mr Kolisi, is that correct? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes. And who was Mr Kolisi? 
MS KWINANA:   Was the lawyer. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  A lawyer.  How did you know him? 
MS KWINANA:  I know him from SAA. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes.  Because Mr Kolisi was one of the 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 102 of 243 
 
people that SAA contracted to run Dr Dahwa’s disciplinary 
process, is he not? 
MS KWINANA:  I – I do not know which contract did run Dr 
Dahwa because I am sure that was not included as part of 
the board. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes.  It was not included in part of the 
board.  But you attended a meeting with Mr Kolisi in advance 
of Dr Dahwa’s disciplinary hearing to discuss the hearing.  
Do you dispute that? 
MS KWINANA:  I dispute that. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Okay let us get the email.  Get the email.  
Could we please hand up as – I have to get track on my 
exhibits.  Let me hand them in first Chair.  There are two 
documents so if I can ask maybe Andrew would you mind 
helping me we will give to Ms Kwinana.  Andrew will give to 
Ms Kwinana.  I just need to make sure that we give it the 
correct exhibit number.  There are two documents Chair.  
The first is an email dated Friday, 4 March 2016.  You might 
see that.   
 
And then the second document is a confirmation of 
20 
acceptance of the meeting that is being referred to in the 
first email.  So if it could be entered as Exhibit DD 33(b).24, 
the email of 4 March 2016?   
MS KWINANA:   Sorry, DD? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   34(sic)(b).24.   
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 103 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the one or the one from Mr Peter. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Lester Peter.  Yes, correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The email ...[intervenes]  
MS KWINANA:   Chair, I do not have ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...dated 4 March 2016 ...[intervenes]  
MS KWINANA:   Sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
...from 
Mr 
Lester 
Peter 
to 
Carol 
Tjinkeke(?) will be admitted as Exhibit DD33(b).24. 
EMAIL FROM MR LESTER PETER IS ADMITTED AND 
MARKED AS EXHIBIT DD33(B).24 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you.  I just want to clarify for 
Ms Kwinana.  I think she was just momentarily confused.  So 
it is not in the bundle.   
MS KWINANA:   Oh. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It is because I have just handed it up.  So 
the first one is DD33(b).24.  And then Chair, if we can make 
the second document which is DD33(b).25?  And that is the 
acceptance of a meeting invitation dated 4 March 2016. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Then the document reporting to come from 
Ms 
Yakhe 
Kwinana 
at 
yakhe@kwinana.co.za 
dated 
20 
4 March 2016 at 14:20 to Carol Tjinkeke with the subject:  
Accepted consultation with external lawyers on ...[indistinct] 
DC is admitted as Exhibit DD33(b).25. 
DOCUMENT/EMAIL FROM MS YAKHE KWINANA DATED 
4 MARCH 2016 
IS 
ADMITTED 
AND 
HANDED 
UP 
AS 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 104 of 243 
 
EXHIBIT DD33(B).25 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So Ms Kwinana, what your ...[intervenes]  
MS MBANJWA:   Chair.  My apologies Chair.  My hand was 
up.  I just wanted to point out two omissions.  The first one, I 
have not been given as the legal representative the 
documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.  O, I am ...[indistinct]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair, can I just explain why Ms Mbanjwa 
...[indistinct] ...[intervenes] [Parties intervening each other – 
unclear]   
10 
MS MBANJWA:   [Indistinct]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   ...we have only two people in this room. 
MS MBANJWA:   Yes ...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   So have forgotten to do the third.  There 
you go. 
MS MBANJWA:   Yes.  And then the other difficulty I have 
Chair.  I do not know what your ruling will be.  Generally, 
before the witness is asked on these documents, we are 
supposed that and confront on them.   
 
So if maybe we can be afforded an opportunity to take a 
20 
look?  I do not know what... when are we supposed to get a 
break Chair, so that these documents that Ms Hofmeyr is 
admitting into evidence ...[indistinct] [distortion present].   
 
It will not be long.  We can take a look at them and then 
the witness can be ...[indistinct] [distortion present] 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 105 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Obviously, this arose because there 
was a denial. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Exactly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Hofmeyr, what do you say to that 
request? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair, the challenge...  I am just going to 
put it on the table is.  We will argue in due course that the 
weight that should be given to Ms Kwinana’s answer after 
she has adjourned to consult with her lawyer about the 
answer, might be of less value.   
10 
 
It is not an answer that gives without that consultation.  I 
simply place that on record.  I make no submission about 
whether that should take place or not.  If Ms Kwinana would 
feel more comfortable discussing this with her lawyer, that 
should take place. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Mbanjwa, what do you say? 
MS MBANJWA:   Chair, can I say something with all due 
respect?  I must object to this expectation that Ms Hofmeyr 
has.  It is the expectation that this witness is not entitled to 
proper consultation.   
20 
 
I do not understand the rules of the Commission to be 
like that because every time we are reading, either a point or 
we are explaining the right the witness has, it is as if we are 
doing the wrong thing.   
 
And we, really, are happy with the way the Chair has 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 106 of 243 
 
treated us today and even Ms Hofmeyr.  We do not want to 
add any altercation as we normally do [distortion present – 
speaker not clear] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you see.  As far as possible while 
the witness is being questioned, it is preferable that he or 
she should be able to just answer questions.   
 
It is different if there were consultations before because, 
obviously, there would have been consultations before the 
witness took the witness stand.   
 
But what Ms Hofmeyr is saying about what she will 
10 
argue.  It may be it is something that she wants to argue.   
 
Do you insist on consulting with the witness or are you 
happy to see whether the witness has any difficulty in 
answering? 
MS MBANJWA:   To be blunt Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
MS MBANJWA:   Personally, I do really do not care what 
Ms Hofmeyr will argue because even before this witness 
came here, before she had a chance to examine the witness, 
she argued that she is a corrupt person.   
20 
 
I think we have already traversed that.  So I think it 
would be ...[indistinct] of me as a legal representative at this 
late stage worry about what Ms Hofmeyr ...[indistinct].   
 
With all due respect, she can go and argue whatever she 
wants to argue.  As long as we get the opportunity to look at 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 107 of 243 
 
the documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MBANJWA:   [Indistinct] [distortion present] that option 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Let us take five minutes break for 
you to consult then.  And then we will resume. 
MS MBANJWA:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay we adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS FOR A SHORT BREAK: 
INQUIRY RESUMES: 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us proceed. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Kwinana, before I handed you these 
documents, you had said that you were not aware that 
Mr Kolisi was involved in the disciplinary process for 
Dr Dahwa.  Do you now accept that you did know that? 
MS KWINANA:   [microphone on mute] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Oh, you need to put on your... 
MS KWINANA:   Chair, I note that I was CC’d in this email.  I 
still do not remember me having attended the meeting.  I, 
however, may have attended the meeting because I was the 
20 
person who lodge a complaint.  However, considering that I 
do not remember where is this meeting, I would appreciate if 
I would have the minutes of the meeting. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   We do not have those minutes.  We only 
have your invitation.  Absolutely.  You accept that you got 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 108 of 243 
 
the invitation and Mr Kolisi is also copies on it, correct? 
MS KWINANA:   It may... I may not necessarily have 
received the invitation Chair.  In many emails that you have 
here, most of them, would be received by Lana, my PA.   
 
So it could happen that, also this one, is the one when 
she looked at my diary and accepted it.   
 
That is why I was saying, I can only confirm.  I am not 
saying, I was not there but I am saying I do not remember 
and therefore, I would be assisted by the minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say to her that she could do that, 
10 
she had the authority to do that?  That if there was an 
invitation for you, she should look at your diary and if it was 
open, she could go ahead and accept without you having told 
her that – instructed her to accept? 
MS KWINANA:   Most of the times she would do that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And that is how the two of you operated? 
MS KWINANA:   That is how we operated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Okay.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   So do you persist in your version that you 
did not know that Mr Kolisi was running the disciplinary for 
20 
Dr Dahwa? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No.  And the fact that you accepted a 
meeting invitation to go and consult with them the week 
before Dr Dahwa’s disciplinary process took place, you still 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 109 of 243 
 
maintain you had knowledge that Mr Kolisi was involved in 
that process? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   H’m.  Well ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Ms Hofmeyr.  Would your PA, if 
she accepted an invitation in terms of the arrangement that 
you say you had with her, would not she take the earliest 
opportunity thereafter to tell you about such an invitation and 
the fact that she had accepted it on your behalf? 
MS KWINANA:   She does that Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   She would do that? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   You fairly said Ms Kwinana that you were 
the person that lodged the complaint against Dr Dahwa. 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And are you aware that a disciplinary 
process was run? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  And did you follow up on that 
20 
process? 
MS KWINANA:   No. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No.  Because you were very...  Let me put 
it 
to 
you 
for 
your 
comment. 
 
When 
I 
read 
that 
9t h of October 2015 email that you sent.  You asked for the 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 110 of 243 
 
chair’s intervention because you took the issues very 
seriously, did you not? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   H’m.  And notwithstanding that, are you 
saying, you never at any point followed up about the process 
and what was happening with it? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No. 
MS KWINANA:   I do not.  In fact, it is the same thing as the 
contracts.  We do not follow up what happened after we have 
10 
approved.  Yes.  And therefore, also, when the disciplinary 
process takes place, you do not follow up what is the 
outcome of the disciplinary process because the outcome of 
the disciplinary process, how it went, depends on the line 
manager of that person.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   And ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But when you...  You lodged the 
complaint.  You are, therefore, the complainant, I would have 
expect you to have an interest because – in finding out what 
is going on with that process because you would be feeling – 
20 
you would have been feeling very strongly that this person 
should be disciplined.   
 
If one looks at that email that Ms Hofmeyr refers to, you 
were feeling very strongly about what you considered to be 
unacceptable conduct on Dr Dahwa’s part.   
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 111 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair.  After I lodged a complaint and 
left it with the people who are supposed to attend to it, I 
really do not see, even in my office for instance.   
 
I really would not see a need for me to follow up as to 
what happened.  Even though, our office was much smaller 
but still, it is because I do trust the process.   
 
And therefore, how the disciplinary process goes, I 
really – including the CCMA disciplinary process.  So I... how 
they go, I really do not follow up.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Except Ms Kwinana, if that is so.  Why 
10 
would the Head of Procurement at the time, Lester Peter, be 
inviting you to a meeting the week before Dr Dahwa’s 
disciplinary was scheduled to start to say the following: 
“As discussed, the legal representatives of SAA 
have 
agreed 
to 
meet 
the 
witnesses 
on 
the 
7t h of March 2016.   
Kindly schedule an appointment inviting all copied 
hereto for ten a.m. 
The consultations will be held at the venue where 
the 
inquiry 
would 
have 
been 
held 
on 
20 
Monday/Tuesday.” 
 
If you had no involvement, why would you be invited to 
this meeting? 
MS KWINANA:   This email Chair is addressed to Carol and I 
am only CC’d here in this meeting.  And I have said, maybe 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 112 of 243 
 
the reason why I would be invited – I do not know why I was 
invited but I am saying Chair, maybe the reason why I would 
be invited is because I am the one who lodged the complaint. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, it seems logical to me.  Actually, it 
seems strange not to expect that the complainant would be 
expected to consult with the lawyers who would conduct 
the... who would represent SAA.   
 
So the approach you take which suggests that you had 
no interest, seems strange to me for a complainant.  
Because I would expect that the complainant would be one 
10 
of the people that the SAA lawyers would want to consult 
with and take a statement from.   
 
And that in all probability the complainant might be 
called to give evidence at the disciplinary inquiry.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, Chair I would have an interest.  And 
maybe that is the reason why I was copied here but however, 
Chair.  You know much as I would be very angry as I was 
angry in the letter, for me I know that is basically not 
personal.   
 
I have stated my case and then the people should deal 
20 
with... the people who were supposed to deal with it, should 
deal with it.  And with me, it just ends there.   
 
So basically, after two weeks and three weeks, I would 
not be as angry as I was and want to find out what really 
happened.  No, that is not me Chair.   
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 113 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, on Monday or Tuesday or whichever 
day you gave evidence about this, you said you were 
indifferent to Dr Dahwa and I think Ms Hofmeyr and certainly 
I said the – your email where you were complaining about 
him did not seem to reflect an indifferent attitude towards 
him.   
 
It seemed to reflect a strong negative feeling towards 
him.  You now say you were angry.  Can I accept that you 
accept that you were angry as a result of what you believed 
he had done? 
10 
MS KWINANA:   Let me put it in context Chair.  On Monday 
or Tuesday, I said there will be differences between a senior 
and his or her junior and visa versa.  And those differences, 
it does not mean that they cannot be there.  They are bound 
to be there.  They are acceptable.   
 
I 
would 
think 
that 
they 
are 
acceptable 
in 
any 
organisation.  There is no way that two people will not have 
differences but that does not mean that when I raise my 
voice or when I am angry at that point in time, I will always 
be angry.  I will be angry after two hours.   
20 
 
So 
maybe 
the 
indifference 
or 
I 
was 
putting 
the 
indifference in that context but I remember very well that I 
said there are bound to be differences between two people. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the suggestion was that, as you 
wrote that email, you must have had very strong negative 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 114 of 243 
 
feelings towards Dr Dahwa.  That was the point.  Not two 
hours later, not three days later.  And as I understood your 
evidence, you were saying:  No, that is not the position.  I 
was indifferent.  That was how I understood your evidence.   
MS KWINANA:   Chair, I would not say I was indifferent.  Of 
course, I was angry.  And as I said, it is normal.  You cannot 
love ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no.  I do not want you to go back.  
You said the point quite a few times.  But I think what, now 
you say, seems to me to be inconsistent with what you said 
10 
either on Tuesday or Monday.   
 
Because on Monday, you maintained that that email did 
not reflect that you had strong negative feelings towards Dr 
Dahwa.   
 
And I had to go back to the email and read it to you or at 
least certain portions of it because I could not believe that 
you would say that you were indifferent to him when you 
wrote that email.  But let us move on.  Okay Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, Chair.  Ms Kwinana, there has 
been evidence, which I want to come to in a moment Chair, 
20 
because I neglected something – to do something late in 
Ms Myeni’s evidence yesterday but I do just need to ensure 
that we enter it into the record. 
 
But what I would just want to understand from you 
Ms Kwinana is.  Were you at any time during Dr Dahwa’s 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 115 of 243 
 
disciplinary processes alerted to the fact that the Head of 
Employee 
Relations 
at 
SAA 
at 
the 
time 
had 
serious 
misgivings about how that process was being conducted?  
Did that ever filter up to you? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No.  Thank you.  Chair, my error was, 
yesterday...  I referenced this in Ms Myeni’s evidence and I 
am not going to take Ms Kwinana to it because Ms Myeni is 
not evidence that she could have been aware of.   
 
She was actually anticipated to conclude her evidence 
10 
before Ms Myeni.  So please, just rest assured, we are not 
going to go there.   
 
But I, overnight when I was preparing, I realised I forgot 
then to ask you to enter that affidavit into the record.  So I 
wonder if we could just do that now for housekeeping 
purposes? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, let us do it. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you.  Or if you will...  It is not even 
probably necessary for you to have it in front of you.  It is 
literally...  Well, you might want to see the date, et cetera.  
20 
Should I hand it up? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It is BD34(b).  It is actually Chair an 
affidavit 
prepared 
in 
response 
to 
your 
request 
after 
Dr Dahwa’s evidence. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 116 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Remember, you raised the issue? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Well, how did – what happened with the 
disciplinary process? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Can you give me a full account? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And so this was prepared by the 
...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   The head of ...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   ...the Head of Employee Relations 
pursuant to that request. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So I just want to be sure that the record is 
complete. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Oh, page 1719, which is under Tab 32. 
MS KWINANA:   Chair, should I also go there? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Kwinana, we literally just doing this for 
20 
record purposes.  I am not intending to take you to it.   
MS KWINANA:   [No audible reply]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   1719 under Tab 32.  
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   So Chair, this is an affidavit prepared by 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 117 of 243 
 
Mr Louwrens Daniel Erasmus and it is...  Sorry, it is just 
sometimes difficult to find the end of it, because he actually 
cuts and pastes emails in the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is what is confusing.  I am trying 
to see the end of the affidavit. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I know, I know.  H’m.  Apology.  Oh, there 
it is.  Sorry, Chair.  It is at page 1793 and it is an affidavit 
deposed to on the 17t h of February 2020.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay have you established where it ends? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, 1753. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   1753.  Okay alright.  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And if this could be entered as Exhibit 
BD34(b).32? 
CHAIRPERSON:   34(b) point...? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   32.  Three, two. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Three, 
two. 
 
The 
affidavit 
of 
Mr Louwrens Daniel Erasmus appearing at – starting at page 
1719 of Bundle BD34(b) is admitted as Exhibit BD34(b).32. 
AFFIDAVIT 
OF 
MR LOUWRENS DANIEL ERASMUS 
IS 
ADMITTED AND MARKED AS EXHIBIT BD34(b).32 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you.  Ms Kwinana, whatever we in 
due course make of the question, whether you were aware 
that Mr Kolisi was a service provider to SAA at the time.  He 
– the evidence of Dr Dahwa previously is that he did run the 
disciplinary process  So as a matter of fact, he was a service 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 118 of 243 
 
provider to SAA at the time.  And he was somebody with 
whom you were also transacting through your business, is 
that not right? 
MS KWINANA:   Mr Kolisi was my client or is my client.  And 
I am transacting with him.  And it falls back Chair to the 
processes.  I never signed a single contract that involved 
Mr Kolisi.  There was not a single contract that was brought 
before me for Mr Kolisi.  And therefore, they would 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But board members do not sign contract, 
10 
is it not? 
MS KWINANA:   Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Board members do not sign contract, do 
they? 
MS KWINANA:   Even the approval Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS KWINANA:   I never approved a single contract 
pertaining to Mr Kolisi.  It is also the same as Ms Nobaxa(?)  
company.  I never signed a single contract of Ms Nobaxa.    
CHAIRPERSON:   [Indistinct]  
20 
MS KWINANA:   Yes.  And in fact, if, for instance, in my 
business - which I would think that it would be unfair if the 
Commission would say I must not enter into business 
relationships with people, in this case the example of SAA.   
 
I must not enter into a business relationship with the 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 119 of 243 
 
people I know.  Because that would mean that I would not be 
entering into a business at all because as an auditor Chair, I 
audit a whole lot of companies when I was in audit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KWINANA:   I audited ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay Ms Kwinana.  I think we may be 
veering off – you may be veering off from Ms Hofmeyr’s 
question.  Ms Hofmeyr, is that still in line with your question? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No.  What I was asking was, whether 
Ms Kwinana accepted that at the time, she established a 
10 
business relationship with Mr Kolisi?  He was a service 
provider to SAA.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   That was just all I wanted to get her 
response to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So do not worry about what you 
think she may ask later.  Just respond to that question. 
MS KWINANA:   Chair, these are the questions that do not 
only need a yes or no but I need to explain.  I will say 
...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   But start by saying:  Yes, I did or... 
MS KWINANA:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or no I did not. 
MS KWINANA:   I knew and I am saying Chair, I was – I 
never saw a single approval for Mr Kolisi on my desk. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 120 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KWINANA:   And therefore, there would be no conflict.  
And I am saying Chair, if I am not required to do business 
with the people I know, then that is a problem.  I have a 
problem with that.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, wait for her to indicate if she says 
there is a problem with the fact that you were in a business 
relationship with Mr Kolisi.  And then you can deal with that 
when it arises. 
MS KWINANA:   Thank you, Chair. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair, we are at the lunch break time.  We 
did take two breaks earlier but we have not taken a full 
break. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And this is taking much longer than I 
anticipated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no, no. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So I am anxious about being able to 
navigate how we take things forward. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  What is your...  Well, things are not 
20 
moving as fast as we all want.  What is your estimate of how 
much more time you need, given the hazards of this 
...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   About 45-minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is taking longer than you may estimate. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 121 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   H’m.  45-minutes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   30, maybe.  It is just, if we could get the 
answers without the anticipation of the next, it might go 
quicker.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, not make them stop ...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   But, of course, any explanation that we 
want to give, must be given. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Yes.  There are two or maybe three 
possibilities.  One, we could continue until you are finished 
10 
and then take a break then, so that when we come back it is 
re-examination.   
 
And another one is, that we could take a break now and 
then come back and you continue.  And within in that, we 
must think about maybe a shorter break than an hour. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   H’m, h’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What do you say? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair, I fail to take advantage of the 
previous two breaks.  So I would quite – I would benefit 
greatly from a comfort break now.  So for me, it would be 
20 
better if we could break now.  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Ms Mbanjwa, what do you say? 
MS MBANJWA:   To be honest Chair, I agree with either.  
That was the reason I was raising my hand.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, I did not see your hand, ja. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 122 of 243 
 
MS MBANJWA:   Ja-no.  Yes, I was just raising it now.  What 
I wanted to ask Chair is, because you had said you would 
give me an hour to re-examine.  I was only thinking that 
maybe I do not re-examine and we do not ...[indistinct] 
[distortion present -speaker unclear]  I just give written 
submission of the points which I want you to take note of. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS MBANJWA:   So if you are comfortable with that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, I am comfortable.   
MS MBANJWA:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I will be comfortable.  In which case, that 
would help. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It would indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That would help quite a lot.  But because 
you would like to take a break now, I think let us take a 
break now.  But maybe – is it fine if we make it 30-minutes 
or 45-minutes? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Absolutely, absolutely.  From my side, 
certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What, 30, 40, 45-minutes? 
20 
MS MBANJWA:   [microphone on mute] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  What you say 30 or 45-minutes? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   30 would be adequate Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   30 ...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Absolutely. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 123 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay alright.  Let us make it 40 
because I have to travel. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   That is what I was worried about. 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing]   
ADV HOFMEYR:   When I said 30, I thought that would be 
far too short.  So... 
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing]  Okay alright.  Let us make it 40 
and that will mean we go up to, I think, ten to. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We will resume at ten to.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not know what happened to the 
registrar but let us get going. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair, we were – I was about to move 
onto a new topic, actually, and just before I do that, Ms 
20 
Kwinana, I did not catch perfectly, you said earlier you had 
a red file when I was asking you about FICA and then you 
read out to me the provision from FICA.  I did not catch it 
exactly, would you mind doing so again, that you said 
showed 
that 
you 
were 
not 
actually 
an 
accountable 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 124 of 243 
 
institution under FICA. 
MS KWINANA:   Chair, I will read it as follows: 
“Entities that are regulated by Financial Sector 
Conduct 
Authority, 
FSCA 
previously 
known 
as 
Financial Services Board, insurance companies,  
hedge funds managers, retirement fund managers, 
credit ratings companies, capital market companies 
and forex brokers.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Sorry, so we are at cross-purposes, you 
are not reading from the FICA Act, are you? 
10 
MS KWINANA:   What does FICA Act say? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It says something different, what are you 
reading from? 
MS KWINANA:   I am reading my notes which says entities 
that are regulated by Financial Sector Conduct Authority, 
Act. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes. 
MS KWINANA:   If I am not reading from FICA, can you 
read the entities that are regulated by Financial Sector 
Conduct Authority Act according to what you have. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, you see, Ms Kwinana, what is 
important is what you understand, right?  I understand you 
say to say that you had taken the view in your Zanospark 
business that you do not need to comply with FICA, is that 
right? 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 125 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   I do not need to have a licence. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, no, it is a different matter.  We were 
talking 
earlier 
about 
FICA. 
 
Remember, 
I 
drew 
the 
distinction.  I said to you I know that you take the attitude 
that under the legislation regulated by what is now the 
FSCA and what used to be the FSB, the Financial Services 
Board, you do not have to have a licence. I put that on one 
side, I said FICA is a different Act. 
MS KWINANA:   Okay, let me read, I have got FICA Act 
…[intervenes] 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Well, just hang on a moment before you 
read I would like to just put my question again.  You see, I 
was troubled by your evidence this morning because on 
Tuesday you told us that you were FICA compliant and that 
you did ensure that your clients provided you with the 
classic know your client, KYC documents.  That is why I 
was surprised this morning when you said no, no, you do 
not have to be FICA compliant, you are just adopting a sort 
of best business practice and then you took me to a 
provision of the wrong Act.  So can you tell me now why 
20 
you say you are not required to be – why you are not 
governed by FICA on your understanding? 
MS KWINANA:   Let me read now.  I have got some notes 
on FICA Act. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Before you read, just answer the 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 126 of 243 
 
question.  Do you say you do not have to comply with FICA 
in your business or do you say …[intervenes] 
MS KWINANA:    I do not – I do not have to have a licence, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja but as far as FICA is concerned, do 
you know or do you not know  whether you must 
…[intervenes] 
MS KWINANA:   We are not in terms of FICA …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Wait until I finished, Ms Kwinana.  With 
regard to FICA do you know whether you are supposed to 
10 
comply with FICA or do you not know? 
MS KWINANA:   Let me answer it as follows, Chair.  In 
front of me I have got a list of accountable institutions in 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, before you go there, I just want 
your understanding, before you can tell me what informs 
your understanding.  I just want your understanding.  Is 
your understanding that you are supposed to comply with 
FICA in your business or is your understanding that you 
are not supposed to? 
20 
MS KWINANA:   It depends, Chair, what compliance 
means.  To me, when you say, am I supposed to comply 
with FICA or say know your client, know your client would 
be to have the idea of my client, I would have to have – in 
fact I have said this before, I would have to have an idea 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 127 of 243 
 
of my client and …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay, from what you say, it seems 
to me that you are not in a position to say you know what 
FICA requires and whether its requirements apply to your 
business.  You have an idea of what you think you are 
supposed to do or what you prefer to do but whether that is 
what is required by FICA or not, you do not know, is that 
right. 
MS KWINANA:   I know a little bit, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You know a little bit. 
10 
MS KWINANA:   Let me tell you what I know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Ms Hofmeyr, maybe you can take it 
from there? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  You have not been conducting your 
business in a way that is compliant with FICA, have you? 
MS KWINANA:   That is not correct, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So can I just understand your answer?  
You have been conducting your business in a way that is 
compliant with FICA. 
MS KWINANA:   Yes.    
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Is that correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You are sure about that?  
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, did you receive at any point legal 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 128 of 243 
 
advice about what FICA requires of you? 
MS KWINANA:   I do not need any legal advice in respect 
of that. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You do not need it? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so …[intervenes] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You did not get it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So in other words, you did not seek or 
receive legal advice about what FICA requires, is that 
right?  Is that right? 
10 
MS KWINANA:   Chair, I have been writing exams, FSCA 
exams, I do not know how many times. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but, Ms Kwinana, just listen to the 
question and answer the question.  Ms Hofmeyr asked you 
whether you received a legal advice about what FICA 
requires and you said you do not need it.  Now that is not 
an answer.  The question is whether you received it or not 
and the answer will either, I did not receive it or I did 
receive it. 
MS KWINANA:   I did not receive it, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
MS KWINANA:   I did not receive the legal advice, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And I understand the reason you gave is 
because you do not require it, is that right? 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 129 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   Sorry? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You did not see the need for legal 
advice. 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes because you yourself have been 
able to determine …[intervenes] 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   ...what the requirements of FICA are, 
correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  And again you said so you do 
conduct your business in a way that is FICA-compliant? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Correct.  Excellent.  So if that is so, why 
have you not taken efforts to keep your records for five 
years as required by FICA, all the records of your clients? 
MS KWINANA:   Chair, the issue of the server was beyond 
my control. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, it was not, Ms Kwinana, because 
your evidence on Tuesday was it was a server that was 
20 
initially contracted for Kwinana and Associates.  You then 
said Kwinana and Associates went under.  Remember, 
Kwinana and Associates is your former company, correct? 
MS KWINANA:   H’m. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Say yes please just for the record? 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 130 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So it went under, there was a huge 
liability, Zanospark took over the server, Zanospark was 
working on credit for a while, you said, and then you said 
Zanospark did not have the money to make good the 
Kwinana and Associates’ debt and that is why it was 
confiscated.  Do I have your evidence correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, you see, the problem with that is if 
Zanospark is required to be FICA-compliant one of the 
10 
obligations under FICA is that all records of the business 
need to be maintained for five years and so you were 
legally obliged as Zanospark to ensure that you paid that 
debt and you kept that information but you elected not to.  
That is not in compliance with FICA.  Do you have a 
response to that? 
MS KWINANA:   Which information that is required from 
FICA that when FICA comes and audit us I will not have?  
Let me tell you, let me tell you, the ID document, I will 
have that.  The proof of residence, I will have that and, 
20 
therefore, it will not be difficult for me to reconstruct that 
information despite the fact that I do not have a server. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   But why would you have it if all of your 
documents are on the server that you could not provide to 
the Commission but there is some documents that you will 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 131 of 243 
 
have? 
MS KWINANA:   I said, Chair, it will not be a problem to 
reconstruct 
them. 
 Also, 
Chair, 
if 
you 
want 
me 
to 
reconstruct …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But if the legislation says keep the 
records, you say you do not mind not keeping them 
because if and when they will be required you will 
reconstruct them, is that compliance with the legislation? 
MS KWINANA:   I do not know in terms of compliance but 
let us also again look at practicability thereof.  The server 
10 
was confiscated, that is one practicability.  Even if I 
wanted to keep them, I would not be in a position to keep 
them but I will be able to reconstruct them.  What happens, 
for instance, if the house or the office burns down and you 
did not have an offsite backup, then that would also be 
another reason why the information may not be kept and 
therefore, there are reasons and, in fact, even when FSCA 
would do the audit, that would depend, they would treat the 
case on a case by case basis, so to say and therefore, 
Chair, I said that I do not have the documents because my 
20 
server was confiscated, there was no way that I would be 
in a position to have those documents.  However, I would 
be in a position to reconstruct them. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, Ms Kwinana, the point – you keep 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 132 of 243 
 
saying you were not in a position to have the documents.  
The reason that the servers were confiscated was for non-
payment of a large debt.  Zanospark was using the server, 
Zanospark made an election not to pay that debt to retain 
the documents that the law required Zanospark to maintain.  
Do you have a response to that? 
MS KWINANA:   Not to make an election, Chair, but 
inability to pay and service that debt. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Why could you not take some of the 
millions that are being invested in your company? 
10 
MS KWINANA:   Those millions are not mine, Chair, they 
are for the investors. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  Well, Ms Kwinana, we have dealt 
with that aspect previously.  Let us go to the Slipknot 
agreement, Ms Kwinana.  You will remember the Slipknot 
agreement?  That is the one entered into with Ms Memela.  
Sorry, I realise you have lots of Slipknot agreements, I only 
have one that I focused on and that is the Slipknot 
agreement that you entered into with Ms Memela, do you 
recall that? 
20 
MS KWINANA:  Show me, Chair, where is it? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay, so that you will need DD25A4 and 
it is page 370. 
MS KWINANA:  Sorry, DD? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   DD25A. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 133 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   This is DD25A. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Page 370. And please feel free just to 
remind us of it.  It is not a long document, it is 372 to 374. 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you recall this agreement? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Now this is an agreement which Ms 
Memela testified had been drafted by Ms Mbanjwa, your 
lawyer today.  Do you confirm that? 
MS KWINANA:   I cannot confirm, Chair, she is here, she 
10 
can confirm if she drafted this or not. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, she is not the witness.  So the 
question is, do you recall that Ms Mbanjwa was the drafter 
of this agreement? 
MS KWINANA:   No, I do not recall. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You do not.  And do you remember when 
– you see, at transfer it indicates that the transfer of the 
property – sorry, this is at page 371, clause 3.  Under 3 
there, Transfer, it says: 
“The transfer of the property shall be effected by 
20 
the following conveyancer.” 
That is a reference to Ms Mbanjwa’s firm, is that correct?. 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you but you do not recall who 
drafted this, is that right? 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 134 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you recall its conclusion – you see, 
what was interesting is it seems as though it was 
concluded and signed, if you go to page 373, on the 21 
April 2015.  Do you see that? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Can you confirm that that is your 
signature for seller on that page? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And then if you go over the page to 374 
10 
it was signed on the 21 April 2015 and Ms Memela has 
confirmed that that is her signature as purchaser.  Do you 
see that?  
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Now it was witnessed by what appears 
to be the same signatures, so that is why I asked Ms 
Memela about how this had come to be signed and she 
indicated 
that 
you 
signed 
together 
in 
each 
other ’s 
presence.  Do you confirm that? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes and she said that that took place at 
Ms Mbanjwa’s offices.  Does that help refresh your 
memory? 
MS KWINANA:   Again? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   She said that that took place at Ms 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 135 of 243 
 
Mbanjwa’s offices.  Does that help refresh your memory? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair, I do not know. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You do not know.  So you do recall that 
you were together? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   But you just do not remember where you 
were? 
MS KWINANA:   I do not know where were we. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay, understood.  Alright.  Now this is 
quite an important agreement insofar as Ms Memela’s 
10 
explanation for the R2.5 million that was used in part to 
purchase her Bedfordview property.  So can you just maybe 
tell me what happened between the two of you in relation 
to this agreement?  Why did she enter into it?  What were 
your discussions about it? 
MS KWINANA:   This property, Chair, is a farm in East 
London and we had been trying to rezoned and it has been 
taking long for us to be rezoned, it is 8.5 hectares.  We 
have been trying to rezone it since many years, I think 
maybe since 2007 or so.  Yes.  And the Buffalo City 
20 
Municipality has not put the services in that area, it is not 
far from the airport.  So the Buffalo City has been 
promising to put in services and therefore it has been in 
the 
process 
of 
rezoning 
for 
a 
long 
time 
and 
then 
…[intervenes] 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 136 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That would have been to rezone it and 
make it what? 
MS KWINANA:   Residential. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Presently what is it? 
MS KWINANA:   It is a farm. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, alright. 
MS KWINANA:   It is agricultural. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Agricultural, okay. 
MS KWINANA:   Yes.  So we decided that we need to sell 
it and in fact we did go to the Buffalo City to try to get 
10 
them to sell it, to buy it.  So when I was talking about this 
with Ms Memela, she saw a huge opportunity and then we – 
I told her that we are selling it to – we are negotiating with 
Buffalo City but Buffalo City is not coming to the party and 
then she expressed an interest in it and it is for this reason 
that we said okay, if you want to buy it then you can buy it 
although I do not know when the zoning will be finalised, 
when the proclamation is going to happen and therefore, it 
is for this reason that we decided that she wanted let me 
give it a try.  In fact it is a farm that I really wanted to get 
20 
rid of it.  We only got the eviction notice about a month ago 
today.  So it shows how we have been struggling with this 
farm but in the end we did get the eviction – final eviction 
notice will be awarded on the 25 November this month. 
 
So basically this farm has been having a lot of 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 137 of 243 
 
challenged now recently.  The reason why we have got the 
eviction is because the illegal occupants did occupy this 
farm.  So basically that is why we wanted it to be rezoned 
as soon as possible so that we can do something about or 
sell it as soon as possible. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Why did Ms Memela want to buy an 
agricultural farm in East London that was inhabited by  
unlawful occupiers? 
MS KWINANA:   No, at the time it was not inhabited by 
unlawful occupiers, that is number one.  Number two, she 
10 
was looking at it when it is subsequently proclaimed. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right, you mean rezoned? 
MS KWINANA:   Rezoned up to the proclamation. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes. 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So she was keen on it, anticipating its 
proclamation, right? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes and her evidence previously was 
that – well, she was presented with evidence that said she 
20 
did not have available to her 2.8 million despite that being 
the purchase price.  Why did you arrive at this purchase 
price?  Did she share with you that she did not have 2.8 
million available? 
MS KWINANA:   No, she did not say she does not have the 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 138 of 243 
 
2.8 million available.  However, I did indicate to her the 
challenges that I have and I said I do not have the exact 
timeframe as to when is the rezoning going to be finalised 
in view of the fact that the services are not yet even there 
and therefore, it may take some time to be – to happen. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes but what then happens off the back 
of what you have described is you conclude an agreement 
that on its face says that she is liable to pay you a full 2.8 
million and makes no reference to this proclamation being 
a condition of the agreement.  Why was that not put in the 
10 
agreement? 
MS KWINANA:   We both know that, Chair, that is 
dependent – that was dependent not necessarily on the 
proclamation because the other thing that she could do, 
when she has money, she could just get it transferred to 
her even before the proclamation happens. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So that is just some independent 
understanding the both of you that was not recorded in this 
agreement, is that right? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Why did you not seek to protect each of 
your rights under the agreement because speaking for 
myself, reading this, you could have tomorrow demanded 
2.8 million from her and she – you could have forced her 
and she would not have been able to resist because there 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 139 of 243 
 
is no condition attached to the proclamation. 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair, we did not even see a need for 
that because she knew exactly what I was selling and that 
is why basically I would also not be in a position to enforce 
some conditions.  
ADV HOFMEYR:  So would it be fair to describe it as a 
fairly loose arrangement?  
MS KWINANA:   It is not that fairly loose, Chair, this 
agreement, we were happy with it. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You were happy with it? 
10 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It does not record, can I put to you, what 
you have described your actual agreement to be. 
MS KWINANA:   Sorry? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It does not record in its terms what your 
actual agreement, as you have described it to me, to be.  
Do you accept that? 
MS KWINANA:   That is fine, Chair, but me and her were 
happy with it. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Did you communicate your requirements 
20 
to the lawyer who drafted this agreement? 
MS KWINANA:   No. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No.  Who drafted it? 
MS KWINANA:   I do not even know. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You do not know? 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 140 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   H’m.  Maybe – I do not know but maybe 
Mhlambi [indistinct –dropping voice] I do not know. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Well, do you have any reason to dispute 
Ms Memela’s evidence that Ms Mbanjwa drafted it? 
MS KWINANA:   I did not dispute it, I said I do not know. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, no, indeed, I am just checking if 
there is any reason you would have for disputing Ms 
Memela’s recollection that Ms Mbanjwa drafted it. 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay, so in Ms Memela’s evidence 
10 
recently I put to her various features of this agreement that 
I said based on the evidence that we have seen and its 
terms 
indicates 
that 
this 
is 
not 
actually 
a 
genuine 
agreement, that this was not an agreement that was 
entered into between you and her on the 21 April 2015 at 
the offices of Ms Mbanjwa and I would just like to tell you 
what those features were and then I am going to ask for 
your input on a few others.  
 
You see, Ms Memela is married in-community-of-
property.  Ms Kwinana, what marital regime applies to your 
20 
marriage? 
MS KWINANA:   I would rather not disclose that, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   H’m  Are you aware that people married 
in-community-of-property require the written consent of 
their spouse to enter into any transaction of this nature? 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 141 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   No, I am not aware of that, Chair, there 
was really no need for me to go and check that. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   There was not.  So if you are married in-
community-of-property with your husband, have you ever 
purchased property with him? 
MS KWINANA:   Sorry, what is your question? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Have you ever purchased property with 
your husband? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, I did.  And I also – I did purchase a 
property with my husband, I also did purchase a property 
10 
alone.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, I am interested in the one with your 
husband.  Did both of you consent to the agreement? 
MS KWINANA:   What does that mean?  To say we agree? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   In writing you say you agree, yes, 
because it affects your joint estate if you are married in-
community-of-property. 
MS KWINANA:   Sometimes I would purchase a property 
with my husband and then he gives me the authority to 
sign and therefore I would sign …[intervenes] 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  No, that is fine, as long as there is 
a written recordal of his consent to give you authority to 
sign.  So have you always had that from him? 
MS KWINANA:   No, sometimes I sign without the 
authority. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 142 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   When you are buying a property with 
him? 
MS KWINANA:   Oh yes, it does happen. 
ADV HOFMEYR:    It does.  So when you were putting this 
agreement together did no one, the lawyer, we have now 
established you cannot dispute that it was Ms Mbanjwa.  
Did Ms Mbanjwa ever enquire as to Ms Memela’s property 
regime because it is a requirement that if she was married 
in-community-of-property 
that 
she 
do 
so 
with 
her 
…[intervenes] 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   You mean marital – you said property 
regime, I think. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I am sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Marital regime. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Marital regime, indeed.  Did – was any 
enquiry made of Ms Memela about her marital regime? 
MS KWINANA:   By whom? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   By the lawyer Ms Mbanjwa who drafted 
this agreement.  Do you recall that? 
MS KWINANA:   No, I would not know.  Ms Mbanjwa can 
20 
answer for herself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   She is not on the stand today so that I 
why I am asking the questions. 
MS KWINANA:   So no, I would not know. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You would not know. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 143 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   I would not know, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   But as the seller in a genuine agreement 
do you accept that if your purchaser is somebody who 
requires someone else’s consent for that agreement you 
would want to be sure that that consent was obtained? 
MS KWINANA:   You know, that is very difficult for me to 
answer this because in my case where I am sitting here, I 
sign just about everything and my husband signs just about 
everything as long as we have agreed that I will sign and 
he is going to sign and he does not have to write that 
10 
anywhere that he is giving me that authority. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, I understand that but I am talking 
about a situation not where you are the purchasers.  Here 
you are the seller through Slipknot, your company, correct? 
MS KWINANA:   It works out the same, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, no, let me explain to you why I say 
to you it is different.  You are selling this through a 
company, right, Slipknot, correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You have got a purchaser on the other  
20 
end of the transaction who is buying it herself not through 
a company.  That was known to you, correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right.  Now in order for you to be sure 
you have got somebody on the line for this agreement on 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 144 of 243 
 
the other side would it not concern you to establish 
whether she does not need the consent of her spouse to 
enter into this agreement with you? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No. 
MS KWINANA:   It does not concern me at all. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ja.  And if you subsequently discover 
that the law requires her to have the consent of her 
husband and she did not, would that concern you? 
MS KWINANA:   No, I do not know about that. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You do not because then …[intervenes] 
MS KWINANA:   Really, it really does not concern me as 
long as we do the purchase agreement and it happens and 
it goes through whether the person has got authority to 
sign and he can sign with the consent of the husband, how 
are they married, that is not for me.  I always use the 
conveyancers to do that.  So if they have done the checks 
that they need to do, I am happy with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well …[intervenes] 
MS KWINANA:   So if you are asking me from here, sitting 
20 
here, that has it ever occurred to me that I confirm if the 
husband does agree with that, really I never did that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it is one thing to say you never did 
that but I am more worried about something else that you 
seem to say, that you would not be concerned to find out 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 145 of 243 
 
whether the person has authority.  Did I understand you 
correctly?  I understood you to be saying in effect you do 
not care whether the person to whom you are selling the 
property or with whom you are entering into a contract has 
authority to enter into that contract, did I understand you 
correctly? 
MS KWINANA:   My assumption, Chair, when …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, let us start with is my 
understanding of your evidence correct? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, what did you say? 
MS KWINANA:   I am saying, Chair, if a person comes and 
says I want to buy your property, I am buying your 
property, I don’t even – it never occurred to me that a 
person would come and say I want to buy this property, 
only to find out that the person does not have authority. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS KWINANA:   And in fact, I don’t even remember a 
person asking me if I have authority to sign as a buyer or 
as a seller. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but that is where I am concerned, 
because you seem to be conveying the message that, to 
you, it’s not something you bother about, whether the 
person who’s buying your property has authority or not to 
enter into that contract, am I misunderstanding what your 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 146 of 243 
 
attitude is? 
MS KWINANA:   You are misunderstanding me Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS KWINANA:   Again…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Don’t go on to explain because you have 
explained. Let me ask another question. If you are selling 
property to somebody would it be one of your issues that 
you would want to satisfy yourself about that the person 
does have authority to enter into that sale agreement? 
MS KWINANA:   Not for me Chairperson, as an individual.  
10 
When I buy or sell in property there are people involved in 
doing that.  There is an Estate Agent, there is a 
Conveyancer and, in fact, the process, the registration 
process up to the deeds office would have to make sure 
that the person has got authority to sign and therefore, for 
me, in my position, that would not concern me because I 
know that – especially in that area we’ll be able to make 
sure that, that happens. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well it’s one thing to say, I would be 
concerned whether or not a person has authority but I’d 
20 
leave it to somebody else, the Conveyancer to check 
whether that is done and if the Conveyancer were to go 
ahead without checking I’d be upset with the Conveyancer.  
So, is that your position?  
MS KWINANA:   Yes, that is it Chair. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 147 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, authority is something you’d be 
concerned 
about, 
but 
you 
would 
leave 
it 
to 
the 
Conveyancer to check whether that’s in place? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And in this case we’ve confirmed that 
the Conveyancer was your lawyer, today, Ms Mbanjwa, 
correct? 
MS KWINANA:   You’ve confirmed that. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No actually, that part, the Conveyancer 
10 
is in the…[intervenes]. 
MS KWINANA:   Oh yes, our conveyancing is done by her. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, so you were, as a consequence, 
satisfied to trust Ms Mbanjwa with doing all of these 
checks, correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, so, that was the first feature that I 
put to Ms Memela and I wanted to have your side of the 
story because you’re the other contacting party.  The 
second feature is that…[intervenes]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe before you go to the second 
feature, Ms Hofmeyr, Ms Kwinana I would be concerned if 
you would go to the extent of signing the agreement 
without knowing whether the person has authority because 
if you sign the contract – once you have signed the 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 148 of 243 
 
contract, today, maybe, I mean this agreement that you 
signed didn’t even have the time within which the purchase 
price had to be paid, if I remember correctly.  If you have 
signed this agreement and somebody who had heard about 
you selling property comes up tomorrow who wants to buy 
it, you wouldn’t be able to sell it to that person even if that 
person said, I’ve got cash I don’t have to apply for a bond 
I’ve got cash right now, I like your property, I want to buy 
it, you wouldn’t be able to sell it to that person because 
you now, have signed an agreement with the person that 
10 
you have signed with and you don’t know if they’ve got 
authority. Later on, if it turns out that the person doesn’t 
have authority you may have lost a good opportunity to sell 
the property. So, you don’t want that to happen when 
you’re selling property, you want to make sure that if you 
conclude a sale agreement with a person, at least things 
such as those, are taken care of because you don’t want a 
month, two months down the line, three months down the 
line to find that there’s a problem because this person 
doesn’t have authority, doesn’t have authority from the 
20 
husband or wife and in the meantime you have lost buyers 
who didn’t have any problem who could have bought the 
property and the cash would have been in your bank 
account.  So, it makes sense to me, that by the time you 
sign you should  want to, have satisfied yourself because 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 149 of 243 
 
you don’t want this type of situation that we’re talking 
about, to happen, can you see that reasoning? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright, Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you.  There were also issues 
about whether Ms Memela would have had access to, 
actually, the R2.8million required because the previous 
month her bond had been declined for half of that and then 
there 
was 
another 
features 
which 
is 
that 
the 
FICA 
document that Ms Mbanjwa obtained from recording Ms 
10 
Memela’s information was only done on the records of that 
document the following year.  Were you involved in Ms 
Memela providing the FICA documentation to Ms Mbanjwa 
at all? 
MS KWINANA:   No, I wouldn’t know that Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It wasn’t something that you dealt with 
when you met together to conclude the agreement at all? 
MS KWINANA:   No Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, okay and then there’s another 
feature of this agreement that I was interested in, and that 
20 
is – oh sorry before I go there, there are other agreements 
that Slipknot has entered into to sell property, is that 
correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, does it sell property quite 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 150 of 243 
 
regularly? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, so, how many times? 
MS KWINANA:   Maybe once – one property per year. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   One per year, okay, now there was one 
other Slipknot property transaction that we had records of 
and that is contained in your Bundle.  If you go to that at 
page – it’s DD33A at page 89, DD33A at page 89. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’ve got the Bundle it says on the spine 
Bundle DD33 without the A. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Oh, that’s – does it have page 89 in it 
Chair? – Oh Apologies, I might be adding in – I am sorry, I 
get confused between Ms Myeni’s Bundles which are 34, 
no, 
no 
there’s 
only 
a 
33, 
that’s 
correct, 
apologies 
everyone.  So, it’s just 33 and we need to pick up page 89. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay no, I think it’s got a page 89 – ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And Chair, jus to check that’s a 
document headed, “Sale Agreement” alright and as I 
understand it, Ms Mbanjwa was also the Conveyancer on 
this agreement, is that correct? 
20 
MS KWINANA:   Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, now this is a 2018 sale agreement 
and what I just want to highlight to you is, certainly to me, 
the quite stark differences between this agreement, this 
sale agreement and the one that we’ve been looking at, the 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 151 of 243 
 
one with Ms Memela.  Can I ask, did this agreement go 
through, in the sense did the property transaction take 
place, nothing fell apart on this agreement? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It went through? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, because you see, previously 
you said, no the issue of Ms Memela not having ready cash 
of R2.8million was alright because in due course she might 
be able to apply for a bond and get one, is that right? 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:    
MS KWINANA:    
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, you see, usually when that’s the 
case, 
when 
the 
purchases 
obligations 
under 
 
the 
agreement, permit her to get a bond that will generally be 
catered for in a suspense of condition relating to bond 
finance right because otherwise you’ve got no protection.  
The purchaser is on the line tomorrow for the R2.8million 
unless she’s allowed to take some time to get a bond.  So, 
20 
I want to show you, in your other Slipknot agreement 
prepared by Ms Mbanjwa, what that would look like and you 
can go to page 92 for that.  You see at page 92, clause 3 it 
says, 
“Suspensive conditions, this offer is subject to the 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 152 of 243 
 
following, that the purchaser obtains mortgage bond 
finance 
from 
a 
recognised 
bank 
or 
financial 
institution in the amount of R11 500 000” 
It says R200 but I don’t see a two in the numbers 
but anyway let’s call it R11.5million and then it always 
stipulates a time for the very reason that the Chair has 
indicated to you.  You’re bound to this person, they are 
your purchaser, and you must know how long you’re bound 
to them for because you might get another purchaser 
tomorrow who can better the deal, right.  So, that’s why, 
10 
that they can get financing and that there’s a time limit is a 
key protection for the seller, do you accept that? 
MS KWINANA:   Chair, these are two different properties 
and as I said, this property did not have…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, Ms Kwinana, the question is 
whether you accept that this way of doing things when you 
sell a property give the seller protection.  In other words if 
the person must still go and raise a bond, you say, put that 
as a suspensive condition,  give the time within which they 
must obtain the bond because once they fail to obtain the 
20 
bond within that time, you are then free to look for 
somebody else or to sell the property to somebody else, as 
opposed to a situation where, you simply say, this is the 
purchase price and you put no suspensive condition, you 
put no deadline by when the price must be paid, it doesn’t 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 153 of 243 
 
protect you because somebody else could be wanting to 
buy the property, maybe even, for a higher price and you 
are waiting for this person, I don’t know for how long, to 
pay because in the agreement you didn’t even say, the 
purchase price must be paid within a month or within three 
months, you didn’t even say that, you just left everything 
open.  Do you agree that this way of doing this is – or 
provides protection to the seller? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair, this way of doing things is 
providing protection to the seller, however, that property in 
10 
East London, I have stated the challenges that it had since 
2007 and therefore, Chair, for me to have an agreement of 
sale on that property was even better than not having an 
agreement of sale at all.  As I have been saying I was 
trying to sell it to Buffalo City and so on and so on and all 
these challenges that I have stated here and therefore, 
that property would not have the stringent suspensive 
conditions as the same as this one.  This one, basically, 
was ready to go, it was occupied, it had a tenant, so 
everything was fine with regards to this and therefore we 
20 
just 
cannot 
compare 
this 
property 
with 
the 
other 
one…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would you not lose out, Ms Kwinana, 
would you not lose out on the basis of the agreement that 
you had with Ms Memela if somebody else, a few days or a 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 154 of 243 
 
few weeks after you signed the agreement said, I actually 
want to buy the property, I’m ready with cash? 
MS KWINANA:   If somebody else would come would come 
Chair, I would go to Ms Memela and ask her nicely that, let 
us get out of that agreement as he did with – as she did 
with me when she decided that she wants out of that.  She 
came to me and said, this is not working and therefore I 
need to buy, let’s get out of that. So, basically, that’s 
exactly what I would do because she also did that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Hofmeyr? 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   But, Ms Kwinana, what you’ve described, 
I have to put to you, is the loosest arrangement possible it 
doesn’t make sense to me that you took the time to write 
anything 
down 
then 
because 
what’s 
written 
down 
is 
meaningless, she could have chatted to you because she 
wanted to get out, you could have chatted to her because 
you wanted to get out, why sign the agreement then, it was 
worth nothing.  If it was actually, that you could just chat to 
each other and get out of it at any point. 
MS KWINANA:   You are correct, Chair, by saying, it was 
20 
worth nothing because that agreement fell through anyway 
and therefore there was never a transaction that took place 
then. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes. 
MS KWINANA:   So, maybe, you are correct by saying it 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 155 of 243 
 
was the loosest agreement because also, when she 
cancelled the agreement there were no penalties because I 
wouldn’t know what would be the penalties for – in view of 
the challenges that I stated. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I’m going to put to you, in due course, 
that it is clear that there was no need for this to be entered 
into recorded in writing in April of 2015.  The need arose 
when 
Ms 
Memela 
faced 
difficult 
questions 
from 
this 
Commission about her receipt of R2.5million and this whole 
story had to be constructed to try and justify it. Let me put 
10 
the – I’m going to come to that in a moment but in fairness, 
I just feel I must tell you where we’re going. What is a 
Domicilium address, Ms – what’s your understanding Ms 
Kwinana of a Domicilium address? 
MS KWINANA:   I don’t know Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Because you have to fill it in when you 
conclude agreements, have you previously been asked by 
lawyers to give them Domicilium addresses? 
MS KWINANA:   Maybe Chair, they would ask it differently, 
but I don’t know what the Domicilium address is. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay, maybe – have you had them ask 
you 
for 
an 
address 
at 
which 
you 
can 
receive 
any 
documents related to the agreement? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, okay so you recall that, sorry, I’m 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 156 of 243 
 
using the  legal term and I actually shouldn’t have it’s also 
Latin, 
so 
we 
should 
never 
deal 
with 
that 
but 
it’s…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I think – I would think that Ms 
Kwinana would understand. My own understanding of 
Chartered Accountants is that they have businesses, they 
advise 
businesses 
they 
help 
businesses 
enter 
into 
business transactions, contracts and so and so.  So, I 
would 
expect 
that 
Ms 
Kwinana, 
being 
a 
Chartered 
Accountant, would know what you’re talking about if you 
10 
talk about a Domicilium address.  So, I’m – ja okay. 
MS KWINANA:   Excuse me Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS KWINANA: In fact when we were going to start this 
morning, I wanted to plead with you Chair, that whenever 
you wanted to talk or comment about my incompetence you 
do not mention my profession, the reason being that if the 
State Capture Commission has to be the graveyard of my 
profession, of me, as a professional let it – don’t allow it to 
be the graveyard of the whole profession and therefore 
20 
Chair, 
I 
would 
appreciate 
it 
when 
you 
prove 
my 
incompetence, you prove my incompetence for me only as 
Yakhe Kwinana, not my competence as a Chartered 
Accountant 
or 
my 
competence 
as 
a 
SAICA 
member, 
because the effect that it has out there, you may not know, 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 157 of 243 
 
Chair, the influence that you have in that chair. You’ve got 
a very big influence in the – maybe, I would comfortably 
say, in the whole world but if you, when you want to show 
me that I am incompetent, you say Mrs Kwinana as a 
Chartered Accountant, 
out 
there 
you 
are 
killing 
the 
profession of Chartered Accountant and therefore, Chair, I 
plead with you that, if there is something I do not know, I 
will not know that because I am a Chartered Accountant I 
will not know that because of my stupidity as an individual.  
I have got full confidence in South African Institute of 
10 
Chartered Accountants and if I am sitting here as a 
disaster to the profession, please separate me from the 
profession to save the profession, thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, Ms Kwinana, well I’m happy that if 
you felt that way you have expressed that but the fact of 
the matter is that we all get judged by what we are 
expected to know, okay.  There are certain things that you 
and everyone else expects a lawyer to know but doesn’t 
expect somebody who’s not a lawyer to know.  There are 
certain things that you and other people expect a Judge to 
20 
know but not somebody who is not a Judge.  So, when you 
give evidence and you said you’re a Chartered Accountant, 
in fact you might find that the reason why you may – you 
were appointed to the Board of SAA might be that it was 
because you are a Chartered Accountant, they needed the 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 158 of 243 
 
skills and knowledge of somebody who’s a Chartered 
Accountant and maybe if you were not a Chartered 
Accountant they would not have appointed you.  They 
appointed you because they wanted the knowledge and 
experience and skills that come with somebody who is a 
Chartered Accountant and when you deliberate on matters 
as a Board there are certain matters where they would say, 
Ms Kwinana you will have to guide us here because you 
are a Chartered Accountant. There are matters where, if 
the Board deliberates upon, they will look for a lawyer 
10 
among the Board members and say, so and so you’ll have 
to guide us here because you are a lawyer so – but, 
therefore, they look at your performance as a Board 
member among other things, against the background of the 
skills and knowledge that is expected of you by virtue of 
your profession.  You understand, if you serve in a Board 
and you are a, let’s say a school Principal, they might 
expect 
certain 
things 
from 
you 
and 
knowledge 
and 
experience but they might not have the same expectation, 
they might not expect you to guide them on law they might 
20 
not expect you to guide them on matters that a Chartered 
Accountant knows about, you understand that, so that’s the 
context.  I was saying to Ms Hofmeyr, I’m under the 
impression that Chartered Accountant’s guide is necessary 
and so on, that’s my understanding but you might say, no, 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 159 of 243 
 
o, that’s not what I’ve been doing and therefore, maybe if 
others do that, I’ve not been doing that, so maybe I don’t 
have that experience that others might have but I’m simply 
saying, I’m informed by my understanding of part of what 
Chartered Accountants do, what I understand them to do, 
so that’s how it come in, you understand now? 
MS KWINANA:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You said that you had been asked, when 
you’ve 
entered 
into 
these 
transactions 
previously, 
to 
10 
provide an address at which you will receive notices under 
the agreement, is that right? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, you see that’s quite an important 
thing, and I wonder if this has been explained to you, you 
can tell me if it has because notices under an agreement 
are sometimes very important, like a breach notice, right, 
you let the other party know that they’ve done something 
that’s in breach and unless they remedy it, then you’re able 
to get out of the contract.  So, do you accept that, being 
20 
able to receive the notices under an agreement, is an 
important thing? 
MS KWINANA:  I really never thought that it’s an important 
thing, thank you for bringing that to my attention.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   So, you wouldn’t, until this moment, 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 160 of 243 
 
have been concerned to ensure if there’s an agreement you 
really want to be in and the other party thinks you’re in 
breach of it, you wouldn’t want to have been alerted to that 
fact or – do you accept you would want to know if the other 
party contended you were in breach so that you could 
adjust your conduct and then stay in the agreement? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair, but that would not be in the 
form of an address, I would think that, in this case the 
email would work. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just repeat that? 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Kwinana said she thought, in this 
case, I think with a bit of a wry smile, that an email would 
be sufficient, but you see, Ms Kwinana…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On a lighter note, Ms Kwinana, you don’t 
think that driving to where the person is, to deliver it 
actually would be okay. [laughter]. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Sorry, but that is, actually the point 
because email is not adequate, often, for notices under an 
agreement. That’s why, specific addresses are given for 
delivery of the notice, actually your point highlights how 
20 
important a Domicilium or an address at which you’ll 
receive notices in because it’s what creates the obligations 
between the parties but, Ms Kwinana, I understand you to 
say that the significance of it, has not previously been 
drawn to your attention, is that right? 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 161 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So, when you concluded this Slipknot 
agreement 
with 
Ms 
Memela, 
you 
had 
to 
provide 
a 
Domicilium address okay, you’ll see that at page 374, have 
you got it there? 
MS KWINANA:   In DD33? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   In DD – oh sorry no, we’re back in DD25 
where you had the Slipknot agreement a moment ago, 
DD25A. 
MS KWINANA:   On page 375? 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   374 is where the Domicilium address is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It actually starts at 370. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, correct Chair and then I’m going to 
the last page where the Domicilium address is.  So I 
understand your evidence to be, albeit that you might not 
have known it was called a Domicilium address, you do 
have experience of being asked to provide an address at 
which you’ll receive notices under an agreement, correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, so this address for the seller would 
20 
have been provided by you, correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And you gave the address of 92 
President Park, Midrand, is that correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 162 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, that was not an address from which 
Slipknot, or you were operating though, in April 2015, was 
it? 
MS KWINANA:   I would have to check when I - when did 
we vacate 94 President Park. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ja I can tell you when it was it was in 
2013.  Does that help you with your memory? 
MS KWINANA:  I am – I am really not sure Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Well we have obtained an affidavit from the 
person to whom you sold 92 President Park and he took 
10 
occupation in 2013.  Do you dispute that, do you want me to 
take to his affidavit? 
MS KWINANA:  I may not dispute it but it would be good if 
you can take me there Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Sure.  Right.  I am running out of space 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I just have to find the correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is alright. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  File.  Okay it is back in your file which is 
20 
DD33 and you will find it under Tab 18 it is page 201.  This is 
an affidavit Chair that the commission obtained from a Mr 
Mark David Bates – apologies Chair I see you are not there 
yet.  It is an affidavit from Mr Mark David Bates.  He is a 
member of a particular family trust and what he details here 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 163 of 243 
 
is that that family trust purchased the property at 92 
Presidents Park, Midrand, Gauteng.  He indicates that it was 
purchased in – this is at paragraph 4 Ms Kwinana on page 
201.  He says it was purchased on auction on the 27 
November 2012 for an amount of 6.160 million and he says 
that the previous owner was Slip Knot Investments that is 
your company.  And then he says on transfer in 2013 they 
vacated the property and we have moved onto the said 
property.  That is where I get that from.  Does that jog your 
memory? 
10 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So Ms Kwinana that is the – I suspect… 
CHAIRPERSON:  It jogs your memory and you agree that 
you vacated the property in 2013? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair for the follow up question.  
That Ms Kwinana is the final feature that I am going to put to 
you suggests that this agreement is not a genuine one.  
Because the domicillium address that is given is not an 
20 
address at which you would ever have been able to receive 
notices under this agreement.  You had sold it two years – 
three years previously.  Somebody else was in the property.  
Do you have a response to that? 
MS KWINANA:  I think Chair it was because of my not 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 164 of 243 
 
knowing what I – what is this word domi? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Domicillium. 
MS KWINANA:  Domicillium yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No Ms Kwinana.  You knew that you were 
giving your address in the agreement is it not? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You knew if this agreement was signed in 
2015 this was no longer your address so therefore you could 
not have given this address 92 President Park Midrand.  
Because you cannot tell me you did not know what – where 
10 
you lived because you certainly were not living at 92 
President Park anymore. 
MS KWINANA:  I am sure Chair that was maybe an omission 
on my part because that address has been my address for 
the better part of my profession. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No Ms Kwinana but it cannot be.  You 
cannot in 2015 when you are required to put the address 
where you live give an address where you lived two or three 
years before.  Because you know where you live.  In 2015 
you know where you live.  So it cannot be. 
20 
MS KWINANA:  That is why I am saying Chair maybe it was 
an omission on my part for not knowing what the meant. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No Ms Kwinana.  Please – you cannot two 
years later – two and a half years later think that you live 
where you lived two years before and you left. It cannot be.  
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 165 of 243 
 
Right now you know where you live is it not? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And if you are asked go to give the 
address of where you live you would give the address of 
where you live? 
MS KWINANA:  Maybe Chair if they said – if they said in 
that instead of saying domicillium maybe if they said where 
do you live? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  No Ms Kwinana with – with all due respect 
the great challenge I put it to you with your answer is that 
10 
there is no world in which if this agreement was genuine and 
in 2015 you are asked for the address at which you are going 
to receive notices you give an address that you vacated two 
years previously.   
I want to put it to you that this error is the type of 
error that creeps in when people fabricate agreements and 
documents.  Because you have to keep so many balls in the 
air – you have to keep so many things because you have to 
go back in time, you have to recreate facts that did not 
happen and these are the little indicators of the error.   
20 
It is akin to the error in the agreement between Mr 
Ndzeku and allegedly Ms Hlohlela that was allegedly 
concluded at the end of 2015 because it refers to a clause 
and a dispute resolution mechanism that did not exist at the 
time.   
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 166 of 243 
 
This is the equivalent in your agreement I put it to 
you because you just do not make this error when it is 
happening as a fact.  You make this error when you are 
sitting four years later.  The commission is investigating 
matters.  It is pursuing corruption and then you make an 
error like this.  What is your response to that? 
MS KWINANA:  Chair your – your – your conclusion on this 
matter is very much incorrect.  This transaction did not go 
through firstly and secondly why would I fabricate the 
address if I knew how important it is as I now know how 
10 
important it is?  In fact even my postal address I still use the 
postal address that I was using when I was – I was at 92 
President Park. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But that is because you have not changed 
the postal address Ms Kwinana.  You have changed the 
residential address.  That is the difference.   
MS KWINANA:  Chair I no longer use that postal address but 
in fact I do not have a postal address now. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
MS KWINANA:  But now – but now if they say postal address 
20 
I say PO Box 3949 halfway house. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us leave out the postal address Ms 
Kwinana.  Here is what has happened.  On your version you 
signed this agreement in 2015 April 21 with Ms Memela 
where you were supposed to give your address.  You gave 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 167 of 243 
 
the address where you live two or so years before and not 
where you live in April 2015.  Ms Hofmeyr says to you, Ms 
Kwinana there is no way of explaining this kind of error 
because if you sign a document today and you are required 
to put in your address there is no way you can forget where 
you live today.  Okay? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if you do this agreement today but 
wanting to put it as an agreement that was done five years 
ago that is when you might make the mistake and think that 
10 
five years ago you were living in this address and it turns out 
you made a mistake.   
So if you signed this agreement in 2019 but wanted it 
to reflect that it had been signed in 2015 you might have 
thought in 2015 you were still living in – at 92 President Park 
and that is why you put it.  But you cannot make that mistake 
if you are signing the agreement today about where you live 
today.  You will answer that and then I will go to Ms 
Mbanjwa.  But I want you to answer that first.   
What do you say to that?  That is what Ms Hofmeyr is 
20 
putting to you that the only – the only explanation that can 
be advanced for this is that at the time you signed this 
agreement it was not on the date that is given there and it 
was – it must have been much later and you had to try and 
remember where you lived and you got it wrong.   
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 168 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:  Chair in 2013 I lived where I live now.  The 
only thing that changed is the office. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes.  Can – sorry can I just come in there?   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I know Ms Mbanjwa wants to speak but it is 
just important.  You needed to give the address of Slip Knot 
right, the business. 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Where you were operating from.  So in 
respect of all the Chairs questions albeit that the Chair was 
10 
emphasising where you live it is where you would conducting 
your business. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Because you – as we have it we have gone 
back to google photographs I assure you.  You were 
operating as Kwinana and Associates at 22 President Park 
for a long period but that changed in 2013, correct? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes. So the point still remains.  I is just 
that it’s the business address. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes thank you.  Apologies Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  One second.  Ms Mbanjwa. 
ADV MBANJWA:  Thank you Chair it has been answered. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It has been answered. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 169 of 243 
 
ADV MBANJWA:  I just wanted to point out that it was … 
CHAIRPERSON:  The business ja.  Okay.  The principle is 
the same.  It is just that it is the business but the principle 
is the same.  You understand the principle? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Yes. 
 Are 
you 
able 
to 
offer 
any 
explanation as to how if this agreement was signed in 2015 
you could have given an address for the business where 
the business was not operating from? 
MS KWINANA:  As I said Chair I am sure it was omission 
10 
or ignorance or not knowing what domicillium means. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  I would like to then move to 
what I hope will be the last major topic and then there will 
just be a few little points.  This is about your role in SAA 
and the auditors that were appointed.  You anticipated 
earlier that you thought that I would likely go there and so 
I am going there.  Ms Kwinana you were involved in the 
decision taken back in 2011 to go out on tender for the 
auditors for SAA, do you remember that? 
20 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And that was a tender for auditors to be 
appointed for the financial year 2011/2012, do you recall 
that? 
MS KWINANA:  No.  I have seen the – the hearings of the 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 170 of 243 
 
auditors and I am almost sure that there is no way that – 
for such a big entity.  In fact even if it is a small entity 
there is no way that we would appoint an auditor for one 
year.  The reason being that you see SAA on its own is 
complicated.   
Even if you audit for five years there are still new 
things that you are learning and therefore that is why most 
of the time auditors are appointed for a period a minimum 
period of three years.   
So I was surprised to find out that the contract 
10 
basically is saying one year.  It also boils back to what I 
have been saying about the contract that board would 
decide Chair and then the contract is drawn elsewhere.   
And in fact the reason why I remember very well 
that it was not one year is because we deliberated a lot on 
transfer of skill and how the auditors should share the work 
going forward.   
And in fact we did say in that meeting of the 
deliberations with the auditors – we did say that first year 
the job should be shared on 50/50 basis and then second 
20 
year on a sliding scale until in the end Nkonki gets 100%.  
That is basically what we said and therefore the one year 
how did the auditors get the contract of one year it is just 
not possible especially it is not possible with most of the 
companies.   
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 171 of 243 
 
We know that the auditors do get annual renewal 
subject to their performance.  Annual renewal at the Annual 
General Meeting but for SAA to issue out a tender of one 
year was a big mistake but I do not think that is what the 
board decided because it is not practical.   
Can you imagine the auditors auditing SAA for one 
year and then the following year and then there needs to 
be another tender process which takes about six months 
and then the other new auditors come and learn the 
business.  The previous auditors have not even learnt the 
10 
business so I think that was a big mistake. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You said two things.  You said it was a 
big mistake and you said it did not happen.  Which is it?  It 
could have happened and you could now review it and say 
it was a big mistake or you – I also understood you to say 
it did not happen. What is your evidence? 
MS KWINANA:  I will not say it did not happen for the 
reason that I did not see the contracts.  So if you have the 
contract that says one year then that means it did happen.  
But definitely that contract did not reflect the discussions 
20 
of the board. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I see.  So your – you say the board – the 
contract differed then from what the board had concluded, 
is that right? 
MS KWINANA:  I think so. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 172 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Okay.  You were on the audit committee 
at that time 2011, is that right? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And you became the chair I just want to 
check this.  When was that, that was sort of December 
2012, is that right?  I have it here.  Let me just look at my 
notes.  Well can you help me when did you become the 
chair?  Oh it was November 2012 correct? 
MS KWINANA:  I do not know Chair if the Company 
Secretary says so it is fine. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Hm those are our records. 
MS KWINANA:  That is fine. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Okay. So you are a member in 2011 and 
you become Chair let us say in November 2012, do you 
accept that? 
MS KWINANA:  That is fine Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Okay.  You see Ms Kwinana the challenge 
is 
that 
as 
a 
member 
of 
the 
audit 
committee 
you 
recommended to the board that SAA go out on tender for 
one year. 
20 
MS KWINANA:  No. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ja.  Let me take you to the minutes.  You 
will find them in DD19[a]. 
MS KWINANA:  What page? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  We are going to – the minute starts – 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 173 of 243 
 
sorry let me give the – at page 54 – 54.   
MS KWINANA:  54? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes.  Now this is a – these are minutes of 
the meeting of the Board of Directors of South African 
Airways held on the 17 February 2011.  And it is attended – 
who is present there is listed and I see your name there.  
Do you confirm that? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes.  So this indicates you were present 
at the meeting and if you go over to page 55. 
10 
MS KWINANA:  Let me read the [00:20:29]point here. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Sorry I will tell you where you are.  You 
are just under Ms Nkosi Thomas.  The 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 
9 t h person.  Do you see that? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And then if you go over the page to page 
55 you go down to Clause 10. – well paragraph 10.2 which 
says, Audit Committee.  Do you have that? 
MS KWINANA:  Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  It says a report and recommendation and 
20 
then at 10.2.1.1 there is a bold Open Tender Process for 
the appointment of external auditors for the 2011/2012 
financial year.   
“The 
board 
of 
directors 
reviewed 
the 
proposal to commence with an open tender 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 174 of 243 
 
process to appoint external auditors for the 
2011/2012 financial year as recommended 
by the Audit Committee and tabled at the 
meeting.” 
How in the face of this Ms Kwinana can you say that 
it was not in fact the recommendation of your – the 
committee on which you served that the very thing that 
happened happened? 
MS KWINANA:  I think this was a very big, big, big mistake 
Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  What was a big mistake? 
MS KWINANA:  A mistake that the board reviewed proposal 
to commence with an open tender process to appoint 
external 
auditors 
for 
2011/2012 
financial 
year 
recommended by the Audit Committee and tabled at the 
meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What was a mistake?  Is it – are you 
saying that… 
MS KWINANA:  To recommend – to recommend for one 
year.  To recommend for one year.  Maybe Chair… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  But you – you… 
MS KWINANA:  Do you have the minutes? 
CHAIRPERSON:  You accept – okay Ms Hofmeyr ’s question 
as I see seeks to establish from you whether you accept 
that it is the Audit and Risk Committee that made that 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 175 of 243 
 
recommendation.  Do you accept that now? 
MS KWINANA:  May – do you have the Audit Committee 
minutes where this was discussed? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ms Kwinana no we do not have every 
single recording of every single meeting which when I show 
you the record of the minutes you try to rely on to give 
more than is recorded here.  Ms Kwinana how in the face 
of what is recorded here can you not just resolutely accept 
the committee of which you were a member recommended 
that the tender go out for only one year. 
10 
MS KWINANA:  Definitely Chair there is just no way that 
we can recommend one year.  In this meeting Mr Zakhele 
Sithole was the chairperson of the Audit and Mr Zakhele 
Sithole was operating an audit firm and also there is just 
no way that we can recommend one year – never Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But did you… 
MS KWINANA:  The audit – never Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But would you not have seen these 
minutes at some stage during that time because then if you 
saw the minutes you should have said this is not correct, 
20 
this committee did not make such a recommendation or 
could not have made such a recommendation?  The 
minutes must reflect something different. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  But Chair… 
MS KWINANA:  That is why – that is why Chair I need 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 176 of 243 
 
these 
minutes 
of 
this 
audit 
committee 
where 
we 
recommended one year.  Because I am sure that we cannot 
recommend one year with audit. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  But Ms Kwinana – no – I mean even 
before we get to minutes you were present at this meeting.  
If you present at the meeting as a non-executive you say 
that was not the recommendation.  There is some error has 
happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You do not even do that.  These are – 
10 
these are signed minutes of the Board of SAA.  In the face 
of that Ms Kwinana it is difficult to – I am putting to you it 
is difficult to understand the basis on which you resist that 
the recommendation came from the committee and that the 
board 
of 
which 
you 
were 
a 
member 
approved 
the 
recommendation. 
MS KWINANA:  The reason Chair why I am resisting is 
because I am sure that there is no way that we can 
recommend – for such an entity as big and complicated as 
South African Airways and then we approve the audit for 
20 
one year definitely Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Mbanjwa. 
ADV MBANJWA:  Thank you Chair.  Chair unfortunately 
this is again an [00:25:10].  The way I understand this is a 
commission of inquiry and I believe what the commission 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 177 of 243 
 
wants is to be assisted with it.   
I know that Ms Hofmeyr is cross-examining and we 
are not objecting to that because we are in agreement with 
the Chair that although that is going beyond the normal but 
the truth must be established and there is no time.  But 
where we are objecting is when a witness says yes I admit 
that this is what is written here but this is so improbable 
given the circumstances and what I know of where I was 
lacking.  Can I have supporting documents?   
And then Ms Hofmeyr now gives this huge outcry 
10 
because in a way it is intimidating to the witness Chair and 
it forces the witness not to look for supporting documents.  
I think in any situation when you present evidence you are 
allowed to get supporting documents. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well you see the difficulty Ms Mbanjwa is 
that the commission cannot be going and looking for every 
piece of document.   
As I understand the position the legal team made 
sure 
that 
you 
and 
Ms 
Kwinana 
were 
notified 
what 
documents would be used during her evidence.  And you 
20 
were given whatever information you would need in order 
to access the information. So which suggests to me that if 
Ms Kwinana had taken the trouble to read the documents 
she would have come across these minutes and she would 
have picked up that there was something that she thought 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 178 of 243 
 
they incorrectly reflected and would have mentioned much 
earlier to say, those minutes are wrong I want to try and 
get more documents.  Yes what do you say? 
ADV MBANJWA:  Thank you Chair I am going to say two 
last things.  It does not matter what Chair.  If you recall 
Chair here there is even a letter which I wrote and I used 
the word irritated and it is because from the very beginning 
once we were given the date of Ms Kwinana’s appearance 
here we requested the evidence by – or to be pointed out 
and there was such a tremendous delay the letter was – 
10 
was ready and I got frustrated because we were actually 
given these documents.   
I think on a [00:27:50] and we are coming here on a 
Monday.  The whole weekend we worked on it.  And then 
the second thing Chair which I want to say.  If a witness 
says this is the other extra [00:28:08] my understanding 
that that evidence is supposed to be admissible.  And I am 
saying that because that is exactly what Ms Hofmeyr has 
just done here before we went for lunch.   
She had a thing and we did not object to the – to 
20 
the admission of that thing because we understand that the 
commission is dealing with a huge volume of information.  
All we asked was just for time to say let us get five 
minutes to read the document.   
So we are trying to cooperate with the commission 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 179 of 243 
 
to the best of our ability.  And we are happy in the manner 
the Chair is treating us. But we have to take a strong 
exception to the fact that every time the witness says, 
maybe if I can get this document that is immediately 
interpreted by the evidence leader as being evasive or 
refusal.  What evidence leader could correctly say is to say 
yes there are concerns but not to shout at the witness.  
Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr.  Just for the record Chair 
the request to be provided with the bundle for Ms 
10 
Kwinana’s evidence came in a letter dated the 16 October 
2020 from Ms Mbanjwa’s firm and the last paragraph it is 
unnumbered there read as follows: 
“In conclusion please advise us as to when 
we can expect the witness bundle including 
the documents specifically requested in our 
letter incorrectly date”  
Sorry that is the later one.  Let me just get here.  
Sorry so this is the 23 October letter.  It says: 
Remember I told you there was a whole request list 
20 
of requested documents and then that was provided in 
addition to the bundle.  What happens after the request is 
made is this following appears. 
That happens after the request is made is this following 
appears. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 180 of 243 
 
“In conclusion please advise us as to when we can 
expect the witness bundle including the documents 
specific 
in 
our 
letter 
incorrectly 
dated 
16 September 2020.  Please note that we need an 
answer on or before the 28t h of October 2020.”  
 
So this was written on the 23r d and they required an 
answer 
about 
the 
witness 
bundle 
by 
the 
28t h of October 2020. 
 
On 
the 
28 t h of October 2020 
is 
when 
Ms Kwinana 
through Ms Mbanjwa was provided with the witness bundle.  
10 
So it was in compliance with the very date that had been set 
in the letter of the 23 rd of October 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So I just wanted to place that on record.  
Insofar as per documents are concerned.  The challenge is 
simply that in the face of signed minutes of a meeting at 
which Ms Kwinana was present and in respect of which there 
was a recommendation from the committee on which she sat.   
 
It is...  I am putting to you Ms Kwinana that it is difficult 
to understand how going to look for the minutes of the 
20 
underlining Audit and Risk Committee meeting would help. 
 
Because as the Chair was ventilating earlier.  If you 
have had any concern about what is recorded here, that is 
likely to have been reflected in the minutes. 
 
How do you think getting those minutes will assist us 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 181 of 243 
 
Ms Kwinana? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe before you respond Ms Kwinana.  
Let me also say.  It just seems quite improbable that the 
recommendation forum, the Audit and Risk Committee, would 
have been recommending a longer period than one year. 
 
And when the minute said one year, not a single one of 
the members of the board who would have been what the 
recommendation of the committee said.  Recommended 
maybe three years.   
 
That not a single one of them, including you, did not pick 
10 
up to say:  No, but the recommendation did not say one year.  
So these minutes do not reflect the true position as to what 
the recommendation said. 
 
So you can comment on what Ms Hofmeyr said but 
comment on what I have also said. 
MS KWINANA:   Thank you, Chair.  I would say Chair, these 
minutes do not reflect the discussions of the day in respect 
of that one-year audit.   
 
In fact, Chair and the procurement process would take a 
minimum of six-months.  And then now, after six-months we 
20 
appointed – and then we appoint the auditors for one year. 
 
That would mean that even before they finish that year, 
we would have to start another process.  So that is why 
Chair, I am almost sure that there is no way that we could as 
a big entity and complicated and complex like SAA, would 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 182 of 243 
 
appoint auditors for one year. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   How long in your understanding were they 
appointed for? 
MS KWINANA:   For five years Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   For five years? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So your understanding, despite what is 
being recorded in the minutes of the meeting, is that in 2011 
a decision was taken to appoint them for five years.  Is that 
correct? 
10 
MS KWINANA:   That is correct Chair.  And in fact, the 
reason as I said Chair.  In fact, the reason why I am saying 
five years with confidence is the discussion that we went 
through where basically we were saying, first year 50%.  
50/50.  Second year, 60/40 and so on and so on.  That 
period would be five years. 
 
And then we even said, then if that is – it happens like 
that, then when the tender comes again, now we would be in 
a position to tender alone without being incurred with PWC 
because the skills would have been transferred over these 
20 
five years. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So your understanding is that there was a 
decision to appoint PWC and Nkonki for five years.  Is that 
right? 
MS KWINANA:   That is correct Chair.   
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 183 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Then why did you try and take it away 
from PWC before the five years was up? 
MS KWINANA:   We did not try to take it away Chair from 
PWC but this is what happened.  First year, 50/50.  Second 
year, 40/30... 40/60.  And then third year, that would be 
70/30.   
 
And then I think in the third or fourth year, when now 
PWC percentage was reducing, PWC got uncomfortable with 
that and they said for the percentage and the risk we are 
having, the risk is higher than the reward.   
10 
 
Something like that.  And then...  So that was not – we 
did not want to remove PWC but PWC said, if that is the 
case, then we are going.  So basically, we did not remove 
them.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Kwinana, do you not remember being 
very vocal about the fact that Nkonki should get it all on its 
own before the five years was up? 
MS KWINANA:   That recommendation Chair, I think we even 
wrote that recommendation but I am subject to correction.  
We wrote to the Auditor General because the Auditor General 
20 
has got the first right of refusal in terms of auditing the 
SOC’s.   
 
So the reason why we wrote – why...  You may say we 
were pushing but PWC said they are withdrawing.  So now, if 
PWC say they are withdrawing before the end of the five 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 184 of 243 
 
years, which means, therefore that it might as well be 
hundred percent.  That was the reason. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, Ms Kwinana that is now how the 
chronology actually played out.  You see, PWC was not 
satisfied with going less than 50/50 at a point.  But the board 
actually resolved to give this exclusively to Nkonki before 
the five years was up.  It did so.  It went to the Auditor 
General about that.  And you remember what the Auditor 
General said in response? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair.  What did they say? 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   They said that you cannot do so without 
ensuring that you are going through a proper supply chain 
management process.  Does that refresh your memory? 
MS KWINANA:   The supply chain management process 
Chair was entered into when we appointed them in 2011 and 
our understanding was that, that is going to be five years 
and the percentage would be on a reducing scale.  And 
therefore, if PWC does not want that, therefore, the other 
company can continue.  That was basically what our thinking 
were. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Well, Ms Kwinana again, I just have to put 
it to you.  What the minutes of the meetings and the 
resolution show is that over time – in the five years, on your 
version, they were jointly appointed for five years.   
 
But somewhere in the middle, the board decides to just 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 185 of 243 
 
take it away from PWC and give it to Nkonki.  They go to the 
Auditor General.  The Auditor General says:  You cannot do 
that.  You have to go through a supply chain management 
process because you are procuring services and you cannot 
just give it to a party.   
 
And the board minutes reflect the following – I will take 
you there in a moment – it was observed that the request by 
the Auditor General, that is the request to go on a supply 
chain management process, was “strange and outside the 
scope of the Public Audit Act”. 
10 
MS KWINANA:   Where are the minutes Chair? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Let me show you.  It is in the bundle that I 
think that you have in front of you.  DD19.  Now, it is going 
to be one of the difficult ones to find because there are lots 
of sub-numbers but if we could look for 132.16.3.1.   
MS MBANJWA:   [microphone on mute] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, Ms Mbanjwa. 
MS MBANJWA:   [microphone on mute] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   132.16.3.1.  And Chair, can I just say?  
The only reason I have not that this get scrapped is because 
20 
I cannot change the numbering now because the record is 
going to previously have averted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So I just do apologise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine.  That is fine.  I want to be 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 186 of 243 
 
the first one to find it because I have a suspicion I am the 
oldest of all of you in this room. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   [laughing]   
CHAIRPERSON:   And it is good to find it first.  [laughing]   
ADV HOFMEYR:   [laughing]   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay.  So these are the minutes of the 
special meeting of the SAA Stock Limited Board of Directors 
held on the 28t h of September...  Oh, sorry Ms Mbanjwa.   
MS MBANJWA:   [microphone on mute] 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Point 3 point 1.  Sorry.  Please let me 
know when you have it.   
MS MBANJWA:   [microphone on mute] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, that is where they start.  Do you have 
that, Ms Mbanjwa?  It is the minutes ...[intervenes]  
MS MBANJWA:   [microphone on mute] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right of the ...[intervenes]  
MS MBANJWA:   [microphone on mute] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   This ...[intervenes]  
MS MBANJWA:   [microphone on mute] 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   This was a very significant meeting.  You 
recall, it is the one I started with on Monday.  It is the one 
where the LSG Sky Chefs’ contract is taking away and given 
to Air Chefs.  It is the one where the CEO’s delegation of 
authority is cut from a hundred million to fifty million.   
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 187 of 243 
 
 
And then the other thing that happened at this happened 
is in relation to auditors.  And you will find that at internal 
page 15 of 17 which is the bundle page, DD19(a), page 
132.16.3.15.   
MS KWINANA:   Page 15 of 17? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Correct, internal page, ja. 
MS KWINANA:   H’m. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And you see against paragraph 13 there 
the appointment of auditors.   
“It was reported that the board had approved the 
10 
appointment of Nkonki as the sole auditor for the 
SAA Group.” 
 
That happened previously but this is where we land in 
September.  The Auditor General had written to SAA, 
requesting proof that there was compliance with the supply 
chain management policy before – that AG was willing to 
consent to the appointment of Nkonki Inc.  And then this was 
recorded: 
“It was reserved that the request by the Auditor 
General was strange and outside the scope of the 
20 
Public Audit Act.’ 
 
So this is the basis Ms Kwinana on which I say to you.  
Even if, notwithstanding what the minutes of the 2011 
meeting 
record, 
your 
version 
is 
that 
there 
was 
an 
appointment for five years. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 188 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   The difficulty that this presents is, that at 
a point within that five year period, the Board of SAA 
decided to take it away from one of the joint audit partners, 
give it to Nkonki and it was the Auditor General that would 
not approve that, unless there was proof that there had been 
compliance with supply chain management. 
 
So how on even your own recollection of what was 
decided, could this have been an appropriate thing to do? 
MS KWINANA:   I have tried to explain and give the 
10 
background to this Chair.  And in fact, I do not know, maybe 
if I had explained it in Xhosa, it would be better.  But as I 
said Chair, the auditors, according to the board, were 
appointed for five years on a sliding scale.   
 
And therefore, when PWC refused to take a smaller 
percentage, then they decided that they are withdrawing.  
And then now, when they are withdrawing, then the board, as 
it is stated here, approved the appointment of Nkonki only 
because PWC wanted out of the deal.   
 
And when the Auditor General says they wanted proof of 
20 
compliance with supply chain management policy.  The 
Auditor General did not know what was decided in previous 
years and therefore – and I also do not think that it would be 
difficult for SAA to be given the assurance that there was 
compliance.   
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 189 of 243 
 
 
But assuming that they would have been given the five 
years that the board discussed in the meeting.  So we really 
did think that the Auditor General’s request was in fact 
strange because our understanding has been that the 
auditors were appointed on a sliding scale anyway.   
 
So in one way or another, maybe in the five years, it 
would end up being 20/80.  And maybe if there is an 
extension, as it happens with other contracts, it would end 
up being 10/90.   
 
So Chair, I do not have any other response, except that I 
10 
have explained what was the discussion in respect of this. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Kwinana, during the period that PWC 
and Nkonki were jointly auditing SAA, you entered into a 
joint business relationship with PWC.  Correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Not only with PWC.  As I have been saying, 
in all the meetings of SAA.  There is not a single person at 
SAA who did not know that I operated and audit.  And 
therefore, as I have been saying...   
 
You know, Ms Hofmeyr maybe you were never involved 
in tendering the way I have been involved in tendering.  In 
20 
tendering, in the government tender and in its tender, there 
will be a whole lot of tenders.   
 
And then if it is tendering for audit and maybe 
accounting or making sure that there is clean audit, you do 
the reconciliations.  This, this, this and that.  You enter into 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 190 of 243 
 
joint partnerships   
 
In 
fact, 
maybe 
your... 
 
In 
fact, 
definitely, 
your 
investigating team, when they were reviewing our bank 
statements as Kwinana & Associates, they would have seen 
that we receive money from almost all the audit firms.   
 
We have received money from PWC, from Deloitte, 
from...  It is only Ernest & Young that we never worked with.  
From SMG, from Wane, from Manase, from basically all the 
audit firms.   
 
And in fact, how we do things.  We enter into different 
10 
forms 
of 
arrangements. 
 
We 
enter 
into 
consortium 
arrangements where the two parties come together and form 
a consortium.   
 
Sometimes we enter into joint venture agreements 
where, basically, we would register the joint ventures.  
Sometimes we enter into a sub-contracting arrangement 
where, basically, one company, as it has happened with 
PRASA, with Kwinana & Associates and PWC.   
 
So basically, it depends on the form of an arrangement.  
Sometimes, 
you 
enter 
into 
a 
supplier 
development 
20 
arrangement.   
 
As my understanding is that you lift as you rise.  So 
basically, that is what we do Chair as the auditors.  And 
therefore, when you asked that I entered into a business 
arrangement with PWC.   
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 191 of 243 
 
 
Kwinana 
& 
Associates 
has 
entered 
into 
business 
arrangements with almost all the audit firms.  If you go to 
Ngubane and ask ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, do not repeat that Ms Kwinana.   
MS KWINANA:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, you have mentioned the various 
names.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   The point of the question is to establish 
that the very joint audit partner who was auditing SAA, you 
were in joint business relationship with.  It is not relevant 
10 
that you were in others.   
 
The one that we focus on now, is the one in respect of 
which you were year-on-year making decisions to reappoint 
them and determining their fees.   
 
So I just want to explain why.  The fact that you might 
have had other relationships with other audit firms, is not the 
focus for us.   
 
Because as a board member in SAA with decision 
making power, generally, and in terms of the Companies Act 
we looked at previously, you should not be making any 
20 
decisions in respect of which you have a personal financial 
interest.  Do you accept that? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair.  In respect of the auditors, I 
definitely do not agree with that.  The reason being that 
Chair.  The personal interest that Ms Hofmeyr is talking 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 192 of 243 
 
about.   
 
Of course, Kwinana & Associates did receive a benefit 
but not from PWC.  Remember that we were appointed by 
PRASA not PWC.   
 
So whenever these consortiums happened Chair, the 
client would want to deal with one company and the other 
companies, like for instance, Transnet.   
 
Transnet was dealing with ten companies but now there 
would be one company that does like the invoicing.  And 
therefore, the benefit Chair...   
10 
 
In fact, I really do not know how to explain this.  The 
benefit, the money, the monies that PWC paid to Kwinana & 
Associates and the monies that were going to get paid to 
Kwinana & Associates, were not the monies that PWC gave 
to me.  They were ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, hang on ...[intervenes]  
MS KWINANA:   They were just appointment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, hang on Ms Kwinana.  I hope I 
am wrong in thinking what you – what I think you are saying.  
You are not saying, are you, that there was nothing wrong 
20 
with you sitting, whether it is at the Board of SAA or the 
Audit and Risk Committee and participating in decisions to 
give work, SAA work to Nkonki and PricewaterhouseCoopers 
in circumstances where your company was going to be 
getting - Kwinana & Associates was going to be getting a 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 193 of 243 
 
benefit, a financial benefit coming from the work that Nkonki 
or PricewaterhouseCoopers or both were going to be doing 
for SAA.  That is not what you are saying? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What are you saying? 
MS KWINANA:   That is not what I am saying.  Am I saying 
Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Or let me go back to Ms Hofmeyr’s 
question.  Ms Hofmeyr, do you want to repeat your question 
so that I can understand what the answer is. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed, indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   The issue is that you are in a decision 
making role within SAA.  You are deciding year-on-year to 
reappoint, or not, PWC and Nkonki.   
 
You deciding what fees they will earn.  And in the same 
– at the same time that you are doing that, you are in a joint 
business relationship with them and you are deriving 
revenue from that business relationship.   
 
That creates a situation, I want to put to you, in which 
20 
you should not be making those decisions.  The Companies 
Act requires you to declare the interest and requires you to 
recuse yourself from that decision making.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, now I think I understand.  So yes, the 
money that would have paid to Kwinana & Associates might 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 194 of 243 
 
not necessarily be for work done by PricewaterhouseCoopers 
or Nkonki at SAA but I think the point being made is.   
 
These are your business associates from which you 
derive some benefit, even if that benefit is not connected 
with work at SAA but you are...  
 
There is too close a relationship with them to be sitting 
and making and participating in decisions whether they 
should get contracts or not.  That is the point.  Are you 
saying there is nothing wrong with that? 
MS KWINANA:   I still think Chair there is nothing wrong with 
10 
that.  And in fact, if anyone thinks there is nothing wrong 
with that.  In my example, when I was answering by email.  I 
said Chair, for the auditors that would be very difficult.   
 
That would mean that any chartered accountant, not 
even a chartered accountant that is in audit.  A chartered 
accountant that is a CFO there, cannot make a decision on 
any firm.   
 
The reason Chair why I am saying that is because a 
chartered accountant will have served articles in one of the 
audit firms.  And when you have served articles in one of the 
20 
audit firms and then now ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Well, 
do 
not 
make 
that 
example 
Ms Kwinana because the mere fact that he or she have 
served articles at some stage or another, is not a here not 
there.  It happens with lawyers, you know.   
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 195 of 243 
 
 
The fact that you served articles with law firm A 20-years 
ago, does not mean that you cannot act against them.  But if 
you served articles and left yesterday or last months and 
now you have to sit and make a decision in a structure where 
they are involved, that might be different.   
 
But if you are talking about a certain, a long period that 
might not mean anything.  So but here, as I understand the 
position.  It was a business association that Kwinana & 
Associates had which was ongoing.  Ms Hofmeyr, am I right? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It is about the two happening at the same 
time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   That is what creates the conflict.  It is that 
at the very same time that you are making the decisions 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV 
HOFMEYR: 
 
 
...you 
derive 
benefits 
from 
your 
association with them.  And that is what creates the conflict.  
20 
It does not mean you cannot be appointed.  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It does not mean you cannot serve and 
give your skills and your expertise to SAA.  It means on that 
decision in respect of which you have a relationship in which 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 196 of 243 
 
you derive personal benefit, as defined, you just recuse 
yourself.  You say:  I cannot participate in this decision.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MS KWINANA:   Chair, I still do not see it like that.  The 
reason why I do not see it like that is.  As I said, I work with 
all the audit firms.  For me, all the audit firms are the same.  
Even, for instance, if ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But you did not have a current ongoing 
business relationship with all of them at a particular time? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes. 
10 
MS KWINANA:   You may have had in the past with that one 
or that one but at the time you make a – you have to 
participate 
in 
decision 
making 
that 
could 
benefit 
this 
business associates of yours, you have that business 
association, relationship from which you continue to get 
financial benefit.   
 
How can you take part in that decision making?  I am not 
talking about some previous or past business relationship.  I 
am talking about current business relationships from which 
you get financial benefit. 
20 
MS KWINANA:   Chair, in that case, that would mean that 
everybody who is operating an audit firm cannot sit in the 
board.  Why I am saying that is because I did not have the 
business relationship at that point in time with say 
Deloitte.  However, at some stage I would have a business 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 197 of 243 
 
relationship with Deloitte because we used to [inaudible – 
speaking simultaneously] 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Ja, 
but 
we 
are 
talking 
about 
a 
relationship that is current at the time you are supposed to 
make a decision.  Do not make examples that do not apply.  
We are talking about a situation where you participate or a 
decision has to be taken and you must decide whether you 
recuse yourself or you are going to participate where an 
affected party who could benefit from the decision from the 
way you vote is a current business associate of yours and 
10 
from that business that relationship you continue to have 
financial benefits.  We are not talking about something that 
has happened and ended.  We are not talking about 
something that could happen in the future, we are talking 
about something that is ongoing at the time you have to 
decide whether to recuse yourself or to take part in the 
decision that could benefit or not benefit that party. 
MS KWINANA:   Let me make my final answer, Chair.  I did 
not get a financial benefit from Nkonki and PwC.  I got the 
financial benefit or my company got the financial benefit 
20 
from PRASA, Transnet and Post Office. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Kwinana, I should just follow up on 
that.  Is it really your evidence before this Commission that 
your association with PwC was not part of the reason why 
you got the PRASA work, you jointly bid for it? 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 198 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   We have been – Chair, we have been 
bidding with PwC and other companies …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well just the question is not whether you 
had been bidding with them, the question is whether you 
are 
saying 
that 
you 
were 
not 
benefiting 
from 
that 
relationship. 
MS KWINANA:   Chair, even if we did not bid with PwC we 
decided to bid with another company but the fact of the 
matter is that the benefit did not come from PwC, the 
benefit came from PRASA and in fact when you bid you do 
10 
not know if you are going to get the tender or not and 
therefore I would not take – in fact, Chair, my conflict of 
interest, I did not have any conflict of interest at all 
according to my understanding and, in fact, as you are 
asking this question, I still do not see any conflict of 
interest because we would lose that tender to the PRASA 
tender and we would get another tender or we would go 
with Deloitte and PwC or KPMG with another one.  So, 
Chair, I really do not see any conflict in this one. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Kwinana, it is clear, you see 
20 
absolutely no conflict.  I am going to leave there point. 
MS KWINANA:   No [inaudible – speaking simultaneously] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you know that Mr Mothibe the lead 
PwC auditor who in your evidence earlier this week you 
said you had a high respect for believed that it was a 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 199 of 243 
 
conflict of interest  for you and that you should have 
recused yourself from those meeting and decision-making. 
MS KWINANA:   That is his own opinion. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It is, indeed. 
MS KWINANA:   It is his own opinion. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You see, Ms Kwinana, we might all at 
one stage or another not see a certain matter in a certain 
way but when there has been the benefit of discussion and 
questions being asked we might then begin to see that 
matter in a different light. 
10 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And say you know what, that is not how I 
saw it at the time but now that you are raising these issues 
I can see, I can see, you know, it was wrong, I should have 
seen it that way but at that time I did not see it that way, I 
am terribly sorry because I really did not see it that way.   
 
Now if one is dealing with that situation, one can 
lay blame – maybe not lay blame, for the fact that a person 
did not see a certain in a certain way at a certain time but 
one can – one might well be able to forgive the person to 
20 
say once this was raised he or she saw it and she realised 
that no, I have made a mistake, you know? 
 
But where even when there is discussions, there 
are questions, issues are raised, somebody still does not 
see it, it becomes even a bigger problem because if 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 200 of 243 
 
between these two people the one who sees the problem 
that he or she did not see before in regard to a certain 
matter, the one who sees the problem, you can – if he or 
she says look, I am now enlightened, I can see this – I will 
make sure I do not do it, you can work with that person 
because that person has seen the light.  But if the person 
persists and say I do not see it - I mean, the other one you 
can say that person can be considered to be a board 
member of another board because at least he or she 
realised that no, that was wrong and now that kind of 
10 
mistake will not happen again but with a person who still 
does not see it, it is too risky to appoint that person in the 
future to a board or such a position because this person 
will continue not to see that this kind of situation is 
problematic and therefore will cause more problems.   
 
So I just want – I am making these examples to say 
to you I am quite concerned about the fact that your 
position still stands that you do not see any problem with 
that situation.  Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you.   The total amount that 
20 
Kwinana and Associates billed PwC for on that PRASA 
matter was in the order of 6.1 million.  Do you confirm 
that? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And in respect of that 6.1 million you 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 201 of 243 
 
were only able to enter into that relationship with PwC 
according to its policy if that amount did not constitute 
more than 5 or 10% of Kwinana and Associates’ revenue.  
Were you aware of that at the time? 
MS KWINANA:   I remember that, Chair, in partnership 
they will come with their policies. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes. 
MS KWINANA:   We will also be having our own policies 
and therefore, that does not mean that in a partnership you 
have to take all the policies of the other partner that is 
10 
coming, you need to sit down and discuss and see which 
policies are applicable, not applicable, which policies are 
acceptable for both parties. 
CHAIRPERSON:   One second, I have run out of water 
here.  Ms Kwinana, do you still have water there? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, alright, I have asked for 
somebody to give me water.  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Would you like to take a moment, Chair, 
or are you …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no …[intervenes] 
MS KWINANA:   Can I have a five minutes break, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, we …[intervenes] 
MS MBANJWA:   I do not know if – is Ms Hofmeyr – are 
you still – I just want an indication, Chair. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 202 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MS MBANJWA:   I thought that we would be asked in 45 
minutes 
so 
I 
want 
to 
know 
now 
are 
we 
going 
on 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   How far we are from finishing. 
MS MBANJWA:   Please. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I am on my last topic, it has just taken a 
bit longer and with all due respect to you, Ms Kwinana, I 
understand that you are wanting to give explanations but I 
cannot anticipate how long they are going to be, so 
10 
apologies for that.  It is this one and then it is two 
questions, so I think about twenty more minutes, fifteen 
even, possibly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, is that fine, Ms Mbanjwa? 
MS MBANJWA:   Yes, Chair.  Let me just say, Chair, it is 
not that [indistinct – far from mic] I just wanted to be 
granted the bathroom. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MS KWINANA:   If we are going on. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe – I think Ms Kwinana wants to… 
20 
MS KWINANA:   Five minutes break please, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, alright.   
MS MBANJWA:   Sorry about that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us take – let us make it ten. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, indeed, Chair, because it is a bit of 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 203 of 243 
 
a way to go. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja,. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I am going to take advantage. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So we will resume at ten past four. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us continue on the last mile. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed.  Thank you, Chair.  Ms Kwinana, 
10 
just before the break we had established that PwC had a 
policy in terms of which it could not enter into a joint 
business relationship with a partner unless it was less than 
10% of turnover and I understood your answer to that to be 
well, that might have been PwC’s policy but we had our 
own policy, is that correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you accept that insofar as PwC 
choosing to partner with you that you would not have been 
able to partner with them if their own policy did not allow 
20 
it? 
MS KWINANA:   I do not know, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay, so if their policy says they cannot 
enter into the relationship with your firm if what your firm 
is going to derive from it is more than 10% of turnover then 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 204 of 243 
 
they cannot enter into the relationship with you.  Do you 
accept that? 
MS KWINANA:   I do not know, Chair, that would depend 
on the circumstances.  And another thing, Chair, in respect 
of 
these 
partnerships 
and 
consortiums 
that 
I 
have 
explained, it is not only the big brother ’s decision, also the 
small sister ’s decision is taken into account.  So when you 
say PwC would not have partnered with us, this becomes a 
mutual relationship where PwC wants to tender with us and 
we also want to tender with them.  So basically it is for 
10 
that reason that we meet each other halfway because we 
need each other, much as PwC would be our big brother 
but in the end we meet halfway and therefore, if you say if 
their policy was saying then we would not be able to – they 
will not be able to tender with us.  They would be able to 
tender with us if they want regardless of their policy.   
 
We 
would 
also 
tender 
with 
them 
if 
we 
want 
regardless of our own internal policy.  So basically if they 
say 10% of the revenue and we say – like, for instance, in 
our policy which basically I would be able to challenge the 
20 
policy that would say if the fees will be more than 10% of 
your revenue you cannot tender because that will impair 
your independence.   
 
Now what about the companies that have got a zero 
turnover?  Does it mean that PwC will never enter into a 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 205 of 243 
 
business relationship with them?  If our policy is saying 5% 
and then now does it mean that we cannot uplift a company 
that is fairly new that does not have a revenue at all?  So 
it is for that reason that we meet each other halfway 
because we need each other. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You see, Ms Kwinana, that may happen 
in certain relationships with different parties.  PwC’s 
evidence before this Commission, corroborated by their 
policy with which – that they provided to the Commission 
said they could not have entered into this PRASA joint 
10 
business relationship with you if the revenue to be derived 
from it was anything more than 10% of Kwinana and 
Associates’ revenues.  So can we just work with those 
facts because those are the facts that they have presented 
to the Commission.  Okay, there might be other situations 
where arrangements are made but PwC said that they will 
not and they actually for that reason communicated with 
Kwinana and Associates before you entered into the 
relationship to ask precisely how much of Kwinana and 
Associates’ revenue this was going to comprise.  Are you 
20 
aware of that communication? 
MS KWINANA:   Let me give you a background information 
…[intervenes] 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Well, could we just start …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just hang on, the question is are you 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 206 of 243 
 
aware of that communication? 
MS KWINANA:   I am aware of the communication, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
MS KWINANA:   But I want to explain, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well …[intervenes] 
MS KWINANA:   The verification of fixed assets of PRASA 
was done by Combined Systems.  Combine Systems is a 
subsidiary or was a subsidiary of PwC.  So now I definitely 
was not aware of the Combined Systems policy. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, Ms Hofmeyr? 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay, so the communication that PwC 
sent to Kwinana and Associates you will find in DD19 at 
page 132. 
MS KWINANA:   Page 132? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is 19A? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   19A at page – we are starting at page 
132 because it is an email chain again so we have to start 
at the end.  Thank you. 
MS KWINANA:   So it is 132 what? 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Just 132.  For once we just have none 
point, point, point number. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you have that, Ms Kwinana? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 207 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I have got it too. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, so this is a question sent  - 
do you see from just above midway down from Nicky 
Wayne of PwC to various people and it says – oh sorry, 
this is internal to PwC, the one at the bottom, right?  It 
says: 
“Hi Koos…” 
Has asked the following: 
“Please can you help with a reply to him:” 
It says: 
10 
“Hi Nicky, please confirm the following with your 
contact at Kwinana.  As per the DD submitted, 
Yakhe Kwinana has no other shareholdings or 
directorships.  However, as per the CIPC info she is 
a 
director 
at 
South 
African 
Airways 
or 
SAA 
Technical, a PwC order client.  Please see if she is 
still a director there.  Please determine if the 
JVR…” 
That stands for joint business relationship on the evidence 
of Mr Mothibe. 
20 
“…with PwC will be material for Kwinana. (If the 
fees for Kwinana for the current JVR relationship or 
engagement with PwC exceeds 10% of their annual 
turnover the relationship will be deemed material 
for them.” 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 208 of 243 
 
Okay.  Now that is then sent by Nishan Pershad - you are 
now at the top of the page, on the 9 December 2015 to 
Lumka Goniwe.  That is your daughter who works at 
Zanospark with you, is that right? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It is entitled: 
“Department of Education Internal Audit Kwinana 
JVR query.” 
And it says: 
“Good morning, I trust all is well.  As discussed, 
10 
please find the queries from our risk management 
section.” 
So that is the query you saw previously and it is been 
forwarded to your daughter.  And then what your daughter 
responds with – and now you have go back to page 131, in 
an email halfway down here, Ms Kwinana, dated the 9 
December 2015 to Mr Persad is: 
“Good morning, Nishan, we have calculated our 
fees to be in the region of 6.1 million excluding VAT.  
I confirm that Kwinana and Associates’ turnover is 
20 
more than 50 million.” 
And then they go on to deal with …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I am sorry, you said 6.1 
million. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ja, I said 6 – I apologise. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 209 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   They ended up receiving 6.1.  I made 
the error, I apologise. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So this is your daughter just calculating 
an estimate, as I understand it.  
“We have calculated our fees to be in the region of 
4.1 million excluding VAT.  I confirm that Kwinana 
and Associates’ turnover is more than 50 million.” 
And then she deals with BEE certificates and confirms that 
10 
you are a non-executive director of SAA.  Were you 
involved 
in 
assisting 
your 
daughter 
with 
this 
email 
response at the time? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No because we went to go and check the 
tax returns of Kwinana and Associates which puts the 
turnover at a much lower figure than that.  Are you aware 
of that? 
MS KWINANA:   I am not aware, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You see, it puts - the Kwinana and 
20 
Associates tax returns said that the turnover was 10.5 
million for the year ending February 2015.  So when your 
daughter sent this email and was alerted to the fact that 
the PwC requirement was that it must not be more than 
10%, she stated here that the turnover is something that is 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 210 of 243 
 
very different to the turnover that appears in Kwinana and 
Associates’ tax returns.  Why would she have made – and 
it is an error of considerable magnitude because it is five 
times.  She says the turnover is five times more than what 
appears in the tax returns.  How could she have made such 
a glaring error? 
MS KWINANA:   I do not know, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You see, because of that false 
representation of the turnover it fell within the policy and 
so the arrangement could continue.  If she had gone back 
10 
and given the tax return information that Kwinana and 
Associates represented to SARS, then you would not have 
been able to enter into the relationship.  Do you accept 
that because 4.1 of 10 is much more than 10%.  Do you 
accept that? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair, I do not accept it.  As I have 
stated the reason, it depends on a relationship that you 
want.  There is a compromise in any relationship and, 
therefore, if they wanted to tender with us, as I said, even 
if we had zero turnover and in fact …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but I think Ms Hofmeyr is asking this 
question, on the basis of the correspondence from them to 
say they had a policy that went this way.  If you fell outside 
of - the turnover of Kwinana and Associates fell outside of 
that bracket that they were talking about then in terms of 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 211 of 243 
 
that policy Kwinana would not be able to enter into an 
arrangement with them.  Whether in terms of some 
discussions that could follow that they might not enforce 
that, I do not know, but in terms of that policy, do you not 
accept that Kwinana would not have qualified to continue 
with them? 
MS KWINANA:   Chair, these relationships, it is not a 
matter of qualification or qualifying or not …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just raise your voice please?  
MS KWINANA:   Sorry, Chair.  This relationship, it is not a 
10 
matter of qualifying or not, the 10% threshold may be in 
fact their guideline but I do not want to say if there was no 
overstatement of revenue or understatement of revenue, 
we would not have entered into this relationship. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, I accept that, Ms Kwinana.  Do you 
accept that that your daughter misrepresented to PwC by 
five times the relevant annual turnover for that year? 
MS KWINANA:   I cannot confirm that, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You cannot. 
20 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So if I show you the tax return will you 
be able to? 
MS KWINANA:   I will still not be able to confirm it. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So you cannot confirm.  If I show you 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 212 of 243 
 
the tax return it shows 10 million and I have shown you an 
email in which your daughter communicated 50 million.  
You will not confirm that she misrepresented the position 
five times to PwC? 
MS KWINANA:   I will not confirm, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Why would not be able to say that?  You 
would have all the facts in front of you. 
MS KWINANA:   I would have, Chair, to conduct my own 
independent audit and then come back to the Commission 
and confirm but, as I am sitting here, I am not going to 
10 
confirm that, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, but … 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the information reflected in the tax 
document would it not be the correct information? 
MS KWINANA:   I would have to conduct my own 
investigation, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That might not be necessarily the 
correct information, the one in the tax document. 
MS KWINANA:   Chair, I may have to conduct my own 
investigation. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but I am asking, the tax information 
that you have put into the  - you have given to SARS, 
would it not be the correct information? 
MS KWINANA:   I would have to recheck it, Chair, because 
also, even with SARS, for instance, you may put some 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 213 of 243 
 
incorrect information, you may have omitted something and 
therefore that is why I am saying I am not going to confirm, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us leave out the five times. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would you not concede that what your 
daughter – the information she gave was not correct in 
terms of the turnover of Kwinana and Associates and that 
time? 
MS KWINANA:   Chair, before I say the information that 
10 
she submitted is correct or incorrect, I would have to be 
given an opportunity to go and audit.  I do not want to say 
it is correct or incorrect, I am saying I need to go and audit 
before I can answer this question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So to the extent that she said 50 million, 
that does not sound to you like that cannot be true? 
MS KWINANA:   Chair, I need an opportunity to go and do 
my own verification. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So you did not make sure when the tax 
20 
return was submitted at the time that the requisite 
checking had been done? 
MS KWINANA:   Chair, I am going to go and do my own 
verification. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Kwinana, that was not my question.  
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 214 of 243 
 
My question was, at the time that Kwinana and Associates 
told the South African revenue Service that its annual 
turnover for that year was R10 567 581, did you not check 
that before you submitted the tax return? 
MS KWINANA:   Chair, I do not submit the tax returns for 
myself, I do not do the tax returns for myself.  I do check 
the tax returns, however, I am saying I need to go and 
audit and confirm if the figure that is stated here is correct 
or the figure that is stated in the tax return is correct. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Why did you not check before today? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Would those documents not have 
something that says I certify that the above information is 
correct?  And is it not signed by her? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   This one is not, it is an electronic filing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So – oh we have – this is something we 
have encountered before, we have to go and check, who 
was the Kwinana and Associates representative for SARS 
purposes? 
MS KWINANA:   I would have to go check and phone them 
20 
and find out who was the representative at the time. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Could it have been you? 
MS KWINANA:   I could have been me, I do not know. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed because that is the person who 
declares, Chair.  But let us leave the point.  I see that Ms 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 215 of 243 
 
Kwinana is not in a position to confirm for us today that her 
daughter made a misrepresentation  in that email.  How 
would your daughter have come to that 50 million figure? 
MS KWINANA:   I do not know, Chair, that is one of the 
things that I would have to audit. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I am sure that is something that 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, Ms Mbanjwa has got… 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Oh, sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Mbanjwa? 
10 
MS MBANJWA:   Chairperson, all the same, I am a bit 
puzzled with this line of questioning insofar as the 
daughter is supposed to have misrepresented the facts, 
Chair.  I just want to get confirmation that Ms Hofmeyr is 
still working within the mandate of the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, surely she is.  Yes, go ahead, Ms 
Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you.   
MS MBANJWA:   Thank you, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And just in terms of your earning out of 
20 
Kwinana and Associates for the period during which you 
did the joint business work, do you have any idea of how 
much you personally derived from Kwinana and Associates 
over that year?  That is December 2014 to December 2015. 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair, I do not have an idea. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 216 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   We provided in your bundle all of your 
personal bank account records for this period because it 
was important for us to establish not only that Kwinana and 
Associates had derived benefit from this relationship but 
also to give some quantification of the monies that came 
from Kwinana and Associates to you and we calculated that 
at about 1.5 million for that period.  Does that sound about 
right to you? 
MS KWINANA:   I also cannot confirm, Chair, I need to 
check. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Certainly.  Well, if at any point you want 
to dispute that, you do have the records, you can do the 
painstaking calculation that we did and certainly, Chair, I 
would invite Ms Kwinana to give us a further submission if 
she thinks our calculation is wrong. 
MS KWINANA:   Where is that – where is your calculation? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   It is in your bundle and it is just a series 
of bank statements from December 2014 to December 
2015. 
MS KWINANA:   Oh, so it is in the bank statements? 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  Okay.  Alright, now Nkonki – I am 
so close to the end I am getting excited.  Now Nkonki you 
also had a joint because relationship with, is that correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And there, as I have it, between 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 217 of 243 
 
September of 2015 and July of 2016 there was work that 
you did together at Transnet and Eskom and Kwinana and 
Associates was paid about 850 000.  Does accord with your 
recollection? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right.  But there was also a particular 
payment that Nkonki made to Kwinana and Associates in 
August of 2015.  Now I just want to pause there for a 
moment.  Remember we looked at the 28 September 2015 
board minutes a moment ago?  Remember I said that was 
10 
an important day because a lot was happening on that day 
in the board.  You were deciding to cancel the LSG Sky 
Chefs award, you were cutting the CEO’s delegation of 
authority and we saw you were deciding to give the whole 
audit work, all of the audit work to Nkonki.  Do you recall 
looking at those minutes a moment ago? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay, so that is 28 September 2015 and 
a month before that there is a payment that is made to 
Kwinana and Associates in a round figure of R300 000.  Do 
20 
you have any knowledge about that payment? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair and in fact that payment from 
Nkonki was going together with other payments from the 
other audit firm.  What happened, there was a fundraising 
event where you would buy cables, depending on the 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 218 of 243 
 
money that you want to buy the tables depending on the 
proximity of the person or the key person in the fundraising 
event.  So that money from Nkonki was not the only money 
that we received, we also received monies from other audit 
firms.  You may have seen the whole lot of other monies 
that was the fundraising event.  So basically the audit 
firms were buying the tables for the fundraising event. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   What was the fundraising event? 
MS KWINANA:   The fundraising event was for the Jacob 
Zuma Foundation who was the President at the time. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So you were doing fundraising as 
Kwinana and Associates for the Jacob Zuma Foundation? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, sorry.  
MS KWINANA:   The foundation was doing the fundraising.  
I was …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You were donating? 
MS KWINANA:   No, Chair.  Kwinana and Associates also 
donated …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is …[intervenes] 
20 
MS KWINANA:   And the black audit firms also donated.  
So Jacob Zuma Foundation was doing the fundraising 
event and the auditors were buying the tables but now 
because we – like we do not have a consolidated bank 
account and therefore it was decided by the Black Firms 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 219 of 243 
 
Forum – we called ourselves Black Firms Forum or ABA 
SA’s Practitioners Forum, so it was decided that the money 
will be deposited – the monies will be deposited to me and 
I would pay the money to Jacob Zuma Foundation for the 
tables that were have purchased, so that was the reason 
for the money. 
ADV 
HOFMEYR: 
 
 
Thank 
you. 
 
I 
appreciate 
that 
explanation.  It is different to the explanation that Ms 
Masasa was able to get from the then CEO of Nkonki.  She 
– but it is not – in fairness to you, Ms Kwinana, it is not 
10 
vastly different from yours.  What troubled us about the 
explanation we got from Nkonki is that they said it was a 
subscription fee that Nkonki was paying for the benefit of 
APS. 
MS KWINANA:   Yes, Chair, there was also a subscription 
fee.  There was a subscription fee where all the firms were 
put in together and then in addition to the subscription fee 
there was also now the actual money for the tables. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay, I understand that because we then 
investigated 
this 
whole 
APF 
and 
the 
fund 
and 
we 
20 
uncovered that there was no such fund at the time.  Were 
you just using that term loosely? 
MS KWINANA:   Me? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes when you said now that it was the 
APF because we then went to ABA SA’s Practitioners Fund 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 220 of 243 
 
and we found that they were deregistered before this 
payment was made.  So was this some other arrangement 
that arose out of it? 
MS KWINANA:  I said the Black Firms Forum which used to 
be APF before. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes. 
MS KWINANA:   Yes.  So in fact also the Black Firms 
Forum is not a registered name, so to say, you will not go 
to the CIPC and check the Black Firms Forum.  That is how 
we call ourselves as the advocacy group of the black firms. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I understand.  I understand, thank you 
for that.  Right, then I would like to just go to two final 
small matters before concluding aspects, Ms Kwinana, and 
these parts are going to be relevant to evidence that we 
traversed with Ms Myeni.  I understand from Ms Mbanjwa 
that you may not have followed that closely but it is 
actually related to matters that you were asked about in 
your Regulation 10.6 directive.   
 
The first one relates to the allegation, I will put it 
broadly, that Ms Myeni used to prepare false whistle blower 
20 
reports and you were asked in your 10.6 directive to tell 
the Chairperson and the Commission your knowledge about 
that and let us take you to what you said, if we can?  That 
is in your affidavit before the Commission in response to 
the 10.6 directive.  So you need to go to DD33 and it is 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 221 of 243 
 
page 5 of DD33.  Now we asked in the 10.6 directive, the 
Chairperson asked for you to address the allegations that 
Ms Duduzile Myeni – I am at the bottom of page 5 prepared 
false 
whistle 
blower 
reports 
against 
employees 
and 
management of SAA whom she wished to remove and your 
response to that in your affidavit is: 
“I have no way of knowing whether the whistle 
blower reports allegedly prepared by Ms Myeni are 
false or not.” 
Is that your evidence that you – you do not know whether 
10 
the reports allegedly prepared by her are false or not? 
MS KWINANA:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You see, Ms …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   There is the question of knowing 
whether the reports she prepared were false or not.  There 
is the question whether you have knowledge that she 
prepared certain reports.  Which one of the two do you 
know, which one do you not know? 
MS KWINANA:   I do not know any one of them, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You see, Ms Nhantsi – do you know Ms 
Phumeza Nhantsi? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Did you follow her evidence before the 
Commission? 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 222 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay, she said – and I am just going to 
quote now from her affidavit.   Chair, it is one paragraph, I 
do not think we need to go there but for records it is DD2 
page 22, paragraph 71.  If you want to go there, Ms 
Kwinana, we will.  But let me read it in, it is just her 
account.  She said - oh, apologies, DD2 at page 22 
paragraph 71.   You see we asked Ms Nansi the same 
question and in her affidavit she said: 
“Ms Yakhe Kwinana will be the right person to 
10 
address this as she was the one who informed us 
about Ms Myeni also going to the internet cafe, 
disguises as another person and sending damning 
whistleblower reports about anyone she wanted out 
of the way.   
After 
the 
whistle 
blowing 
reports 
she 
would 
pressurise Siyakula Vilakadi, the internal Chief 
Audit & Risk to investigate those implicated in the 
report or instruct him to appoint one of the firms, 
for example EY or ENS to investigate whoever was 
20 
mentioned in the report.    
After all the investigations she would push for those 
people to be suspended and dismissed.” 
Now that is Ms Nansi’s account of something you told her.  
Do you confirm that you told her that?   
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 223 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   No Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You don’t?  So is she just making this 
up? 
MS KWINANA:   She is making it up Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you remember saying the same thing 
at an interview with OUTA about eight days after you 
resigned from SAA? 
MS KWINANA:   I remember having an interview Chair and 
I don’t remember saying that Ms Myeni did prepare false 
whistleblower reports. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   What do you remember saying to them 
on this topic? 
MS KWINANA:   I would have to get the – I would have to 
get the transcription Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay but as you sit here now can you 
just help me with your memory, what do you remember 
having said on this topic? 
MS KWINANA:   I remember chair about the whistleblower 
reports and basically that is all I remember that we used to 
receive a lot of whistleblower reports from the Hotline or 
20 
from Ms Myeni herself and she would basically get the 
Whistleblower reports from the people, other people would 
refer to give her the information, basically. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So they – it was their information and 
then they would give the Whistleblower reports to her, is 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 224 of 243 
 
that what your understanding was? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay that would tend to indicate that 
there was nothing false, that explanation says there is a 
genuine whistleblower, they have got their facts but for 
some reason they want to get them to Ms Myeni rather than 
put them through the anonymous system that was created, 
correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay so in that scenario there wouldn’t 
10 
be any reason to suspect them being false, do you accept 
that? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes Chair, that’s why Chair I am saying I 
have no knowledge if the Whistleblower reports were true 
or false. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And is that what you recall having 
conveyed to OUTA at that meeting?   
MS KWINANA:   Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, now that meeting as I understand it 
was you had requested to meet with OUTA is that right? 
20 
MS KWINANA:   Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And then they subsequently, there was a 
second meeting that was a follow up meeting, correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Why did you request to meet with OUTA? 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 225 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   The reason why I wanted to meet them, to 
meet with OUTA is because they wanted to make an 
application for me, or also myself to be declared a 
delinquent director so the reason why I went to them, in 
fact I was advised by one of my lawyer friends to say I 
need to go to them so that I can clear the things that they 
may have against me, and in fact I managed to clear the 
whole lot of wrong information that they had against me, so 
it was a good thing that I did go and clear it with them, and 
in fact I told them that the reason why I am going to them 
10 
is not because I will be declared a delinquent director, the 
reason why I am going there is that of course I would have 
to protect myself legally, but the reason why I am going to 
OUTA is because I will not have money to incur the legal 
costs to get to the end result, which end result I know that 
I am not going to be declared a delinquent director.  That 
was the reason why I went there. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I understand.   Now Ms Kwinana we 
previously had evidence admitted on affidavit in Ms Nansi’s 
case when she gave evidence from OUTA and OUTA 
20 
confirmed that you het met with them and everything you 
have said now is consistent, that you called for the first 
meeting, that there was a follow up meeting, but they had 
long recordings from the meeting and they had – but the 
they had a summary, their own summary of it, in which 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 226 of 243 
 
their summary records that you told them something very 
different to what you have testified about today.   They 
said at that meeting you told them that Ms Myeni used to 
put in false whistleblower reports, does not jog your 
memory. 
MS KWINANA:   I am sure they misunderstood me Chair, 
maybe I wanted to say something but now because I said it 
in English the it lost the meaning because I speak Xhosa 
fluently.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right, so as you sit here today you can 
10 
confidently say you did not convey to them that Ms Myeni 
would 
put 
false 
information, 
incorrect 
information 
in 
Whistleblower reports that she prepared, correct?  
MS KWINANA:   Correct. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right, you see I am sometimes able to 
anticipate what – based on what you have told us and our 
investigations are likely to be the approach you take in the 
evidence.  On this one I thought you might say something 
like that, so what we did is we went and got the recordings 
from OUTA and we had them transcribed, so I would like to 
20 
hand up those transcriptions.  We didn’t have them 
previously, and I have to tell you I am going to ask you 
about two aspects of OUTA, that OUTA interview, and I can 
tell you Chair we have managed in the time available to 
transcribe one but not the other, we do have the recording 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 227 of 243 
 
of the other but all I can show Ms Kwinana today is the 
transcription of the one dealing with whistleblowers. 
 
So if I can hand that in and copy certainly also to 
Ms Mbanjwa, and to apologise for that error earlier.   
Thank you.  Have I given you the wrong one, sorry, there 
you go.  Chair if I can request that we enter this as Exhibit 
DD33A, not there’s no A, I have made that error, DD33.26. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say 53? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No 33. 
CHAIRPERSON:   33? 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes thank goodness we are not file 53.  
CHAIRPERSON:   33 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes point 26. 
CHAIRPERSON:   26.  The transcript of a meeting with Ms 
Yakhe Kwinana at OUTA offices, Johannesburg, 30 August 
2016 will be admitted as EXHIBIT DD33.26. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So there’s – it is a very lengthy 
recording, what we did was we extracted that part that 
dealt with the Whistleblower discussion and if you turn to 
page 3 of 10 you will see that that is where it is – sorry 
20 
internal page 3 of 10, do you have that Ms Kwinana? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay so this is the section of the 
Whistleblower discussion and Ivan starts speaking and 
then 
Ms 
Kwinana 
and 
then 
there’s 
another 
person 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 228 of 243 
 
identified as Rethabile and what happens is this is where 
the 
topic 
of 
the 
whistleblower 
discussion 
is 
being 
introduced and there’s an issue that occurs where people 
are talking about them feeling a bit scared actually and if 
you go over the page to page 4 of 10 you will see there 
Ivan says, in the 4 t h line, 
“I 
have 
death 
threats, 
I 
have 
received 
death 
threats.” 
And then Ms Kwinana you say the following: 
“One of the reasons why I am scared is that I do not 
10 
know the powers that be beyond, but the other 
reason is that it is difficult to bring a proof like for 
instance Dudu has got her hit list of people that she 
wants to remove and bring her own people.  We’ve 
got that and how she operates.   How she operates, 
she will go to internet cafe and write whatever 
information that she knows are correct and incorrect 
information and then she will email it to SAA 
Whistleblower from the internet cafe.” 
And then Ivan says: 
20 
“Which information?” 
And you say: 
“Like for instance – like for instance she will write, 
okay let me make an example, she will go to 
internet cafe whatever she knows about me, she will 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 229 of 243 
 
the correct information together with the incorrect 
information and now okay if I am an SAA employee 
she will send that to Whistleblower that is how she 
operates, she will send that to Whistleblower and 
after sending it to Whistleblower.” 
Ms Kwinana that I put to you is very different to what you 
said just now is what you conveyed to OUTA, do you 
accept that it is very different? 
MS KWINANA:   It is very different Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you have any reason to dispute this 
10 
transcript? 
MS KWINANA:   Chair this transcript I see that it is edited. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes. 
MS KWINANA:   And so – and I did, I was not taking the 
minutes myself and therefore I will definitely not be able to 
confirm with certainty if this is what was discussed, but 
what I am saying is I will not be in a position as I said 
before, I will not be in a position to know if the 
whistleblower is true or false. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No but that is not what ...[intervenes] – 
20 
sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, let’s start here, you have accepted 
that what you have said about what you know with regard 
to Ms Myeni’s connection with whistleblowers reports is 
different from what is said here, which one is true, is it 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 230 of 243 
 
what you said earlier on here or is it what is reflected here, 
which one is true? 
MS KWINANA:   This is what I said earlier on here Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what is true? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Are you saying that you never said what 
is reflected here when you met with OUTA? 
MS KWINANA:   I may have said it Chair not wanting to 
convey the message as it is.  As I was saying maybe if I 
was interviewed by OUTA in Xhosa I would be in a position 
10 
to articulate myself and reflect what I have just said in this 
Commission today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No Ms Kwinana please, I have listened 
to you speaking English on Monday, Tuesday and today, 
you speak English very well, I understand what you are 
saying, I don’t have a problem, I thinks Ms Hofmeyr 
understands you.  We understand you and when we speak 
to you, you understand us, it cannot be a question of 
language.  It can’t be. 
MS KWINANA:   Chair it could be a question of language, 
20 
also in this Commission.  Ms Hofmeyr has been asking, 
including you Chair, many times if I head Ms Hofmeyr, if I 
understood what she was trying to say.  You will be 
explaining Chair a whole lot of times. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes but I don’t think it is because of the 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 231 of 243 
 
language, it has not been because of the language, your 
command of English is very good, your understanding of 
English when somebody else is speaking English is very 
good.    
MS KWINANA:   Chair between this recording, OUTA 
recording, and what I have just said in this Commission I 
stand by what I have said in this Commission. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   But then – sorry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no it’s fine. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Then I would like to put it to you that 
10 
you went to OUTA with an intention to try and avoid being 
one of the defendants in the delinquent director application 
that 
they 
were 
considering 
bringing 
and 
then 
said 
something false to them about Ms Myeni to try and put 
yourself in a good light to avoid that, what is your 
response?  
MS KWINANA:  I don’t think the reason for me to be 
excluded 
in 
the 
application 
is 
because 
of 
the 
whistleblowers, it is because of the clarification of the 
incorrect things that they heard about me, like for instance 
20 
one of them was BNP Capital where they were thinking that 
I knew who the directors of BNP Capital because the 
director of BNP Capital is a co-director in another company 
with my cousin’s brother. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, Ms ...[intervenes]  
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 232 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   So basically those are the things that they 
had misinformation about.  I don’t think they are reason for 
them to exclude me is because of my lack of English.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, no, no Ms Kwinana that is not what I 
was saying at all.  I am not actually asking you about their 
reason, you could never know their reason, I am asking 
about what you went there to achieve, because what has 
been revealed now is that there’s a transcript of a meeting 
that you had with OUTA, eight days after you left SAA, in 
which you on two occasions make it very clear that what 
10 
Ms Myeni was including in these whistleblower reports was 
“incorrect information”, you say in your evidence today that 
is false, that you did not say that, and that you have not 
ever I understand your evidence to be had that knowledge 
that she was doing things and putting false information in 
Whistleblower reports, but if that is the truth then I put it to 
you, you – your motivation for then making up what is 
false, a lie, served your interests because it puts you as an 
adversary to her, painted her in a worse light so that you 
could escape being one of the defendants in the delinquent 
20 
director application. 
 
If that is not it Ms Kwinana how else do you explain 
if this is accurate the lie that lies here.  You were then 
lying 
that 
she 
used 
incorrect 
information 
in 
the 
Whistleblower reports. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 233 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:   Let me respond Chair for the last time.  I 
am saying this document you have just confirmed that it is 
edited, that is number one, and number two you have 
asked me that between what I have said here and what is 
in this document which statement do I stand for, I am 
saying Chair for the last time I am standing by the 
information that I have said in this Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   If it were to be found that you did 
actually say what is reflected here would you agree that 
then if what you have told us is true, namely that you don’t 
10 
know whether Ms Myeni was involved in preparing false 
reports will you not accept that then you were untruthful 
when you spoke to OUTA if it were to be found that you did 
say this? 
MS KWINANA:   Chair you know without firstly I wasn’t 
even informed that I am recorded and secondly here I am 
speaking under oath, there was no oath here Chair, and 
therefore when you say between what I am saying here 
today and what is stated here I am saying Chair I stand by 
what we have heard here before. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but that does not answer my 
question.  The fact that you may not have been speaking 
under oath at OUTA offices cannot change whether what 
you said is true or not is it?  Even if – in other words 
something doesn’t become true only because you are under 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 234 of 243 
 
oath.  When you are not under oath you can tell something 
that – you can be untruthful or you can be truthful.  Now 
my question to you was if it were to be found that you did 
says this at OUTA as reflected here, but now you are 
saying that is not true, what is true that you do not know 
anything 
about Ms 
Myeni 
making 
false 
whistleblower 
reports, 
would 
you 
accept 
that 
you 
were 
therefore 
untruthful when you said this to OUTA, if it is found that 
you did say this? 
MS KWINANA:   Chair this OUTA report, this report, as I 
10 
said it is edited, that is number one, number two Chair this 
report I was never informed that I am being recorded, and 
thirdly Chair I was never informed that this report will be 
used against me in any forum and therefore Chair I do not 
recognise this report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have asked you the same question two 
times, and each time you have not answered the question.  
I am going to ask it for the third time and the last time, and 
see whether you are going to give me an answer.  The 
question is if it were to be found that you did say what is 
20 
reflected in this report and now given the evidence that 
you have now given here would you accept that therefore it 
would mean that you were untruthful in what you said to 
OUTA about Ms Myeni? 
MS KWINANA:   Chair I beg not to answer that question. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 235 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   You don’t have a right not to answer the 
question Ms Kwinana, but we are going to move ahead, this 
does not do  you any good Ms Kwinana, it does not do you 
any good.  Continue Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, Chair I really don’t want to 
take more time, if we had time I would suggest that we play 
the recording but I am not going to suggest we do that 
now, we have been here the whole day.  What I want to 
propose is that we give Ms Kwinana the recording and she 
listens to it, she gets her own transcriber and if there is 
10 
any part of this transcript that she says is inaccurate she 
could let us know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, she can do a supplementary – an 
affidavit. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed because when transcribers say 
edited at the top it means they have gone through and they 
have changed scarred which appeared with two r ’s into 
scared, they are editing it for ensuring that there are no 
typographical errors, they are not editing to change the 
task which is to have an accurate reflection of the 
20 
document, but I can see Ms Kwinana is not comfortable 
relying on this, so we will make the recording available to 
her and she can let us now in a supplementary affidavit if 
she disputes the transcript that has become EXHIBIT 
ED33.26.    
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 236 of 243 
 
 
The last aspect of your interview there Ms Kwinana 
is what you had said about Talente Myeni, Dudu Myeni, 
Duduzilo Myeni’s son, in his involvement in BNP, do you 
remember 
what 
you 
told 
OUTA 
what 
is 
Mr 
Myeni’s 
involvement in BNP? 
MS KWINANA:   No Chair I don’t remember. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay, because your affidavit before the 
Commission – let me just deal with that, give me a moment 
– it is at page 6 of Exhibit DD33, you were asked again 
about the allegations that Ms Myeni’s son, Mr Talente 
10 
Myeni, was in a relationship with Mr Masotsha Mgadi, Mr 
Masotsha Mgadi was the person who was involved in BNP, 
did you know that, that Mr Mgadi was involved in BNP? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay, so the question was what do you 
know about the allegations that Talente Myeni had a 
relationship with Mr Masotsha Mgadi and your answer there 
on affidavit was I have no knowledge of the alleged 
relationship between Mr Myeni and Mr Mgadi.  So did you 
not tell OUTA anything about that relationship? 
20 
MS KWINANA:   I don’t remember Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay so you could have.    
MS KWINANA:   I don’t know, I really do not know, I don’t 
know what is it that I would have told OUTA because I 
really do not know. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 237 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you remember telling them that you 
had seen Mr Talente Myeni and Mr Masotsha Mgadi 
together at SAA? 
MS KWINANA:   Definitely no. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you remember telling them that they 
are likely – that they are associates, business partners? 
MS KWINANA:   No, I don’t know that. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you remember telling them that you 
had seen them in Sandton together? 
MS KWINANA:   No. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Okay, that is what appears in the 
recording of the meeting with OUTA.  We did not get it 
transcribed, 
there 
was 
insufficient 
time, 
we 
got 
the 
recording, we will provide it to Ms Kwinana and she can tell 
us why today she confirms under oath that she did not say 
those things whereas the recording indicates that she did. 
 
Chair I would then like to just go to the concluding 
aspects if I may, unless there is something further. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Kwinana we will make likely – we will 
20 
likely 
make 
submissions 
in 
due 
course 
through 
the 
Chairperson that seek to summarise the effect and content 
of your evidence over the last three days, and this is the 
opportunity where I indicate to you what the submissions 
are likely to be and you have an opportunity to respond. 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 238 of 243 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe before you do that Ms Hofmeyr, I 
am sorry, maybe I should just deal with this one thing 
which continues to be a matter of concern to me, with 
regard to Ms Kwinana’s evidence.   That is about that 
agreement Ms Kwinana between Slipknot and Ms Memela 
and the fact that you gave a wrong address there.  I heard 
you say something like maybe the reason why you put a 
wrong address was that you did not understand domicilium, 
is that correct? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes Chair, plus the fact that we have been 
10 
there for many years and therefore basically that is what 
would come to my mind. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You don’t mean that between 2013 and 
2015 whenever you were required to write your business 
address you would have written 92 President Park, that is 
not what you mean, is it what you mean?   If we go and 
check all documents between the time when you vacated 
92 President Park and 21 April 2015 are we going to find 
that whenever you were required to put in your business 
address or Slipknots address this is the address you put all 
20 
the time? 
MS KWINANA:   Maybe Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe? 
MS KWINANA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You think you may have done that? 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 239 of 243 
 
MS KWINANA:  I may have done that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, but in that case it wouldn’t have 
been about domicilium would it have been? 
MS KWINANA:   It would be the business address. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MS KWINANA:   It would be the business address Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It would have been the business? 
MS KWINANA:   It would be the business address. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but your business would not have 
been operating from that address for quite some time isn’t 
10 
it?   
MS KWINANA:   Yes Chair but as I said I have been there 
for a long time, hence I haven’t even forgotten the 
business address as it is now including its postal address. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you think you would have forgotten 
the most recent address or the current address where 
Slipknot was operating from, and you remember that old 
address?  That can’t be. 
MS KWINANA:   It is possible Chair because in 2015 I 
think our – the offices of Kwinana & Associates the offices 
20 
of Kwinana & Associates were in Lynnwood and Slipknot 
Investments the address that we had been using for 
Slipknot Investments is the old address. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well when Mr Ndzeku was giving 
evidence and he had initially I think said that the 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 240 of 243 
 
agreement between himself and Ms Memela’s mother had 
been entered into in 2015, when certain things were 
pointed out to him by Ms Hofmeyr he conceded that that 
agreement could not have been concluded in 2015, as I 
recall. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He conceded that it was concluded in 
2019.  Are you going to concede that this agreement could 
not have been concluded in 2015 Ms Kwinana?  
MS KWINANA:   The agreement Chair was ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   This one? 
MS KWINANA:   It was concluded in 2015 Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you.  Ms Kwinana so I am going 
to put the propositions to you to give you an opportunity to 
respond. We will likely make submissions in due course 
that while you served at the Board of SAA particularly 
during the period late 2014, 2015 you created a climate of 
fear and intimidation in SAA against those who opposed 
you.  Do you dispute that? 
20 
MS KWINANA:   I dispute that Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You accused those who stood in the way 
of the unlawful 30% set aside policy of insubordination and 
treason, do you dispute that? 
MS KWINANA:   Sorry what is your question Chair? 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 241 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You accused those who did not – sorry 
you accused those who stood in the way of the unlawful 
30% set aside policy of insubordination and treason. 
MS KWINANA:   That is not correct Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You unfairly favoured AAR and JM 
Aviation in the components tender, do you dispute that? 
MS KWINANA:   I dispute it Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You awarded a tender to them worth 
more 
than 
R1billion 
when 
they 
should 
have 
been 
disqualified in that tender, do you accept that? 
10 
MS KWINANA:   I dispute it Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You got payments for favouring them in 
this way to the tune of R4.3million, do you dispute that? 
MS KWINANA:   I dispute it Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You received – sorry you have made up 
a story that is clearly false involving confidentiality policies 
and 
hand 
delivered 
statements 
in 
order 
to 
try 
and 
legitimise the benefits that you received for favouring AAR 
and JM Aviation in this way, do you dispute that? 
MS KWINANA:   I dispute it Chair. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And you helped Ms Memela to hide the 
fact that she also got a benefit from this because of the 
way in which she assisted JM Aviation, do you dispute 
that? 
MS KWINANA:   I dispute it Chair.  
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 242 of 243 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   We will also argue in due course that 
you have been a dishonest witness Ms Kwinana, do you 
have a response to that? 
MS KWINANA:   I also dispute that Chair. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And finally that as an accountant, an 
auditor, you benefitted personally from payments that the 
joint auditors of SAA made through business relationships 
with you, your company, while they were auditing SAA and 
while you were making decisions to keep appointing them 
without going through a tender process, do you dispute 
10 
that? 
MS KWINANA:   I dispute that Chair.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you Chair, those are our final 
questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much.  Ms Mbanjwa I am 
grateful for you that you came up with the proposal that 
you came up with in terms of no re-examination but you will 
be submitting something, I think it is helpful particularly 
because we have finished much later than we thought we 
would, but Ms Kwinana thank you very much for coming to 
20 
give evidence and thank you for your cooperation both you 
and Ms Mbanjwa in terms of assisting the Commission to 
sit even on a Saturday to try and finish its work because 
there is not much time left. 
 
Thank you very much to Ms Hofmeyr and her team 
07 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 301 
 
Page 243 of 243 
 
for all the hard work and making yourselves available even 
on a Saturday, thank you very much. 
 
We are going to adjourn, on next week I will be 
hearing evidence relating to Denel, that is just for the 
information of the public. 
MS MBANJWA:   Apologies Chair, I just wanted the 
timelines about those submissions on re-evaluation, is it in 
order if we submit them on or before the end of November? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that would be fine. 
MS MBANJWA:   Thank you. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, we adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 9 NOVEMBER 2020 
