 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
 
DAY 298 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 120 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 3 of 120 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 04 NOVEMBER 2020 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe they can see whether they can 
move it to a place where it will not be a problem for you.  
Maybe if – I just want it to light somewhere. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair can I say if – if it is useful to have 
it I will just make sure I use that screen so then I will be – 
I just will not look that way.  It will – it will not be an issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no I want you to look where you 
10 
are comfortable to look.  They have just moved it a bit now.  
How is it? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Oh that is better. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is that better? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Much better thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Okay.  Thank you. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair. Chair today we receive 
the evidence of Ms Duduzile Myeni.  She is legally 
represented and so if we could take a moment for her legal 
representatives to place themselves on record. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Yes.  Okay that is – that I think you 
will come over – you could do it from where you are Mr 
Masuku if that is fine because it will save us some time. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  [Inaudible].  To stand talking to Deputy 
Justice.  I will just sit and speak to you.  But now that you 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 4 of 120 
 
have you permitted me to have a seat. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I am permitting you, yes, yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Yes together with Mr Buthelezi we 
appear for Ms Myeni. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:    And Chair you will notice that we 
were not exactly – where she is we will be giving her 
advice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
ADV MASUKU SC:    So if we do not intend to interrupt 
10 
you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:    Or interrupt the flow of the evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   But if there is something that really 
crops up. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:    We will politely indicate that we need 
to speak and obviously if she needs to speak to us. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV MASUKU SC:    She should be free to indicate as 
well. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Okay. 
ADV MASUKU SC:    And with your leave. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 5 of 120 
 
ADV MASUKU SC:    Which perhaps phone her and hear 
what she says. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No, no that is alright.  Well you talk 
about interrupting the proceedings Mr Masuku I can say 
that if your last appearance here was – is anything to go 
by these proceedings will be very smooth.  I think you only 
interrupt when it is really necessary. 
ADV MASUKU SC:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You do not just interrupt.  So I think if 
your last appearance is anything to go by that is when you 
10 
appeared for Mr … 
ADV MASUKU SC:    Van Rooyen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Van Rooyen I think ja.  Everything went 
very smoothly. 
ADV MASUKU SC:    I am glad you say that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I appreciate that very much. 
ADV MASUKU SC:    Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay alright.  I do not see Ms Myeni 
now so there may have been some technical problem that 
has arisen. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair I… 
ADV MASUKU SC:    Chair just – sorry just one last thing.  
I am not here from tomorrow and Friday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And on Friday. 
ADV MASUKU SC:    Mr Buthelezi will be here. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 6 of 120 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Will be here.  Okay no that is fine.  That 
is fine. 
ADV MASUKU SC:    Thank you. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair I have been informed that there 
has been a connection problem.  It seems that Ms Myeni 
has lost bandwidth.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So we are going to need to have to 
establish … 
CHAIRPERSON:  What the problem is. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  What the problem is and endeavour to 
reconnect. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay I think let - let me adjourn 
then and hopefully it will not take long and then hopefully 
when we start everything will be smooth. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay it looks like the technical problem 
20 
has been sorted out. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed Chair 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  As I understand it Ms Myeni has now 
been provided with a laptop by her legal team and we hope 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 7 of 120 
 
that that will greatly assist todays’ proceedings.  So we are 
indebted thank you for making those arrangements. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes well her picture is also much more 
clearer now. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That it was before. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Ms Myeni can you hear me? 
MS MYENI:  Yes Chairperson I can hear you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay thank you.  We can hear you well 
10 
as well.  Thank you.  Okay let us start.  Do you – let us do 
the oath – please administer the oath or affirmation.  Ms 
Myeni you might have to – you might have to come in at 
some stage when your health situation permits to confirm 
everything under oath in the commission but for now we 
will do the oath via video link.  Okay.  Please go ahead. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MS MYENI:  Duduzile Cynthia Myeni. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objections into taking the 
prescribed affirmation? 
20 
MS MYENI:  I do not have any objection. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly affirm that the evidence 
you will give shall be the truth; the whole truth and nothing 
else but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and 
say, I truly affirm. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 8 of 120 
 
MS MYENI:  I solely affirm. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you very much.  It seems that 
there is a delay.  Is it supposed to be like that? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair as I understand it it is a product of 
the relevant quality of Ms Myeni’s bandwidth.  So what we 
have been asked to do today is just try and ensure that we 
work with the delay.  So we ask questions and we 
anticipate that there will be a delay in the relay for her 
answer and then we also wait after the answer to ask the 
next question.  I understand that is going to be the best 
10 
way to facilitate the proceedings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine.  Okay.  You may 
proceed then. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  Ms Myeni I would just 
like to ask a few questions about your set up today 
because it is important that we just get certain things on 
record.  Can you confirm that you are alone in the room 
that you are currently present in? 
MS MYENI:  I am in self-isolation Ma’am.  I am being 
assisted by my representative from the Mabuza Attorneys.  
20 
There is always a day helper in the place I stay.  But what 
happened to me was the – the notification about Covid-19 
exposure happened while the day helper was in the house.  
So she is here with me and the representative from Mabuza 
Attorneys. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 9 of 120 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you. 
MS MYENI:  So that is why today I have not been able to 
come before the commission because at the moment I am 
just observing progress on my side.  I am also ensuring 
that I am taking necessary precautions because I have not 
felt anything as yet but the person – the other person is 
confirmed to be positive. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Ms Myeni we – we really 
appreciate the efforts that you are taking to be available 
today.  Then the other thing I need to just confirm with you 
10 
is that you will not receive any messages during the 
evidence that you give and if you do receive messages or 
communications you will alert the Chairperson to that fact. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  I apologise Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry one second. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  I apologise Chair I cannot understand 
that – that she would be asking to make that condition 
because we are here.  We communicate with her on sms.  I 
do not understand why she would be required to tell you 
what our communication with her is.  If the idea is that we 
20 
should not communicate with her unless we tell you what 
we are communicating with her I do not understand that 
condition. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What do you – what do you want to say 
Ms Hofmeyr. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 10 of 120 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Chair I was just wanting to explain the 
background to the question.  You see if there is a witness 
present in the room with us they do not communicate with 
their lawyers while they are in the room.   
If there is a need for the lawyers to communicate 
with the witness there can be a request for an adjournment 
or any such thing.  The question was not intended to limit 
in any way those types of communications.  
But as we have done with at least one other 
previous witness whom we have addressed in evidence on 
10 
Zoom we always ask these questions because there is a 
level at which because of the remoteness we need an 
undertaking from the witness that during her evidence she 
will not be receiving messages from anyone else because 
that would diminish the quality of her evidence if she was 
receiving communications during this.  So that is the basis 
for the questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Masuku. 
ADV MASUKU SC:  No I am – appreciate the answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV MASUKU SC:  But I do want to make it clear that as 
legal representatives we are entitled to have – we interject 
when we need to speak to her or she is entitled to also 
raise the fact that she would like to consult with us.  And 
that we should not be restricted as far as that is 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 11 of 120 
 
concerned. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no I think based on what both of you 
have said I think Ms Hofmeyr ’s concern is that there should 
be no assistance to the witness in regard to the evidence.  
Obviously there would no such assistance from the legal 
team side.  But maybe the idea – should the idea not – the 
arrangement not be that when you have a need to talk to 
her we can adjourn and then you can talk to her.  Would 
that be fine? 
ADV MASUKU SC:  That will be fine. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:    And I can assure you Chair it will not 
be a you know a frequent issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, no you – that I accept without 
any problems ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Yes.  Thanks Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Okay.  Thank you.   Ms 
Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think Ms Myeni was in the process of – 
20 
or was about to respond when Mr Masuku wanted to say 
something.  Do you want to remind her of your question is 
case she has forgotten? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes.  It was just to give her confirmation 
that she will not receive communications while she is 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 12 of 120 
 
giving evidence and if she does that she will simply alert 
us 
to 
that 
fact. 
 
Because 
we 
have 
catered 
for 
communications between Ms Myeni and her lawyers which 
we will manage in the way that we have discussed.   
MS MYENI:  That is noted and thank you for that.  But 
Chair I must also thank you very much for allowing me to 
appear before you through this process and there is an 
appreciation on my side that I had to ensure that I appear 
as per the subpoena that I received and I think you for 
allowing me to appear through the Zoom.  Let me assure 
10 
you Chairperson that my phone is off. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MS MYENI:  So I do not think I will be receiving any 
messages from anyone. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  And I think the representative from the office 
of the Mabuza Attorneys is not here where I am sitting. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  Also I think to ensure that he is also safe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
MS MYENI:  In case I am  
CHAIRPERSON:  Positive. 
MS MYENI:  Positive. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No thank you very much Ms Myeni.  
Thank you for taking – making all the efforts you have 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 13 of 120 
 
made to ensure that the fact that you may have been 
exposed to somebody who has tested positive did not 
result in the commission not sitting.  So I understood your 
request and had no hesitation in granting the request that 
you 
give 
your 
evidence 
via 
video 
link 
so 
that 
is 
appreciated. 
MS MYENI:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.   
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you and then Ms Myeni the one 
other thing I would like to do is just from a logistics point 
10 
of view confirm that you have the files that were delivered 
for you this morning once we were notified yesterday about 
your situation.  Do you have those files available to you? 
MS MYENI:  Yes I do. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  What we are going to deal with mainly 
today is a file that on the spine of it there will be two of 
them marked DD34 and they bear your name.  So I suggest 
that you have those readily available to you.  And then I 
will ask the Chair to enter that into the record as Exhibit 
DD34.   
20 
MS MYENI:  I do have it in front of me. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I have got Ms Hofmeyr a file written 
DD34[a].  It is written Exhibit DD34[a] I guess it should 
Bundle DD34[a]? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Correct Chair. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 14 of 120 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Let us start with that just so that 
we will speak from the same page.  On the spine of that 
file I am changing Exhibit to Bundle – Bundle Dd34[a] so 
that is it.  When we say Bundle DD34[a] that is the file we 
will be referring to.  Maybe we should for the sake of 
completeness do the other one as well? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Will it be 34[b]? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  So the other file which is written 
10 
Exhibit DD34[b] on the spine will now be Bundle DD34[b].  
Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair and then… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Alright thank you. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  When we come to specific documents 
within it as we have been doing we will identify them as 
DD34.1, 2, 3 or 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  As we follow the index. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Ja 
they 
will 
be 
Exhibit 
DD34[a.] 
20 
whatever. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  DD34[b.] whatever. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair we are indebted. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 15 of 120 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So then I would like to start if we can in 
Bundle DD34[a] because Ms Myeni that commences with 
the affidavit that you provided to the commission in 
response to the Chairperson’s directive requiring you to 
provide an affidavit.  When I direct you to page numbers 
they are going to be the page numbers in the top right 
hand corner of a page.  So could you please go to page 1 
and Chair that will be Exhibit DD34.1 it is the affidavit of 
Ms Myeni in response to your 10.6 Directive.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes after you have got her to make the 
10 
necessary confirmations you will ask me to admit it as an 
Exhibit? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ms Myeni if you will then – have you got 
page number 1 in front of you? 
MS MYENI:  001. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Correct. 
MS MYENI:  It is DD34 DCM 001. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  indeed.  Thank you Ms Myeni.  I tend to 
20 
leave off the full DD3 DCM I will just identify the number of 
the page when we go through today’s proceedings.  But do 
you have that in front of you?  If you will say yes. 
MS MYENI:  I have it in front of me. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you yes. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 16 of 120 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  What she will do Ms Myeni is that for 
example where your affidavit starts which is written 002 
she will not even say 002 she will just say page 2.  Where 
it says 003 she will just page 3.  So whenever she says… 
MS MYENI:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  She will mention the number without the 
00 before.  You understand? 
MS MYENI:  Thank you Chairperson I do understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And then Ms Myeni if you could turn to 
10 
page 11 and could you confirm whether that is your 
signature on that page? 
MS MYENI:  Yes it is my signature. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And then can you confirm that this is the 
affidavit that you deposed to and that its contents are true 
and correct? 
MS MYENI:  Yes it is my affidavit and the contents are 
correct. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Chair if we could then enter 
it as Exhibit DD34.1? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Taking off the [a] now? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Oh apologies Chair yes because on the 
numbering there is no [a] but let us do DD? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja let us keep the [a]. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  DD34[a].1. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 17 of 120 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Point 1 ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The affidavit of Ms Duduzile Cynthia 
Myeni starting at page 2 is admitted as Exhibit DD34[a].1. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  Now Ms Myeni in this 
affidavit that you provided in response to the Chair ’s 
directive you indicated that you were going to invoke your 
right to silence at todays’ proceedings.  And you also made 
certain claims regarding pending appeals etcetera.  What I 
would like to know from you to begin with is whether you 
10 
are persisting in claiming on a basis of a right to silence 
that you do not want to answer the questions that are put 
to you today? 
MS MYENI:  Please repeat your question? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  In the affidavit that you prepared and 
that we are looking at at the moment in response to the 
Chairperson’s 
10.6 
Directive 
you 
indicated 
that 
you 
intended to invoke your right to silence when you came 
before the commission and you would do so in order not to 
answer any of the questions put to you today.  And I am 
20 
seeking clarity whether you persist in that position? 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson I came before this commission in 
terms of its rules.  I filed the affidavit indicated – indicating 
that while I respect the commission and wish to assist the 
commission I am in a very difficult position.  Because 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 18 of 120 
 
before me there is a court order directing that I be charged 
in this regard.   
I think I am anxious that I am compelled to forego 
my constitutional rights not to incriminate myself.  So in my 
affidavit I have referred the commission to the documents 
relevant to the issues that were raised by the commission.  
I did that Chairperson because I highly respect this 
commission.   
I always act responsibly and I am willing and I have 
– I committed to present myself to this commission so that 
10 
we deal once and for all with everything that has been said 
and all the false accusations and insinuations about me 
that have been made in my absence.   
But now the problem I have is that the court 
judgment which I have been advised to appeal is before 
the commission and it is known.  It is public and therefore I 
would like to exercise my rights and answer where I can 
and be silent where I can.  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Yes Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair.  If I could suggest at 
20 
this point that it might be appropriate to just delineate what 
we as the legal team of the commission understand the 
legal position to be in relation to Ms Myeni’s invocation of 
the right to silence.   
But which I understand her just to have said is 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 19 of 120 
 
actually coupled a willingness to answer some but not all 
questions. And so I would just with your leave like to 
navigate that issue momentarily.  It will not be a question 
to Ms Myeni it will be to address you Chair on the issues 
so that we can have direction for the way forward. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, no before we do that I just want to 
say to you Ms Myeni that the commission would not seek to 
deliberately 
and 
intentionally 
infringe 
any 
of 
your 
constitutional rights.   
Where any of the rights you wish to rely on are 
10 
applicable the commission would seek to respect those 
rights.  We have had occasions where some witnesses 
have taken more or less the same attitude you have taken.  
One was I think Mr Vincent Smith.   
I think another one was Mr Mokhetsi and they were 
represented by counsel.  With regard to both of them with 
the advice of their counsel I think Mr Mokhetsi was 
represented by Mr Mpofu.  In the end I think there was only 
one or two questions that they – they refused to answer 
with the advice of their counsel for the rest they were able 
20 
to answer I think partly because they wanted to just tell 
their side of the story which they might not have had a 
chance to tell.  So we – you know where it is a right that is 
applicable the commission would seek to respect that right. 
But as I say you know in the past there have been 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 20 of 120 
 
instances where people want to use that right but also 
want to be helpful – as helpful to the commission as 
possible.  And as I say in both cases we ended up with a 
situation where you know there may be – there may have 
been one or two or three questions that they were not 
comfortable to ask and there was no issue from the 
commission 
but 
they 
gave 
the 
answer 
to 
all 
other 
questions.   
My own understanding of what you are saying is that: 
1. You want to assist the commission as much as 
10 
possible but 
2. You would like to try and strike a balance and protect 
your rights in regard to certain questions.  You 
certainly are not saying you do not want to answer 
any question at all.  That is my understanding. 
So having said that I need to say well maybe if Ms 
Hofmeyr you and Mr Masuku have not had a chance to 
discuss this issue it might be better if there is a discussion 
between the two teams.  Because if there is agreement 
that that might make things smooth obviously there is no 
20 
agreement then if there is going to be argument then it 
might be on a very narrow, narrow point or issue.  So my 
suggestion is that maybe I should adjourn so that you have 
that discussion. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Certainly. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 21 of 120 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then you can approach me in 
chambers to indicate the outcome.  Is that alright? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Myeni we are going to adjourn to 
allow Ms Hofmeyr and your legal team to have a discussion 
about how we are going to proceed with a view to 
respecting your rights where they are applicable in these 
proceedings but nevertheless being able to get as much 
assistance from you as possible.   
So they will discuss and they will come to me in 
10 
chambers and talk to me and then when we resume you will 
be told what the situation is.  Okay? 
MS MYENI:  Thank you Chairperson.  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES: 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, Chair.  We are ready to 
proceed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I understand that the discussions between 
20 
yourself and Ms Myeni’s legal team resulted in an agreement 
...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...on the way forward. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed it did. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 22 of 120 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes-no, 
thank 
you 
very 
much. 
 
I 
appreciate and thank all parties for reaching an agreement 
on that.  And I understand that Ms Myeni has been briefed on 
the way forward.   
COUNSEL:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Thank you. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you.  Ms Myeni, when did you 
become chairperson of South African Airways? 
MS MYENI:   In 2013.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   And ...[intervenes]  
10 
MS MYENI:   2013. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And prior to that, did you hold the position 
of acting chairperson? 
MS MYENI:   In December 2012, indeed. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And when you were appointed, you gave 
an undertaking to the Department of Public Enterprises.  Do 
you recall that? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, matters pertaining to SAA.  I 
would really prefer to invoke my right to silence on any 
matter pertaining to SAA.  May I qualify why I am saying this 
20 
Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   [No audible reply]  
MS MYENI:   You will recall, let me tell you that...  Sorry, you 
will recall Chairperson that OUTA, the private organisation 
that took me to court together with the Pilots’ association.  
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 23 of 120 
 
They for...  Or they opened a case, I think it was in 2017, 
early 2017.  It was before the start of the – this Commission, 
Chair.   
 
For some reason, which we did write to the Commission, 
to enquire about the documents that would be used by a 
private organisation with the letterheads and the logos of the 
Commission of Inquiry.  The majority of documents...   
 
In fact, almost every file from OUTA were files coming 
from the Commission.  My legal representatives wrote a 
letter to enquire if the Commission or the Chairperson has 
10 
given permission to use the documents being a private 
organisation as evidence in the case against me.   
 
Almost every question 
pertaining to South African 
Airways was contained in those documents.  Therefore, I 
prefer, Chairperson with your permission, to invoke the right 
to be silent on the matters pertaining to South African 
Airways.   
 
There is a standing judgment which was handed on the 
27t h of May by Judge Tolmay wherein OUTA and the Pilots’ 
Association wanted me to be declared a delinquent director 
20 
for the decisions of a collective board of South African 
Airways which were then put on my shoulders as one person.   
 
Therefore, 
Chair, may I 
not 
answer any 
question 
pertaining to South African Airways?  Especially those 
questions that OUTA as the private organisation, not a state 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 24 of 120 
 
organ, that had access to the Commission’s documents.  
With your permission Chairperson, I would like not to 
answer.   
 
But I am prepared Chairperson to continue question-by-
question to say I invoke my right to silence.  I think 
Chairperson that is what I would like to do.   
 
And I also want to emphasise Chairperson that I came 
before you because I have respect for you.  I have respect 
for the Commission.  I have respect of the work you are 
doing.  I also, Chairperson want to ensure you that I am a 
10 
law abiding citizen.   
 
Therefore, I really do not want to incriminate myself and 
answer to questions which the judge, NPA to investigate.  
Whether the judge found against me or not but she referred 
all matters pertaining to collective decisions by the Board of 
South African Airways to be laid over me or to be given as 
my responsibility alone.   
 
Therefore, Chairperson with your permission, may I 
invoke the right not to answer the questions with your – with 
respect Chairperson? 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thanks, Ms Myeni. 
MS MYENI:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   My understanding is that both the 
evidence leader, Ms Hofmeyr and your legal team, after 
discussing the matter of how we would proceed with a view 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 25 of 120 
 
to striking a balance between you assisting the Commission 
but the Commission also respecting those of your rights that 
may be applicable to these proceedings. 
 
My understanding is that they reached an agreement 
that you would invoke your right not to incriminate yourself in 
regard to specific questions as opposed to seeking to invoke 
to refuse to answer all questions that might relate to SAA. 
 
My understanding is that, the expectation is that you can 
be asked question that relates to SAA.  Some of those 
questions, it may be that you maybe you may invoke that 
10 
right but others, it might not be applicable because they 
might not be incriminating.   
 
So that is my understanding but I see Mr Masuku is 
ready to indicate to me what their position is.  Mr Masuku. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Sorry, Chair.  I think that understanding 
of you may be overstated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   We specifically...  Our agreement is that 
she would assert her right, the questions and topics she 
believes are topics or questions that might be a subject of 
20 
interest by the law enforcement agencies right now. 
 
The explanation of the SAA matter is quite... it falls 
exactly within the agreement.  She has invoked her right to 
silence in totality. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 26 of 120 
 
ADV MASUKU SC:   We do not understand that to be outside 
the ambit of our agreement as far...  Maybe we will take it...  
We will put it that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Because my understanding of what 
Ms Hofmeyr says, was that she... that does not stop her from 
asking questions about SAA.  If she wants to ask questions 
about SAA ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   ...she can ask questions about SAA but 
10 
then the response is perfect in the sense that it says about 
SAA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   The documents coming from this 
Commission ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   ...to be used in the court application 
that has now resulted in her being a subject of investigation 
by a court order. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MASUKU SC:   By... which is sanctioned by a court 
order. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Now, the scope of it is not know 
because if you look at the order that was made by 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 27 of 120 
 
Judge Tolmay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   It says everything about SAA that was 
covered in that application.  Must be send for the – must be 
referred to the NPA for the NPA to investigate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   So I do not believe that her answer is 
inconsistent with the agreement. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Because the agreement was that she 
10 
would in fact invoke her right even though that does not stop 
the Commission from asking questions that they want to ask. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that...  I certainly did not 
understand the agreement that way.  Subject to argument, 
my inclination would be that she could invoke the right not to 
provide an answer to specific questions. 
 
But not to say:  I am not going to answer any question 
on any SAA issue at all.  So subject to hearing argument, my 
inclination would be.   
 
There would be questions that she could answer without 
20 
incriminating herself in respect of which she could not invoke 
such a right but there would be questions where she will be 
entitled to invoke her right and her right would be respected 
by the Commission.  It is a question of which ones, which 
questions fall under which category.   
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 28 of 120 
 
 
So let me clarify this.  Ms Myeni, is the position that, at 
least in terms of what you wish to put it as what you prefer in 
terms of what you would wish is that, you not be asked 
questions on SAA or if you are asked questions, you would 
be allowed not to answer them.   
 
But in regard to any other matters such as matters that 
might relate to Eskom or BOSASA or any other matters that 
are not SAA, you do not have a problem.  You can answer 
questions on those.  Is that correct? 
MS MYENI:   Perhaps for the record Chair, I can repeat what 
10 
I have said.  OUTA collaborated with the Commission and got 
all the documents and the questions that are contained in all 
the letters that I received from the Commission.   
 
OUTA is a private organisation and OUTA was able to 
use all what is contained on the documents that I am 
expected to answer today.   
 
And they relied on the information that they got with the 
watermark of the Commission.  All their documents, it was 
not a hidden thing.   
 
Therefore, Chairperson as – I think...  I listened to 
20 
Masuku SC and I listened to you Chairperson.  It is accurate 
that I would like to invoke my rights on matters pertaining to 
South African Airways for the reasons stated that there is a 
judgment before me for collective decisions that were took 
as the Board of South African Airways. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 29 of 120 
 
 
There is a judgment that was handed down that says 
there must be further investigation and NPA could possible 
charge me for those decisions. 
 
Therefore, I would prefer not to answer anything 
pertaining to South African Airways, Chair.  And you are 
indeed correct to say I do not prefer to say anything 
pertaining to SAA. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but my question went further than 
that.  It seems obvious but I want to have clarity to have 
certainty.  It seems obvious that you are not seeking to 
10 
invoke the same right in relation to matters that do not relate 
to SAA such as, maybe BOSASA and Eskom.  I just want to 
have certainty that that is the position. 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, the rest of the questions, we will 
deal with them as we go.  With your permission Chairperson, 
we will deal with each question as we go that has nothing to 
do with South African Airways.  Thank 
you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Ms Hofmeyr, do you want to 
say something? 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, indeed Chair.  There does seem to be 
a misunderstanding about the agreement.  So I think it is 
preferable just to state what our understanding of the legal 
position is. 
 
And then I do want to address personally Ms Myeni’s 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 30 of 120 
 
allegation or suggestion that there has been some sort of 
collaboration between the Commission and OUTA visa vie 
her trial because there was correspondence about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Maybe before you do that, let me 
say this.  Ms Myeni, I saw in the – I think in your affidavit a 
reference or a concern or a complaint about the fact that 
OUTA used documents that it seems to have obtained from 
the Commission.  I was hearing about that, I think, for the 
first time.   
 
But I do not know when they obtained the documents 
10 
and I do not know what process they would have followed.  I 
assume they would have followed some process.   
 
But generally speaking, once the documents... a witness 
has given evidence in the hearing, the documents become 
public documents.   
 
It is only before that that they are not public documents.  
So but once witnesses have given evidence about those 
documents they become public documents.  So but I think Ms 
Hofmeyr will say something about that as well. 
ADV 
HOFMEYR: 
 
 
Chair, 
I 
see 
my 
learned 
friend 
20 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, Mr Buthelezi. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:   Thank you, Chair.  Sorry, Chair.  I would 
like to expand on this point regarding these documents used 
by OUTA. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 31 of 120 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
ADV BUTHELEZI:   Because I was the one who actually 
picked it up. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:   The rules of the Commission, Chair.  
Rule 11(3) says the following: 
“No person may disseminate or use documents of 
the 
Commission 
without 
the 
Chairperson’s 
permission.” 
 
And after we sent correspondence, inquiring as to how it 
10 
is that OUTA came to be in possession of the Commission’s 
documents to the extent that they were able to use them.  
We accept Chair that documents are public documents.  We 
can pick them up on the website. 
 
However, if somebody would then to discover them in a 
discovery bundle it would imply, in our view, that this has 
been done with your consent. 
 
And after the response was not forthcoming as to say:  
Can you guys give us a confirmation as to whether these 
documents 
were 
indeed 
documents 
provided 
by 
the 
20 
Commission.   
 
We then assumed that OUTA would not break the law 
and use the Commission’s documents without the permission 
of the Chair. 
 
And this is now the apprehension that arises from 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 32 of 120 
 
Ms Myeni to say, if this Commission then participated in the 
process of her being declared a delinquent director, it the 
creates this apprehension to say then that this Commission 
is participating in other processes outside the law.  Not to 
say outside the law but OUTA is not a law enforcement 
agency.  That is the first point.   
 
Now it present you Chairperson with the bad dilemma to 
say, if you now say today you are not aware that these 
documents are used in this sense but the correspondence is 
there to the Commission. 
10 
 
This means that then, people in the Commission may not 
have declared to the Chair that there has been such an 
inquiry.   
 
Well and that is the essence of why Ms Myeni now has 
this issue with regards to answering questions as well with 
regards to this particular point of SAA. 
 
And just to expand on another point here.  The judgment 
of the Pretoria High Court with regards to Ms Tolmay...  
Ms Myeni, of the delinquent application.  It is a very open-
ended judgment and it is all encompassing on all things SAA. 
20 
 
Because the referral to the NPA for investigation and 
prosecution says this matter is referred and all things 
thereto, one can assume.   
 
So our advice then to Ms Myeni is the following that:  
Look, we are holistically exposed on all points.  And she 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 33 of 120 
 
being a lay person is none the wise to the fact one.   
 
She can ascertain what is self-incriminating and what is 
not.  All factual questions, like the first question you had for 
you Chair:  What date were you appointed?   
 
But anything that goes to a second and tertiary level 
beyond that, we cannot keep raising our hands and say do 
not answer that, do not answer that, do not answer that.  
Because we do not know what the scope of what the NPA 
investigation is right now.   
 
And then to take the point slightly further Chair.  We 
10 
have then said:  Look, you have to answer other questions 
as they come.   
 
But before warn Chair that what is likely to happen from 
this point forward, we are going to invoke the right not to 
self-incriminate by virtue of the fact that there are currently 
media reports as recent as this Sunday, saying that she is to 
be arrested. 
 
Now we will be failing in our duties not to warn our client 
to say:  Well, rather you say nothing.  And we do not want to 
be contemptuous of the Commission.  But we do not even 
20 
know what she is being investigated for.  
 
It could be issues around BOSASA.  It could be issues 
around Lathuze(?).  It could be a whole lot of issues.  So for 
the protection of our client Chair and not to be ...[indistinct].   
 
We have just said, let us limit to what we say in as much 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 34 of 120 
 
as we can.  But we are here to participate but we have this 
cloud and sword hanging over our necks. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  I have already said what I have said 
about documents that have been at a public hearing being 
public documents, as I understand the position.   
 
The regulations have got a particular provision and the 
Commissions Act has a provision that says the proceedings 
of the Commission happen in a public hearing. 
 
So that is what we understand to render all documents 
that have been placed before a public hearing to become 
10 
public documents as soon as they have been the subject of a 
public hearing but before that, it is a different situation.   
 
So on the face of it, if OUTA obtained documents that 
had already been the subject of a public hearing that might 
not have needed my consent but if it was before that, they 
may have needed my consent. 
 
I, certainly, have no recollection of giving any consent 
about that but I do not know whether they obtained 
documents after they have been used in a public hearing or 
before. 
20 
 
But to the extent that it may be necessary, it might be 
important to just get the facts of what happened in regard to 
that.  Yes, Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, Chair.  It is going to be 
important just to traverse a bit of law. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 35 of 120 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Because what happened thus far in the 
engagement with Ms Myeni and her legal team is, different 
rights are being elided with each other and it is very 
important that we understand the difference between them 
because Chair, as you have indicated this morning, certain 
rights are applicable in these proceedings but others are not.   
 
So let me begin with the right to remain silent.  The right 
to remain silent is a right that accused persons have under 
Section 35(3)(h) of the Constitution. 
10 
 
Now that is a right and it reads as follows that: 
“It gives every accused person a right to a fair trial 
which includes the right to be presumed innocent, to 
remain 
silent 
and 
not 
to 
testify 
during 
the 
proceedings.” 
 
And that means, the proceedings in respect of which 
they are an accused.  So that is the ambit application of the 
right to silence.   
 
The right to silence as a consequence does not apply in 
these proceedings.  What does apply in these proceedings is 
20 
a privilege against self-incrimination and I will explain briefly 
how that becomes applicable in these proceedings. 
 
But I do just want to give you Chair the reference to the 
case which makes it clear that the right is confined to a 
criminal trial and does not give a basis for a person to be 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 36 of 120 
 
exempted from answering a question in other proceedings. 
 
There are numerous cases on that but the one I draw 
your, the Chair’s attention to is Thatcher v The Minister of 
Justice, 2005(4) SA 543 (C) at paragraphs 93 and 94.  So 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The paragraphs? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   93 and 94, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So importantly, the right to silence does 
not have an application here.  I highlighted a moment ago 
10 
that there is a privilege that applies in these proceedings 
and so let me move to that. 
 
Section 3(4) of the Commissions Act says in essence 
and of relevance of this argument that: 
“The law relating to privilege as applicable at a 
criminal trial shall apply to a person summonsed 
before this Commission.” 
 
Any commission and this Commission today.  Now that is 
a privilege that you find in Section 203 of the Criminal 
Procedure Act and: 
20 
“It is a privilege that applies to a witness in criminal 
proceedings who shall not be compelled to answer 
any question that may tend to expose him or her to 
a criminal charge.” 
 
What is important about the test is, it is focused on the 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 37 of 120 
 
answering of a question that may tend to expose a person to 
a criminal charge. 
 
Now our courts have in a number of judgments fleshed 
out what the test is that should be applied when such a 
privilege is invoked.   
 
So just to summarise again.  That is a privilege that any 
witness who comes before this Commission is entitled to 
invoke because the Commissions Act specifically gives 
recognition to that privilege. 
 
Now when it is invoked, there is a particular test with 
10 
implication.  And the key judgment there Chair is the 
judgment of Magmoet v Jansen van Rensburg and Others.  
And the citation there is 1993(1) SA 777 (A) and the 
appellant division there sets out the principles from page 
819 of the judgment. 
 
And Chair, I submit that there are four important 
principles about that privilege.  The first is that: 
“It 
is 
a 
personal 
right 
to 
refuse 
to 
disclose 
admissible evidence in terms of which a witness may 
refuse to answer a question where the question may 
20 
tend to expose them to criminal charge.” 
 
The second important point is that: 
“The privilege must be claimed by the witness and 
the court (or the commission as the case may be), is 
then required to rule when it is invoked.” 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 38 of 120 
 
 
And then the test is set for how discretion is exercised 
by the body in respect of whose proceeding it is invoked and 
the principle is as follows: 
“Before allowing the claim, the body must be 
satisfied from the circumstances of the case and the 
nature of the evidence the witness is called upon to 
give, that there is a reasonable ground to apprehend 
danger to the witness from being compelled to 
answer.” 
 
Again Chair, because it is going to be the key-test, I 
10 
submit, for today’s proceedings.  The question that must be 
answered is whether... 
 
Because of the circumstances of the case and the nature 
of the evidence that the witness is called on to give, the 
question will be:  Is there a reasonable ground to apprehend 
danger to the witness from being compelled? 
 
I am going to digress for a moment from Magmoet to 
other cases because they further fleshed out how that test is 
applied.  The first is a case of S v Carneson.  And that is a 
judgment of 1962(3) SA 437 (T) and the relevant passages 
20 
are at 439H.  So in an effort to flesh out, well what does it 
mean that it is reasonably tends to apprehend a danger, 
right?  The court there says it must be real and appreciable 
and not imaginary and unsubstantial.  So that is the first 
bit of further guidance. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 39 of 120 
 
 
And then the second bit of further guidance is that a 
mere remote or naked possibility of legal peril will be 
insufficient and that is the English case of R v Boyes 
1981(1) VNS 331.   
So, Chair, it is our submission that Ms Myeni 
certainly has been granted a privilege, as any witness who 
appears before this Commission, is granted to in respect of 
specific questions that there is a reasonable basis for 
apprehending would tend to incriminate her to then decline 
to answer.  It is not capable of application to topics and 
10 
that is the difficulty with, in our submission, the way that 
Ms Myeni proposes to approach the questioning because 
as I understand her request to you, Chair, it is that the 
topic of SAA is such that she will not answer questions.  
That cannot be so on the application of the law.  Each 
question must be carefully evaluated for its tendency to 
incriminate her and where that tendency has a reasonable 
basis, a ruling will be made by you, Chair, with respect, 
and if there is that necessary tendency, not a remote 
possibility, but a reasonable tendency, then the privilege 
20 
will be entitled to be claimed and no answer will be 
compelled thereafter. 
So, Chair, we submit against those principles the 
way we propose proceeding today, is each question will be 
put to Ms Myeni and if she in response to a question in 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 40 of 120 
 
both the right or her privilege against self-incrimination, an 
assessment will then have to be made.   
The question that Ms Myeni responded to, to raise 
this issue, was a question that asked her whether she 
recalls having made an undertaking to the Department of 
Public Enterprises when she was appointed as acting 
Chairperson in December 2012.  Chair, you will make a call 
in each case on whether that is the type of question 
reasonably likely to tend to incriminate her by her answer 
and on each occasion a judgment will have to be made. 
10 
Chair, I would then just like to deal with the facts in 
relation to this suggestion that there has been some 
improper receipt of documents from the Commission.  
Chair, we have requested the correspondence to be made 
available to us.  I have a recollection of it, so I must just 
make it clear, I am going on memory now.  This did occur 
just around the time of the OUTA trial which was at the end 
of 2019 but what one must recall is a great deal of South 
African Airways evidence was led in the June of that year 
before this Commission.   
20 
We certainly did receive a letter, it was a letter that 
expressed concern, there were documents that seems to be 
– well, that had been disclosed in discovery.  I think it was 
at that stage that bore the watermark of the Commission 
and there was concern about how those documents had 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 41 of 120 
 
been obtained and our response was twofold, as I recall it. 
You see, the watermark is placed on the documents 
when they are placed on the website of the Commission 
and so the fact of the watermark in a sense is a key 
indicator that is already public, right?  We do not 
watermark all the pages for our investigative purposes.  
But 
we 
also 
said 
but 
please 
identify 
the 
specific 
documents, send us the specifics documents because we 
would like to assess if there are any that do not, to our 
knowledge, fall within that category and I have no record of 
10 
a response to that request.  We will go back to our records 
and if my learned friends have an indication that there was 
a response to our request that greater identification of the 
documents be provided so we could take the matter further, 
they certainly can present that correspondence to us but 
over the break I will make sure I get copies so that they 
are available, if this point is going to be pressed at all. 
But a final submission, if I may, even if, unbeknown 
certainly to me, Chair, and it appears to you, somehow 
documents got from the Commission to OUTA, in the OUTA 
20 
trial.  That is not a basis to invoke the privilege against 
self-incrimination.  The law says there is a very particular 
test that must be applied and we submit to you, Chair, that 
is the test that should govern today’s proceedings. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes from what you say it seems you are 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 42 of 120 
 
saying by the time OUTA asked for documents the hearing 
relating to SAA had taken place sometime before that. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So a lot of those documents would have 
been public  documents by then. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed and as I understand it, the issue 
that was raised by Ms Myeni’s lawyers was we have seen 
documents with the watermark of the Commission, explain 
how this can be possible.  And, of course, the watermark is 
there when the documents become public and the evidence 
10 
had been led and then we asked, just to be cautious, 
please 
identify 
the 
specific 
documents 
that 
you 
are 
concerned about and my knowledge is there was no 
response to that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  I do not know whether it 
will be Mr Masuku or Mr Buthelezi?  Oh, you want to stand.  
Ja, okay, you want to feel comfortable. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Mr Masuku we will just sanitise, we do 
that every …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Somebody must just sanitise.  Well, Mr 
20 
Masuku, I must just say this to you.  When I was still in 
private practice, one of the courts I used to appear in was 
called the Industrial Court and it was permissible for 
lawyers to address the Presiding Officer seated but I used 
to want to stand because I felt I presented my argument 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 43 of 120 
 
much better standing. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Yes, that is true, Chairperson.  But I – 
the chairs are a bit low and I am feeling a little strange. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   I need to stretch a little bit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, that is fine. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   So I prefer to… 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is fine. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Deputy Justice, we are not going to 
rehash the law. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   It is not a helpful premise from which 
to deal with the matter, as I said.  The first issue is the 
Commission has to be fair to Ms Myeni.  Commission is 
aware in the judgment issued by Justice Tolmay that all the 
issues that resulted in her being declared a delinquent 
director, on all those issues the court directed the NPA to 
gather all the evidence in that case and thereafter decide 
whether to criminally charge her. 
 
So before you is a witness who is an axe hanging 
20 
over her head and part of what makes a good witness in a 
fact-finding connection is just the freedom to speak freely 
or rather, the freedom to speak freely.  Well, ja, that is 
what I mean. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, the freedom to speak freely must 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 44 of 120 
 
be a very good freedom. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:    A strong freedom. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   So it is the ability to speak freely on 
issues that the Commission is looking for information on.  
She is not speaking freely because there is a court order 
directing that she be investigated and charged criminally.  
What she has done is to tell the Commission that this is 
the situation she finds herself in, she calls it a dilemma. 
 She says I want to assist the Commission reach 
10 
the truth but I face a dilemma because on one hand I may 
have facts that are relevant to what the Commission is 
looking for.  On the other hand, giving that information to 
the Commission exposes me to criminal – or forces me to 
be disadvantaged that in a criminal case I may well have to 
face the possibility that I may not exercise my right, 
silence of my right not to incriminate myself fully. 
So she is not saying that she is not going to answer 
questions.  If Ms Hofmeyr wants to ask questions on SAA 
she must do so.  If her answer is I invoke my right not to 
20 
incriminate myself for fear that given the judgment of 
Tolmay, in future I might be criminalised.  That should be 
the – it may well be that the answer is what – is the answer 
as I suggest. 
But then where are we going with it because part of 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 45 of 120 
 
what this Commission has to do is to look at the witness 
and say we created a fair environment for this witness to 
speak freely about matters that pertain to the Commission.   
And so we are not suggesting that there is a blanket 
right to refuse to answer questions and I do not believe 
that that is what she is saying.  She has given an answer 
that will determine how she moves forward with questions 
that she may be asked on SAA. 
In other words, if the next question is going to be 
an undertaking, if that undertaking – I have no idea what 
10 
the undertaking is referring to but if that undertaking – if 
the question about an undertaking may well set her up for 
a question that may result in a charge that that undertaking 
was breached and that breach was a criminal offence, then 
of course she is entitled to …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   It might be an undertaking to perform 
her duties as a director to the best of her abilities. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Yes, yes, that is fair enough.  So we 
do not know what the undertaking is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I also do not know, I am just saying… 
20 
ADV MASUKU SC:   But I do think that you have a witness 
whom you must accord the dignity that you have accorded 
all the witnesses and part of that dignity is that you are 
made aware that there is this axe hanging over her head.  
And I understand that this Commission may well have 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 46 of 120 
 
descended into a cross-examination environment but we 
have to appreciate the importance of what she has just told 
you about the fact that there is a real fear based on a real 
judgment of a real judge that the real NPA will in the future 
charge her with crime arising from her activities as a 
Chairperson.  So you really want to find the truth of this, 
have that in your mind as you ask her questions on SAA.  
If she affords you the answers, fair enough, but she has 
the right to invoke her right to privilege – I mean, the 
privilege against self-incrimination, she has that right. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Limited, as it is… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Let us be aware that you do not place 
her in a position of unfairness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Because these proceedings do result 
in a great deal of prejudice to witnesses who are otherwise 
assisting the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, what I can tell you, Mr Masuku, is 
20 
that certainly from my side and I think the same would be 
said in regard to Ms Hofmeyr, I do not think there is any 
intention to be unfair to her or anybody, you know?  
Certainly the idea is for me to treat witnesses with fairness 
but, of course, one has got to strike a balance.  Being fair 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 47 of 120 
 
does not mean that you will not be firm if you need to be 
firm. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   No, I… 
CHAIRPERSON:   And, of course, it does mean that 
sometimes when you think you are fair, the witness might 
think you are unfair, somebody else might think you are 
unfair.  That is fine also, you know, but the commitment to 
try and be fair to all witnesses is there and the attempt to 
try and make it a reality is always going to be there and  - 
but, as I say, there may be cases where I think I am being 
10 
fair and the witness thinks differently.  Somebody in your 
team thinks differently.  That is normal, that is fine, but 
there would be certainly an intention to carefully look at 
areas where her right – her privilege not to incriminate 
herself 
should 
be 
correctly 
invoked 
and 
should 
be 
respected.  There will be other cases where she might 
think it applies and maybe I think differently but certainly 
the attempt is going to always be – strike a balance. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Bearing in mind what the test is between 
20 
respecting her rights and making sure that as far as 
possible the work of the Commission continues without her 
rights being infringed. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Yes and all I want to end by saying, 
Deputy Justice, thank you for the assurance that you have 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 48 of 120 
 
always treated my witnesses fairly.  But what I do 
emphasise is the fact that on the issues that she has 
flagged and issues that are – as I said, there probably are 
Hawks waiting outside this building to arrest her. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   That is what we have heard in the 
morning. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   So there is a real fear with the 
witness when she is being asked to answer questions on 
10 
these topics. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   And at the back of your mind and even 
as you exercise your discretion as to whether or not to 
grant her the privilege of that, be fair  to her because this 
story is not going to end today, it is not going to end the 
Commission.  We know the story will go to the criminal 
courts where she will be able to speak a bit more freely 
because she now has to defend herself. 
 
So what I am asking the Commission to do is to be 
20 
fair to her a bit more in the sense that even as you strike 
that balance, understand that there is a real hammer over 
her head. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Which hammer is that judgment of 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 49 of 120 
 
Tolmay’s. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   And real reports about real police 
officers looking for her in order for her to be arrested for 
these things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   So let us not create a difficult thing 
for her. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, I do not know about the be 
fair part to her …[intervenes] 
10 
ADV MASUKU SC:   No, no, no, all I mean …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I mean, that might be [inaudible – 
speaking simultaneously] 
ADV MASUKU SC:   All I mean, Deputy Justice, that 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Take into account her real concerns. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Yes, take into account that and in the 
exercise of the discretion afford her the benefit of that light 
and say to yourself well, look, I mean, there is in fact a 
real danger that she is going to a criminal court case 
20 
involving these very issues you are dealing with.  Perhaps 
that is the forum where she should be dealing with them.   
Ms Hofmeyr can ask as many questions as she 
wants about SAA, if the answer is look, you want me to 
answer questions that I am going to – that the answers that 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 50 of 120 
 
may be used in future against me in a criminal case, that 
danger is real.  It is not just real, it is possibly imminent, 
from what we have read in the papers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   So we would – that is all really we are 
asking you to do, to just strike a balance but understand 
what she had told you is the basis and the premise from 
which she is answering questions in any other matter that 
may well be a matter of interest to the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
ADV MASUKU SC:   So I am not debating the law with Ms 
Hofmeyr. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, no. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   I think she can… 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I appreciate that, thank you, Mr 
Masuku. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Oh, the last thing, Chairperson, on the 
issue 
of 
documents 
that 
have 
been 
used 
by 
the 
Commission, I think that issue will be resolved when all the 
documentation that involves communicating with a private 
20 
entity and how the – how OUTA ended up having these 
documents is going to – it is not helpful to try and argue 
the case right now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no, that is …[intervenes] 
ADV MASUKU SC:   In any event Mr Buthelezi may well 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 51 of 120 
 
address that tomorrow or the day after tomorrow if the 
matter proceeds at all. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine. 
ADV MASUKU SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Hofmeyr, I see we are at nine 
minutes past one but I think you should respond if you wish 
to respond before maybe we take the lunch break. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, Chair.  Just two brief points 
in response, if I may.  The first is just to also emphasise 
that Regulation 8.2 of the regulations of this Commission 
10 
also provided double protection in a sense to witnesses 
because what it makes clear – it actually took me some 
time to work out how the privilege in the Act operates 
together with Regulation 8.2 because what Regulation 8.2 
says is any answer that you give in evidence in this 
Commission is not admissible in a later criminal trial 
except 
for 
a 
trial 
related 
to 
perjury. 
 
Right, 
I 
am 
paraphrasing, but that is the essence of it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And it was not entirely clear to me how 
20 
that lives alongside a privilege to invoke whenever you 
want a not answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And what I resolved is likely to be the 
way to read those together, is the witness who is aware of 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 52 of 120 
 
the privilege, invokes it and is entitled to invoke it in the 
appropriate circumstances when the test is applied.  But 
there will be occasions where a question might not be 
anticipated as being incriminating or a witness might come 
before you not aware of that privilege and it is in those 
circumstances that there is even an additional protection, 
that nothing that can be said here is admissible as 
evidence in a criminal trial except for in relation to the 
crime of perjury.   
 
So, Chair, that is just an additional protection that 
10 
the 
Commission 
works 
with 
in 
order 
to 
make 
its 
determination and in the final point I wanted to make is 
just to refer, as I think Chair has already this morning to 
your previous ruling when this issue was raised with Mr 
Mokhesi.   You see there, Chair, as I understand your 
ruling, it was directly in line with the legal authorities that I 
have addressed you on.  It required the privilege to be 
invoked 
in 
relation 
to 
specific 
questions 
and 
the 
proceedings were conducted on that basis and there is 
also an importance of parity of treatment across witnesses 
20 
in this Commission and so that, I submit, Chair, would be 
another consideration that you would bear in mind in 
making 
your 
determination 
whenever 
the 
privilege 
is 
invoked 
here. 
 
Thank 
you, 
Chair, 
those 
are 
our 
submissions. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 53 of 120 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, that is fine.  We are going to 
proceed after lunch – I know that there was a time when Mr 
Masuku was still addressing me when Ms Myeni was not 
appearing on the screen, so I do not know whether she 
nevertheless was able to hear Mr Masuku as he was 
addressing me even though she was not appearing on the 
screen or whether she could not hear.  Ms Myeni, were you 
able to hear when you were not appearing on the screen?  
It looks like she cannot hear me.  No, she cannot hear me, 
so I think there is something wrong with the – can you hear 
10 
me now, Ms Myeni?  She is speaking but we cannot hear 
her. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, I think you may have muted 
yourself, if you just – yes, there you go. 
MS MYENI:   I can hear, Chairperson, very well.  I was 
hearing you all along. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.  And did you hear your counsel 
when he was addressing me, Mr Masuku? 
MS MYENI:   I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, alright. 
20 
MS MYENI:   I did, Chairperson, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.   
MS MYENI:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As I understand the position based on 
Mr Masuku’s address and Ms Hofmeyr ’s address, the 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 54 of 120 
 
position is that, Ms Myeni, you will be asked questions 
even on SAA, okay, and in terms of your responses, there 
may be questions where you might revoke your privilege 
not to incriminate yourself and therefore say that you 
would like not to respond to that question or answer that 
question but the expectation, certainly from my side, is 
that there would be other questions which you ought to 
have no problem with or in respect of which I would not 
expect the privilege not to incriminate yourself to be 
invoked but, from your side, you will do – you will exercise 
10 
your rights, as you understand them, in regard to the 
questions that you wish to invoke it.   
If Ms Hofmeyr submits that that is not a question 
where you can invoke that privilege, I may hear argument 
and make a ruling whether your privilege may be invoked in 
regard to that question or not and if I make a ruling in 
regard to a particular question that you must answer, that 
would be the ruling.  There may be others where I say no, 
you are entitled not to answer and then we will see as we 
go along but, from your side, you will protect yourself as 
20 
you wish and your legal team is here, at any stage they will 
also indicate to me if have something to say.  You 
understand that?  Do you understand that, Ms Myeni?  That 
delay is long, I think she does not hear me sometimes.  Ms 
Myeni? 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 55 of 120 
 
MS MYENI:   Yes, I can hear you very well now.  Yes, 
Chairperson, thank you, I understood. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
MS MYENI:   What the Chair was saying and thank you 
very much, we may proceed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright.  We are going to take 
the lunch break now, it is about quarter past one.  We will 
resume at quarter past two.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes Ms Hofmeyr, are we ready? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you Chair, we are indeed.  I 
understand from my learned friend over the break that 
there is an aspect that he wishes to address you on, so if I 
could hand over to him for a moment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, no that is fine. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:   Thank you Chair.  Firstly, Chair I would 
like 
to 
politely 
to 
excuse 
Mr 
Masuku, 
his 
transport 
arrangements force that he leave now, because he had to 
rush back to Cape Town. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay no that is fine. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:   Chair with the greatest of respect, 
firstly I would like to say we say, and personally my view 
as well as Counsel, this is not motion court, and this is not 
a platform for counsel to be the one arguing between 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 56 of 120 
 
themselves.  So, in as much as I make the submission, I 
make it with a heavy …[intervenes].  
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry Mr Buthelezi, I don’t know why, 
it’s very dark, once again where you are there on that side, 
much darker than it was – okay, alright when Ms Hofmeyr 
comes back we’ll just check whether that will disturb her or 
whether it should be that side, that light, okay, ja. 
ADV 
BUTHELEZI: 
 
 
So, 
Chair, 
the 
nature 
of 
my 
submissions are not to provoke a debate between Ms 
Hofmeyr and myself but our intention is to move us 
10 
forward, having issued, upfront what our reservations and 
concerns are.   
Now, the first of these, Chair, we’ve now said Ms 
Myeni wishes to invoke the right to silence, however, we, 
in our discussions have now discovered that, I think there 
may have been a misunderstanding with regards to SAA 
and we’d like to unbundle this misunderstanding and give 
grounds from where it emanates from.  Ms Myeni had 
already answered the question as to when she was 
appointed as Chair, it was a question about SAA, and she 
20 
answered it.  The difficulty arose in the subsequent 
question 
that 
asked, 
do 
you 
remember 
taking 
an 
undertaking?  Now, the nature of the question, when it 
says, do you remember making an undertaking, is in itself 
open ended it could go either way to an undertaking  that 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 57 of 120 
 
was, either not upheld and an undertaking that is a subject 
of a controversial point around her.   
So, we can not to dictate to Ms Hofmeyr how to ask 
her questions an in the way it’s asked and what questions 
to use but we then unpacked it to realise that, because the 
question 
had 
said, 
do 
you 
remember 
making 
an 
undertaking to the Department, then it leaves us open and 
we take the caution that we took to say, look, in that case 
then that question leaves us open.   
So, 
we, 
in 
making 
the 
submission 
to 
the 
10 
Commission in the affidavit were upfront in stating that we 
are restricted in what we have answered we haven’t come 
and ambushed the Commission with the fact that these are 
the points that we will be relying upon because our bone 
fide isn’t relying on that point, are upfront but the day that 
we submitted the affidavit, states clearly, on 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 
issues I have these restraints.  Now we want Chair, to say, 
we want to take this piecemeal approach of question by 
question and allow Ms Hofmeyr to proceed.   
What we are wary of is, will three days be enough 
20 
for the Chair to make a ruling on every question and we 
want to frame it in a way that says, look we’ve said, 
specifically with the questions that you’ve sent us, we’ve 
got discomforts in these 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 areas.  Anything else 
you want to traverse you’re at large to do so.  
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 58 of 120 
 
So, we don’t object, so we are not asserting a 
blanket right to silence and I think that’s the point that we 
don’t want the Chair to be under the impression that Ms 
Myeni came here to assert a blanket right to silence, that 
is not correct 
 
Secondly, Chair, Ms Hofmeyr raised the points 
about the test and the right to silence and we say to her 
yes, 
that 
is 
correct, 
that 
is 
the 
test 
and 
we 
qualify…[indistinct 5.17] because the test asked the two 
crucial questions, do we have a real and appreciable 
10 
apprehension that prosecution may follow and we say ours 
if founded on a Court Judgment that has pronounced us as 
people who may be prosecuted.  So, it’s not fictitious, is it 
real, is it not naked, is it not too much, it is real.   
Mr Agrizzi is arrested as we speak, and he testified 
about Ms Myeni. So, we are not framing things that are not 
tangible, we’ve got tangible reasons as to say, why we 
raise these issues.  So, we would like to propose – not 
propose but suggest – because I can’t keep coming to 
object ad I don’t want to coming to – we’ve lost an entire 
20 
morning having made little progress Chair, to say, would it 
be possible, given that we’ve been upfront with everything 
that we are about and what is of concern to us, that the 
line of questioning be mindful of that and if the question 
says, do you remember making an undertaking, it’s going 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 59 of 120 
 
to trigger that we are, that we’ve lost an hour to trying to 
resolve to say, if the question is, you made an undertaking 
on this date saying A, B, C, D then it’s clear to Ms Myeni to 
say, is this what she considers herself, incriminating, is 
this what she considers, she may be silent on or is this 
something she’s comfortable to answer because from 
where I stand and from what I know she’s comfortable to 
answer many, many questions and she wants to answer 
many, 
many 
questions, 
however, 
we 
do 
have 
those 
disclaimers Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think, what we may consider doing is 
maybe 
allow 
Ms 
Hofmeyr 
to question 
her 
and 
note 
questions where she seeks to invoke the right and the 
privilege not to incriminate herself and then Ms Hofmeyr 
continues, so that we are able to make as much – as much 
progress as possible on those questions where she’s able 
to answer. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:   Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then later today or tomorrow, we 
might have to come back to the questions that she – in 
20 
respect 
of 
which 
she 
invoked 
the 
privilege 
not 
to 
incriminate herself and look at those and if I need to make 
a ruling, make a ruling but to avoid a situation where a 
question is asked she invokes her privilege and then 
there’s an argument, then a ruling, then the next one, same 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 60 of 120 
 
thing.   
So, it may be that we do it that way, Ms Hofmeyr 
could ask as many of the questions she would like to ask 
as possible and then those that Ms Myeni – those in 
respect of which she says I would like to – not to respond 
to, answer that question and to invoke my privilege not to 
incriminate myself, we note and then can deal with later, 
together with others that she might – in respect of which 
she might adopt the same attitude. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:   Thank you Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, thank you.  Ms Hofmeyr, what do you 
think of that suggestion? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair, from our side we have no 
difficulty with that proposal.  I actually think, it will be 
unlikely that a ruling will be necessary and so let us go 
through it, provided, at a point I get clarity as to Ms 
Myeni’s reasons for invoking the privilege.  It is likely that 
we will simply move on.  So, I think there’s every chance 
that there will be speed and efficiency. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, not that’s fine.  Okay you may 
20 
proceed. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you.  So we’ve had the debate 
already but the question that I asked, I just want to be 
clear again, Ms Myeni, what approach you take to it, 
whether you are willing to answer it, given the debate 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 61 of 120 
 
that’s taken place today and the clarification about what 
the legal test is. So, the question was, whether you 
recalled having given an undertaking to the Department of 
Public Enterprises on the day that you were appointed as 
acting Chairperson of SAA? 
MS MYENI:   I don’t recall. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I’d like to take you to…[intervenes]. 
MS MYENI:   I recall the letter of appointment and a phone 
call as an acting Chairperson, that I received in December 
when there were resignations. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Right, then I’d like to take you, if I may, 
to that undertaking and for that purpose you will need to go 
to the second file that contains your Bundle, so you’re 
going to need DD34B in front of you and the page we’re 
interested in, is page 1240. 
MS MYENI:   DD34? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  B.  
MS MYENI:   B? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MS MYENI:  Did you say DD34B?  
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have you got it? 
MS MYENI:   I have, 34B. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MS MYENI:   Yes, Chairperson, I have. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 62 of 120 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Now, this document, 
Ms…[intervenes]. 
MS MYENI:   Sorry what – sorry Chairperson, I didn’t get 
the section, I still have the file DD34B. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So, you will find it under tab13 in that 
file and the page number is 1240. 
MS MYENI:   Yes, Chair, I have it. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Is that your signature on the page. 
MS MYENI:   Yes, there is a signature, it’s my signature. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And given that you didn’t have a 
recollection of it, might I suggest that you read in to the 
record what you signed confirmation of on that page and 
then just for the record purposes I see the date on this is 
2012/12/07, that’s the 7 t h of December 2012 which I think 
was the date you indicated earlier you’d been appointed as 
acting Chairperson, is that right? 
MS MYENI:   Yes, it is correct. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, so if you’d read that into the 
record please? 
20 
MS MYENI:   Sorry? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   If you’d read what you say on this page 
above your signature. 
MS MYENI:   I’m not comfortable to continue with this 
question because I don’t know where it’s leading to.  I did 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 63 of 120 
 
sign an undertaking, I don’t know where it is leading to. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well all she’s asking, Ms Myeni, is just 
to read what you signed into the record, that’s all she’s 
asking.  Are you not comfortable reading it? 
MS MYENI:   I have answered, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Hofmeyr do you want to just read it 
into the record. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So, it reads, 
10 
“I Duduzile C Myeni, in my capacity as a non-
Executive member of South African Airways Board, 
hereby 
accept 
the 
appointment 
as 
acting 
Chairperson of South African Airways Board.  I 
undertake to observe and comply with the principles 
and provisions of all legislation relevant to South 
African 
Airways, 
the 
protocol 
on 
corporate 
governance under review and the provisions of the 
shareholders compact between the Board of South 
African 
Airways 
and 
the 
Minister 
of 
Public 
20 
Enterprises.  To devote sufficient time for the 
execution of my responsibilities to utilise my skills 
to the best of my ability, to initiate, develop and 
implement systems or mechanisms for the effective 
and efficient management of South African Airways 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 64 of 120 
 
and to maintain and observe the highest standards 
of integrity and probity in the execution of my 
responsibilities”.  
Ms Myeni did you observe the obligations that, that 
undertaking placed on you, while you served on the Board 
of SAA? 
MS MYENI:   I will not answer the question, Chairperson 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And why will you not answer it Ms 
Myeni? 
MS MYENI:   May I be allowed to invoke or to ask for the 
10 
privilege that has been given to me, not to answer 
pertaining to questions I feel I’m not comfortable to 
answer? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, if I could just seek a point of 
clarification, you see there’s a very particular circumstance 
in which the privilege may be invoked so it’s important that 
I get clarity.  Are you invoking the privilege because you 
believe that the answer you give, will tend to expose you to 
a criminal charge?  Ms Myeni, if I may just pause there, 
that is the ultimate question I want to ask you but in 
20 
fairness to you, I want to explain why I ask it because if 
there are other reasons on the basis of which you are 
declining to answer it’s important that we know them 
because if you are, for example, refusing to answer the 
question because you have an appeal pending against the 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 65 of 120 
 
High Court Judgment, or because investigations might be 
under way by the NPA or because it relates to, as I think 
my learned friend said in his address a moment ago, a 
controversial point around you, those would not be legally 
valid grounds on which to refuse to answer.  So, it’s just 
very important for the Commission’s purposes that you 
confirm that your reason for not answering is because you 
regard the answer as likely to expose you to a criminal 
charge, is that the reason you refuse to answer? 
MS MYENI:   I think, Chairperson, as I explained earlier, 
10 
anything pertaining to SAA and decisions we made at SAA 
were done as a collective, as a Board.  Therefore, having a 
judgment that has been made against one person makes 
me feel uncomfortable and I feel I might incriminate myself 
in this point into matters such as these ones, with respect 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you.  Ms Myeni speaking for 
myself, as the evidence leader, if you, in response to a 
question I’ve asked say that you confirm that you believe 
20 
the answer you give is likely to expose you to a criminal 
charge, then subject to the direction of the Chairperson, 
my intention will be to move on to the next question but it’s 
just 
extremely 
important 
that 
there 
is 
a 
proper 
understanding on your part, of what your rights are and 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 66 of 120 
 
what your privileges are because this privilege cannot be 
invoked, simply because there are matters pending or there 
are possible investigations or because there are points of 
contention.  You  must have a reasonable belief that your 
answer is likely to expose you to a criminal charge and if 
you give that confirmation, if it’s necessary there can be a 
ruling, Chair, I propose but if not, speaking for myself I 
would move on to the next question. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Maybe 
what 
we 
should 
do 
is…[intervenes]. 
10 
MS MYENI:   I know Ms Hofmeyr. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes Ms Myeni, you want to say 
something? 
MS MYENI:   I’m sorry Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MYENI:   No, no Chair, I was saying I know that Ms 
Hofmeyr might not like my answer, but I have answered the 
question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, no, no she’s saying that her 
inclination is to move on to another question  without 
20 
asking for any ruling if that’s what you say, that’s what she 
is saying. So I think what we should do, Ms Hofmeyr, is 
move on if you are comfortable to move on and at some 
stage when I know all of the questions, maybe that she has 
refused to answer, I can apply my mind to whether there 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 67 of 120 
 
are some that I will compel her to answer because I come 
to the conclusion that they don’t expose her or answers 
won’t expose her to criminal prosecution. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   We’re indebted to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But at least let us move on and at the 
end we will see how much she has been able to answer 
and how much she hasn’t answered and then we can take it 
from there. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You understand that Ms Myeni?  I think 
10 
she can’t hear me anymore, Ms Myeni can you hear me? 
MS MYENI:   I can hear you now Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, did you hear what I said about 
a minute ago? 
MS MYENI:   Yes, I did. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, thank you. 
MS MYENI:   Thanks Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, let’s continue. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you Chair.  Ms Myeni when you 
served on the Board of SAA were you aware that you had 
20 
certain duties under the Public Finance Management Act as 
a member of the accounting authority of SAA? 
MS MYENI:   I won’t answer, Chairperson, the question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, just repeat that, just repeat what 
you said? 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 68 of 120 
 
MS MYENI:   I’ve answered Chairperson, or I said, may I 
please, 
with 
respect, 
not 
answer 
that 
question 
Chairperson? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And is that because you believe that the 
answer is likely to expose you to a criminal charge? 
MS MYENI:   What is your suggestions, Ms Hofmeyr, you’re 
saying it might lead to a criminal charge, is that what you 
say I must say? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, I’m not telling you to say anything 
Ms Myeni.  You said, I refuse to answer, so I’m seeking 
10 
clarity because remember my question is, were you aware 
when you were a Board member of SAA, that you had 
duties under the Public Finance Management Act.  As I 
understand it, you say, you don’t want to answer that and 
I’m seeking clarity.  Is that because you believe the answer 
is likely to expose you to a criminal charge? 
MS MYENI:   Yes, I’ve answered you Ms Hofmeyr, I said I  
would prefer not to answer because I don’t want to 
incriminate myself. 
ADV 
HOFMEYR: 
 
 That 
- 
 
Ms 
Myeni, 
just 
to 
be 
20 
clear…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe let me explain it to her.  Ms 
Myeni where the question that you’re being asked is a 
question in respect of which you’d like to invoke your 
privilege not to incriminate yourself, it is not enough that 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 69 of 120 
 
you just say would like not to answer, it’s important also to 
give the basis that is why Ms Hofmeyr has been asking – 
after you said you would like not to answer the question, 
that is why, she will, each time ask you, whether the basis 
is this one because as she put it to you, if the basis is 
something else, that would not be applicable. So, when you 
say you’d like not to answer, she will ask you for the basis 
so that she can see whether it’s the right basis, you 
understand? 
MS MYENI:   Thank you very much, Chairperson, for  
10 
clarity, I appreciate it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, okay Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So do I have clarity then, Ms Myeni that 
you refuse to answer the question, whether as a Board 
member of South African Airways you were aware that you 
had duties under the Public Finance Management Act 
because you believe the answer to that question is likely to 
expose you to a criminal charge? 
MS MYENI:   No Chairperson, I don’t refuse to answer that 
I was a Board – I was a Chairperson of the South African 
20 
Airways Board, I don’t refuse to answer that question, I did 
answer it at the beginning and I did everything that ought 
to have been done at SAA as the Chairperson of the Board 
in respect of my responsibilities as the Chair and leading a 
collective Board but what I would not like to answer is, 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 70 of 120 
 
what is added on the question of whether I was a 
Chairperson of the Board of SAA and whether I knew – the 
other added part in respect of the PFMA and other relevant 
documents that were supposed to be used in executing our 
work at SAA. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Okay 
let 
me 
just 
make 
sure…[intervenes]. 
MS MYENI:   In case, Chairperson, maybe let me add that 
the reason why I wouldn’t want – in fact, I don’t want to 
use the word, I refuse, Chairperson.  I did indicate at the 
10 
beginning that I respect the Commission I would prefer not 
to answer that question, Chairperson, because as you have 
explained it to me that I must add why I think I do not 
prefer to answer.  I don’t want to answer that question, 
Chairperson, because I do not wish to incriminate myself.  
CHAIRPERSON:   That is the question about whether you 
were aware that you had certain obligations under the 
PFMA, that’s the question that you are saying you would 
like not to answer, is that correct? 
MS MYENI:   That’s the question, I say, I would not like to 
20 
answer Chairperson, for the reason I have explained yes 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, just so that we fit within the legal 
framework, I think you have made the point that you 
wouldn’t  like to say you refuse, out of respect.  You say 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 71 of 120 
 
you prefer but we can take that what you intend is to 
refuse just that you’d like to say, you prefer, you prefer not 
to answer as respect but otherwise your position is that, 
you are refusing but you don’t feel comfortable to say that, 
is that correct? 
MS MYENI:   Yes, indeed Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you, Ms Myeni if I may make a 
suggestion, because I know the language is challenging, 
one doesn’t want to say refuse in circumstances especially 
10 
when one appears before a body as august as this.  So in 
line with the legal test the simple question that you would 
need to form in your mind, I propose, is to confirm for 
yourself that you believe that the answer would tend to 
expose you to a criminal charge and so that might be the 
answer you give on occasions when you have that concern.  
Let me move to my next question then because you 
confirmed for us already, in relation to the question about 
obligations under the PFMA that you are declining to 
answer on the basis that the answer would tend to 
20 
incriminate you...[intervenes]. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:   Sorry Chair if I may try to assist Ms 
Hofmeyr. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:   It was argued in Ms Myeni’s case that 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 72 of 120 
 
the basis – one of the reasons why her case would be 
referred to the NPA for investigation and then prosecution 
was that there are provisions in the PFMA that says, a 
person who is found to have contravened the PFMA may be 
criminally prosecuted, I think it’s Section 89. Now, that is 
another trigger point for us, if you ask us questions that 
pertain to the PFMA because we already have a Court 
Order that says – or there’s a finding that says we may, 
potentially have violated the PFMA and it’s also the basis 
upon which Ms Myeni is apprehensive and to delve into any 
10 
issues that - the obligations Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm.  Okay alright.  Ms Hofmeyr let us 
continue. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Section 50 of the PFMA 
requires accounting authorities such as the Board of SAA to 
act with fidelity, honesty and integrity.  Were you aware of 
that obligation while you served on the board of SAA? 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson I and with respect to the question 
may I not answer the question in case I incriminate myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And there are also obligations under that 
section to exercise the duty of utmost care in conducting 
your business and exercising your functions.  Were you 
aware of that obligation? 
MS MYENI:  May I not answer Chairperson in case I 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 73 of 120 
 
incriminate myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ms Myeni the Public Finance Management 
Act 
also 
prohibits 
irregular, 
fruitless 
and 
wasteful 
expenditure.  Were you aware that that is a prohibition it 
places? 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson with respect may I not answer the 
question in case I get affected by the response I make. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And just to clarify that it is because you 
10 
believe it will tend to incriminate you, is that correct? 
MS MYENI:  I have answered Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes I think she – I think Ms Hofmeyr just 
wants to make sure that what you say is in line with what the 
law says.  But I think that is what you say – you – you fear 
that you might incriminate yourself if you answer that 
question. 
MS MYENI:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  Yes Chair sorry.  Sorry I must be consistent 
20 
where I need to say… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  What I think and I believe. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
MS MYENI:  It could be case going forward. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 74 of 120 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  Yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  If in regard to a particular question you 
feel that you have reasonable grounds to believe that your 
answer might incriminate you you can say you know I would 
like not to answer the question.  We now understand that 
that is a code for I am refusing to answer the question 
because I believe that I am going to incriminate myself. 
MS MYENI:  Incriminate myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  So there may be many – there may be 
10 
a number of questions where you might have to say that but 
Ms Hofmeyr has got to do her job and ask you a number of 
questions that you might feel you – you might not wish to 
answer.  But she has got to go through them and you take 
each one on its merits.  Those that you believe that you have 
no problem with you must answer.  As I said at some stage 
later today or tomorrow I am might have to look at all of 
them and see whether there are some where I might make a 
different ruling.  But for now let us move on and you will 
treat each question – deal with each question as it comes. 
20 
MS MYENI:  Thank you Chairperson. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ms Myeni what is your understanding of 
wasteful expenditure? 
MS MYENI:  May I not answer Chairperson the question?  
Just in case it happens that I incriminate myself. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 75 of 120 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And if I said to you that my understanding 
was that it is expenditure that has no real value from which 
the party expending the money receives no value, would you 
agree with that? 
MS MYENI:  I have given my answer Chairperson.  So I will 
not answer that question Chairperson so that I do not 
incriminate myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And Ms Myeni the PMFA the Public 
Finance Management Act makes the accounting authority of 
10 
a state owned enterprise responsible to ensure that this type 
of expenditure that is wasteful expenditure does not take 
place, correct? 
MS MYENI:  May I not answer the question Chairperson just 
in case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And I suggest to you and I would be 
interested in your comment on this. The rationale behind that 
obligation placed on the accounting authorities of state 
owned enterprises is because if they engage in wasteful 
expenditure then they are misusing public funds, are they 
20 
not? 
MS MYENI:  May I not answer Chairperson to avoid self-
incrimination. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ms Myeni do you agree that if public funds 
are wasted the entities who benefitted from those wasted 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 76 of 120 
 
funds should pay back the money? 
MS MYENI:  May I not answer Chairperson in case I 
incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And would you agree that they should pay 
back the money because the public have a right to have 
returned to them what is rightfully theirs? 
MS MYENI:  May I not answer Chairperson in case I 
incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I would then like to move from the PFMA 
Ms Myeni to the Companies Act.  When you were a director 
10 
of SAA were you aware that you had obligations not only 
under the PFMA but also under the Companies Act? 
MS MYENI:  May I not answer Chairperson.  May I have the 
privilege not to answer so I do not incriminate myself. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  Sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes Mr Buthelezi.  Is it more than one year 
and not more than three years? 
MS MYENI:  Ja more than one year not more than three 
years.  Thank you Chairperson for your assistance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it more than one year and not more than 
20 
three years? 
MS MYENI:  Ja more than one year not more than three 
years.  Thank you Chairperson for your assistance. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:   I would like to issue the same disclaimer 
that we issued with regard to PFMA because her being 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 77 of 120 
 
declared a delinquent director is under Section 162 of the 
Companies Act. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Just raise your voice. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  I am saying her being declared a 
delinquent 
director 
was 
under 
Section 
162.5 
of 
the 
Companies Act so there is a court ruling that has found her 
in breach of the Companies Act already.  And that is also the 
subject of an appeal.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  So in as much as there are questions 
10 
with regards to her applying the Companies Act or what she 
considers her actions and conduct regards to the Companies 
Act. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  She stands on the same advice Chair.  
So I am not too sure if it takes the commission forward 
because we declare these things up front. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  Is that is it constructive for us where it is 
obvious that she did not answer any questions on the PFMA 
20 
and I really tell you now she is not going to answer any 
questions on the Companies Act and we declared this 
upfront.  We are not grandstanding.  It is genuine concerns 
we operating under a court order that has already found her 
in breach of this issue.  She defended herself in court, the 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 78 of 120 
 
court found against her.  We are going to try to another 
platform.  But the point is we could be wasting the 
commission’s time answering questions where we have 
declared upfront that we do not feel comfortable answering 
these questions.  Ms Kate Hofmeyr is at large to go into 
other areas but if she goes into legislation where she has 
already has adverse findings – adverse findings against her. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  She is not going to answer that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr. 
10 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  And out of respect for the Chair and the 
processes we have advised our client accordingly and she is 
acting accordingly but she can ask other questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  But she knows what the issues already 
are. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV 
HOFMEYR: 
 
Chair 
the 
privilege 
against 
self-
incrimination places no limitation on the question that may 
be asked.  And it is precisely because the fact that there is a 
20 
judgment in civil proceedings cannot be a basis to invoke the 
privilege against self-incrimination that I propose to continue 
to ask the questions and when Ms Myeni fairly indicates to 
me that she in her own mind believes the answer will tend to 
incriminate her I move on.  
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 79 of 120 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  But we must have certainty. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  That that is the basis and it is not because 
for example some high court in a delinquent director case 
has found her to have been delinquent because that would 
not be the correct legal test.  So my next question then is Ms 
Myeni whether you were aware when you were a board 
member that the Companies Act placed particular fiduciary 
duties on board members to act in the best interests of the 
10 
company? 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson I request not to answer the 
question just in case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And it also imposes obligations of duties 
and obligations of care, skill and diligence. Were you aware 
that you had those duties where you – when you served on 
the board of SAA? 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson may I not answer the question in 
case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ms Myeni are you still the Deputy 
20 
Chairperson of Centlec SOC? 
MS MYENI:  I beg your pardon. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Are you still the Deputy Chairperson of the 
state owned company Centlec? 
MS MYENI:  No. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 80 of 120 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I understand Centlec to be an electricity 
utility 
solely 
owned 
by 
the 
Manguang 
Metropolitan 
Municipality, is that correct? 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson may I not answer that question.  I 
would prefer not to answer the question so that I do not 
incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Before you – I understand you to say you 
no longer a member of the board.  How long did you serve on 
that board? 
MS MYENI:  I do not remember Ms Hofmeyr. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Is it in the order of a year or four or five 
years? 
MS MYENI:  I will say something that might not be accurate 
so it would not be four years it certainly is under three years 
or – ja around there about. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Is it more than one year and not more than 
three years? 
MS MYENI:  Ja more than one year not more than three 
years.  Thank you Chairperson for your assistance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  And at the time of the OUTA 
trial that took place at the beginning of this year were you at 
that point a board member of Centlec? 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson with respect I think my – the 
Advocate – the legal representative that is before you there. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 81 of 120 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Mr Buthelezi? 
MS MYENI:  Can assist me.  The matter is with OUTA – the 
issue of Centlec is with OUTA on the appeal as the case is 
continuing since we appealed and I think OUTA raised the 
issue of Centlec.  So may I not answer any question 
pertaining to Centlec Chairperson in case I incriminate 
myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let me hear what Mr Buthelezi if he has 
got anything to say about the issue? 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  Chair it is just – there is an application 
10 
before court that where OUTA seeks to enforce the removal 
of Ms Myeni from the Centlec board despite the matter being 
appealed.  And there are several contentious issues there.  
There is a constitutional issue as well with regards to 
whether the finding of an appeal does not stay the execution 
of an order and in particular the one released from the court 
that says she must be removed from the Centlec board on 
the basis of the judgement in the delinquency case.  So I 
think the version then arises from that aspect because there 
is specific case by OUTA saying they want her removed from 
20 
the Centlec board. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But she is no longer a member of that 
board as I understand the evidence.  Or she is no longer 
Deputy Chairperson. 
ADV BUTHELEZI: Then she can answer Chair. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 82 of 120 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Sorry. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  Then I can ask her to answer that 
question. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  Can I – I would be testifying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no. No, no. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  No I think she has given the evidence 
already. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Well she – she said she is no longer 
Deputy Chairperson what I think you did not ask her is 
10 
whether is… 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Any board member. 
CHAIRPERSON:  A board member ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Well let me just ask that for clarity as my 
learned friend said he should not be – giving evidence and 
then if I may Chair just return to Mr Buthelezi’s submissions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Just for clarity and let us know if you are 
not comfortable answering the question.  You indicated 
previously you were not currently the Deputy Chairperson of 
20 
the Centlec board.  May I then follow up and ask do you 
serve in any capacity on the board? 
MS MYENI:  Sorry what is your question again – I beg your 
pardon? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Apologies.  Do you serve in any capacity 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 83 of 120 
 
on the board of Centlec?  At the moment are you a board 
member of Centlec? 
MS MYENI:  I – I am not at Centlec Chairperson. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Then just in response Chair if I may to my 
learned friend.  It is again just underscoring the importance 
of the basis on which Ms Myeni is declining to answer the 
question.  Because the fact that there are court proceedings 
to remove her from the board of a particular company 
10 
because of a finding by a high court that she breached her 
fiduciary duties and was a delinquent director does not 
create a sufficient basis to decline to answer a question 
because of her privilege against self-incrimination.  So that 
is why the clarity is so important.  When I asked… 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  Sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  I think to correct Ms Hofmeyr I think that 
is her submission Chair but I think that should be your ruling 
in that regard.  I think she cannot assert it as if this has 
20 
been a ruling of this commission Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No she is making a submission. 
ADV BUTHELEZI: Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Responding to you. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  Yes.   
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 84 of 120 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  Specifically the point of saying that she… 
CHAIRPERSON:  She is not making a ruling. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  I am sorry Chair I want to be specific.  
When she says the basis upon which Ms Myeni relies on 
these reasons cannot be the reason.  I think she must qualify 
it as her own submission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  Because I think it is beyond what… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  She cannot assert that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja no I think whatever she says and 
whatever you say I will always understand as a submission.  
Even if you do not say so. 
ADV BUTHELEZI:  Okay thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  So just to repeat my question so that we 
have your basis for answering or not answering clear.  My 
question was; were you a member of the board of Centlec at 
the time that your trial against OUTA took place in the high 
20 
court earlier this year. 
MS MYENI:  Yes Chairperson I was. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And how much did you earn on a monthly 
basis from that directorship? 
MS MYENI:  May I not answer that question Chairperson in 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 85 of 120 
 
case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And – Ms Myeni you have experience in 
matters of corporate governance, do you not? 
MS MYENI:  What is your question Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Do you have experience in matters of 
corporate governance? 
MS MYENI:  May I not answer that question – a question like 
that Chairperson in case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  If I indicated that in September of 2019 
you earned approximately R35 000,00 from your activities on 
10 
the Centlec board could you confirm that for me? 
MS MYENI:  Can you repeat the question Ma’am? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  If I indicated that on our investigations you 
earned approximately R35 000.00 in September of 2019 from 
your activities on the Centlec board can you confirm that? 
MS MYENI:  May I not confirm anything pertaining to Centlec 
Chairperson in case I incriminate myself.  And Chairperson I 
do also would – I do like to ask if I am on trial or not? 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are not on trial Ms Myeni.  The 
commission does not conduct … 
20 
MS MYENI:  I beg your pardon Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are not on trial. 
MS MYENI:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because the commission… 
MS MYENI:  I just needed that clarity Chairperson. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 86 of 120 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  No you are not on trial. 
MS MYENI:  Thank you very much. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  You have done quite a number of courses 
on corporate governance have you not? 
MS MYENI:  May I not answer that question Chairperson in 
case I incriminate myself may I not answer that question. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ms Myeni do you have a B Administration 
Degree? 
MS MYENI:  May I not answer that question Chairperson in 
10 
case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  The Department of Public Enterprises 
produced a document shortly after or it might have been at 
the same time actually that you were appointed as acting 
chairperson on the 7 December 2012 in which it listed all the 
qualifications held by members of the board.  And in relation 
to you that document which I will take you to in a moment 
indicated that you had the B Administration Degree.  Are you 
aware that you were indicated on that document as holding 
that degree? 
20 
MS MYENI:  My CV does not say anything to that effect that 
I have – I do not know what CV you have so may I not 
answer that question Chairperson in case I incriminate 
myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Well I was not suggesting it was in a CV I 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 87 of 120 
 
was indicating that it was a document prepared by the 
Department of Public Enterprises.  So let me take you to it 
before I ask you the follow up question.  You will find it in 
the file that we were working on previously.  It is DD34[b] 
and you will be on the next page – page1241. 
MS MYENI:  Excuse me.  Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson it is on which – I do not know which 
document that is being referred to Chairperson and secondly 
may I – may I ask Chairperson that I should respond to a 
10 
document that was prepared by Department of Public 
Enterprises or must I answer to a document that is prepared 
by myself?  Just a question Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MS MYENI:  In that regard. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No, no you – you – there may be a 
legitimate question that relates to a document that you did 
not yourself prepare.  But obviously if you do not know what 
the answer to the question because the document you – was 
not prepared by you you would say so.  But you can be 
20 
asked a question that relates to a document prepared by 
somebody else.  It just depends on what you are asked. 
MS MYENI:  Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Ms Hofmeyr said – referred 
us to… 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 88 of 120 
 
MS MYENI:  Thank you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To Bundle 34[b] that is the file that is in 
front of us.  What page Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:  It is page 1241. 
CHAIRPERSON:  12 – oh it is the page just after the 
undertaking that you… 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Exactly Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay it is the same file that is 
supposed to be in front of you Ms Myeni. 
MS MYENI:  Yes indeed Chairperson.  I can see Chairperson 
10 
it is agreed and at the top it is written secret I see it yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Exactly so if you have that in front of you 
Ms Myeni you will see it says Current SAA Board at the top.  
It is marked Secret.  As we understand it it emanates from 
the Department of Public Enterprises and then annexure D.  
It was an annexure to another document.  And under number 
1 in the table there you will see number 1 full name: Ms 
Duduzile Myeni Chairperson.  And then your gender and your 
20 
ethnicity is given and then under qualifications you will see it 
says:   
“Secondary Teacher’s Diploma, B Admin, 
Business 
Skills 
of 
SA 
Business 
management.” 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 89 of 120 
 
So that recordal there is the basis for me saying to you that 
there 
is 
a 
document 
from 
the 
Department 
of 
Public 
Enterprises that records you as having a B Administration 
Degree and I was asking you whether you were ever aware 
of this document? 
MS MYENI:  May I not answer Chairperson because my CV 
does not look like this Chairperson. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ms Myeni that would not be a basis on 
which to decline to answer.  What I understand you to be 
saying is your CV is different from this but my question was, 
10 
were you ever aware of this document in which you were 
credited with having a B Admin Degree? 
MS MYENI:  May I not answer Chairperson in case I 
incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And what does you CV say about this? 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson I have answered.  I know Ms 
Hofmeyr may not be happy but I have answered. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ms Myeni. 
MS MYENI:   I clarified earlier that she has qualified the 
issuance of the document that I am looking at and she said it 
20 
was prepared by the Department.  It is not a document that I 
prepared. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Correct and so my follow up question 
was… 
MS MYENI:  May I then Chairperson – may I then 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 90 of 120 
 
Chairperson not respond to the question in case I incriminate 
myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  I do not think I finished the question so 
can I just be sure.  My question was what does your CV say?  
Because a moment ago you told us your CV is different to 
this so I am following up on that.  What does your CV say? 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson may I not answer this question in 
case I incriminate myself.  I think also maybe my legal 
advisor can assist me because if the CV would be required 
for the commission since I am not on trial I would be happy 
10 
to submit it Chairperson if you need my CV. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  We – we have a copy of it.  I was asking 
you what your understanding was of what was contained in 
the CV.  You see my challenge is I asked you what was in it 
and your answer was I refuse to answer on the basis that it 
incriminates me.  But then you added I am happy to provide 
to the commission.  So that presents a difficulty.  You cannot 
both volunteer to provide the CV to the commission and say 
you refuse to answer the question what is in CV on the basis 
20 
that it would tend to incriminate you.  So what is your 
position Ms Myeni?  Would it incriminate you if you told us 
what was in your CV? 
MS MYENI:  Chairperson I am being asked about a document 
that was prepared by somebody else.  I am not being asked 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 91 of 120 
 
by a – about a document that is before me that is my 
document.  That is the basis for which I say may I please not 
answer the question in case I incriminate myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the earlier question that Ms Hofmeyr 
asked was indeed about a document that seems to have 
been from the Department of Public Enterprises but the last 
question she was asking you was not about what is in that 
document but what is in your CV which you said you are 
quite happy to provide the commission. 
MS MYENI:  May I not answer Chairperson? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  You would like not to answer what about – 
answer what is in your CV? 
MS MYENI:  I did not bring my CV here Chairperson so I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay but you are happy to provide it? 
MS MYENI:  May I please not answer? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Ms Myeni. 
MS MYENI:  May I not answer Chairperson. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  No I do need clarity.  Because a moment 
ago you said that you declined to answer a question about 
20 
what is in your CV because it may tend to incriminate you.  
And then you offered to provide your CV to the commission.  
Now those two propositions cannot live side by side.  And it 
is for that reason that I ask you again would disclosing what 
is contained in your CV tend to incriminate you? 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 92 of 120 
 
MS MYENI:  I have given an answer Chairperson on this 
question. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  What was that answer? 
MS MYENI:  I am not going to answer your question in case 
it incriminates me. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  Thank you.  Now we did establish a 
moment ago that you have ex – you have experience on 
matters of corporate governance and what I am interested in 
is probing just a little bit further about that.  Is it your 
understanding of good corporate governance that a board 
10 
should regard its function as different to the functions of 
management? 
MS MYENI:  May I not answer that question Chairperson in 
case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:  And it is management of a company like 
South African Airways that is responsible for operational 
matters whereas a board is not responsible for operational 
matters.  Do you agree with that? 
MS MYENI:   Can I not answer that question Chairperson in 
case I incriminate myself.? 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And procurement process, particularly, 
within a state-owned enterprise should generally run by 
management and not the board.  Is that correct? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer that question Chairperson in 
case I incriminate myself? 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 93 of 120 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Now Ms Myeni, in 2013 and 2014, there 
was quite a severe breakdown in the functioning of the Board 
of SAA, was there not? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer that Chairperson, the 
question in case I incriminate myself? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And Ms Myeni but the trouble really 
started with what has become known as the Ten Two Ten 
Transaction, the Pembroke Transaction which involved the 
sale in Sail and Lease Back of A 320 Aircraft, did it not? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, the transcript that was submitted 
10 
is very elaborate on the matter that is being asked.  There 
was an annexure that was submitted and I stand by that 
response.   
 
So I am not going to answer Chairperson because 
transcripts have been provided with all the answers that we 
provided in court and the answers for the Commission to be 
able to know that I have dealt with the question that is being 
asked. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, Ms Myeni ...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   So Chairperson, in case I incriminate myself, I 
20 
prefer to invoke the privilege that I have been given. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you see Ms Myeni, the only basis on 
which you can refuse to answer the question is the privilege 
of self-incrimination and of course, in case there is attorney 
and client information.   
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 94 of 120 
 
 
But unless there is something else that I have forgotten, 
there is no other basis legally on which to refuse to answer a 
question.   
 
You cannot refuse on the basis that you have provided a 
document that the Commission should look at to find an 
answer.  That is not an acceptable basis.   
 
But I thought I must mention that I did not actually here 
the question that Ms Hofmeyr asked.  So Ms Hofmeyr, I am 
going to ask you to tell me what the question was. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   So that I can know.  I missed it. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair, just aside.  What I find quite 
remarkable about this afternoon is that it is very difficult to 
remember a question if there is not an answer to it.  I am 
also struggling to remember my own questions.   
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing]   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Because there is usually an answer which 
is ...[indistinct]  
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing]  Yes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Luckily, I do have ...[intervenes]  
20 
MS MYENI:   I remember the question very well Chairperson. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Oh, great. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, yes.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   [laughing]   
CHAIRPERSON:   [laughing]  Yes.  At least...  Ja, just repeat 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 95 of 120 
 
it Ms Myeni. 
MS MYENI:   I beg your pardon Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just repeat the question.  You said you 
remembered the question. 
MS MYENI:   Chair, yes.  It was about the complaint by six 
board members, South African Airways board members in 
about a period of 2013/2014, thereabout.  That is what I 
heard.  And a letter between the Pembroke and financing of 
the aircraft. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
10 
MS MYENI:   I think there were leases of the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, of the airbus. 
MS MYENI:   ...aircraft.  I hope I paraphrased correctly, 
according to my understanding. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine. 
MS MYENI:   And my response is that, I prefer not to answer 
that question Chairperson in case I incriminate myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Now, I am going to pause this transaction 
for short, the Pembrooke Transaction. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Ms Hofmeyr.  I am going to just 
ask Ms Myeni something and it is connect with an earlier 
question about what is in the document from the Department 
of Public Enterprises and about her CV.  Do you hold a 
Bachelor of Administration degree, Ms Myeni? 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 96 of 120 
 
MS MYENI:   [Indistinct] Chairperson.  It is very explicit.  I 
studied it.  I did not complete it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS MYENI:   I did three years of ...[indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MYENI:   ...that particular degree. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MYENI:   And it is very explicit.  It even says why 
anything and whatever the reason ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MS MYENI:   ...that caused me not to do my majors. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MS MYENI:   Very explicit on my CV. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MYENI:   That is why I am saying, this is not my CV. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  And ...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   But Chairperson, I prefer not to respond to the 
questions that might incriminate myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  No, that is fine.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, if you did not complete the B-
20 
Admin degree, why would you include it at all on your CV? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, I prefer not to answer the 
question.  We have dealt with it.  I stand by the answer that I 
have given.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Have you, in all your years in corporate, 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 97 of 120 
 
ever seen other people’s CV’s where they list under 
qualifications, qualifications that they do not have? 
MS MYENI:   By whose standard Ma’am are you asking me 
that question?  Let me just ask the question.  Whose 
standards are we talking about? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni ...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   Is there...  No, just for me to understand 
Ma’am.  Whose standard are you asking? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, I ...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   I am saying, whose...  Sorry.  Let me just finish 
10 
my question because I need clarity. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Myeni ...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   I need clarity Chair so that I can provide the 
answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Myeni ...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   I have never seen people’s CV’s that a person 
will write a CV this way because this one has written it this 
way and that other one has written it this way.   
 
I have written mine in my own way and in my own 
unprescribed standard that I preferred to do it.  So 
20 
Chairperson, may I not answer the question that Ms Hofmeyr 
has put before me in case I incriminate myself? 
CHAIRPERSON:   If I am not mistaken, I thought you did 
answer.  But that is okay.  Ms Hofmeyr, continue. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, my question has not yet been 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 98 of 120 
 
answered, 
actually, 
the 
most 
recent 
one 
because 
my 
question was:  Have you ever seen other CV’s in your time at 
various corporate entities in which under the qualification 
section, a person lists a qualification that they do not have?  
I do not have a record that you have answered that. 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, I prefer not to answer this 
question because my focus is dealing with poverty, inequality 
and all the other problems facing me as a woman leader.   
 
I have never had an opportunity to sit down and start 
with people’s CV’s so that I can align my CV to somebody 
10 
else’s CV.   
 
And Chairperson, if that is a crime.  May I ask for an 
apology?  That is why I am stating that my CV is written 
according to my own standard because I do not know if there 
are certain standards.  Or that somebody who is somebody’s 
CV that I should copy and emulate.   
 
Chairperson, I am speaking not my language.  Whose 
standard must my CV copy?  My apologies Chairperson.  If it 
is the kind that I did indicate that I studied at the University 
of Zululand.   
20 
 
It is an achievement for a black woman that studied after 
marriage.  It is a big achievement for me to have passed the 
first year and the second year.  And it is an inspiration for 
any other black woman somewhere.   
 
And I am sorry Chairperson.  If then I am before the 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 99 of 120 
 
Commission to talk about my qualifications, they were not in 
your letter Chairperson.   
 
And therefore, I request that I do not answer this 
question before it becomes something that will put in me in 
bad 
light 
that 
I 
should 
have 
followed 
some 
Western 
standards to write a CV. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, on the 27t h of May 2013, there 
was a meeting of the Board of Directors of South African 
Airways that you attended.  Do you recall that? 
10 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer that question Chairperson in 
case I incriminate myself?   
ADV HOFMEYR:   At that meeting – I would like to take you 
to a minute of that meeting if I may?  You will find it in the 
bundle in front of you which is DD34-B and it is DD34-B, 
page 1247. 
MS MYENI:   Yes, Chairperson I do have the minutes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And can you confirm that you are being 
indicated as present on page 1247? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer that question Chairperson in 
20 
case I incriminate myself?   
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, she is not asking whether you were 
– you attended that meeting.  She is asking only whether the 
minutes reflects that you were present. 
MS MYENI:   I have not read the minutes Chairperson but I 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 100 of 120 
 
can see that my name is there.  I attended the meeting but I 
have not read the minutes to confirm that this is a true set of 
the minutes of the meeting. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   If I can take you to page 1263 which is the 
last page of those minutes and can you tell me whose 
signature appears on that page? 
MS MYENI:   Yes, Chairperson.  I am on the page. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And whose signature appears on that 
page? 
10 
MS MYENI:   I am not too sure then because there is a rub 
on the signature.  But Chairperson, be that as it may.  May I 
not answer the question? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So you cannot confirm whether that is 
your signature? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer the question just in case I 
incriminate myself?  I have not had an opportunity to read 
the minutes. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni ...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   Under normal circumstances Chairperson...  
20 
Sorry? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   No, please continue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, continue Ms Myeni. 
MS MYENI:   No, I am saying.  I would prefer not to answer 
the question.  I have not had an opportunity to read the 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 101 of 120 
 
minutes.  And apart from that, I do not want to incriminate 
myself.  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Let us go to what the board resolved at 
that meeting in relation to the Pembroke Transaction.  You 
will find that at page 1259.   
MS MYENI:   I guess what ...[indistinct] is that whoever 
signed those minutes at page 1263 is given as the 
chairperson.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes.  And just for record purposes.  Chair, 
these are minutes dated...  Well, at least the signature 
10 
appears to be dated the 28t h of July 2013. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   ON that date Ms Myeni, were you 
chairperson of the SAA Board? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer that question Chairperson in 
case I incriminate myself?   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay ...[intervenes]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I thought, but you can tell me if you prefer 
not to ask the question.  Having said that you became 
20 
chairperson or was it acting chairperson in 2013? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   2012, Chair.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Or 2012. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   December of 2012. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  I thought that it is accepted that you 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 102 of 120 
 
were chairperson for a number of years thereafter.  Are you 
able to confirm that or would you prefer not to  
MS MYENI:   I am not comfortable Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And just to clarify.  You are not 
comfortable to answer on the basis that the answer may tend 
to incriminate you? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer because I do not want to 
incriminate myself? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So I was going to the report in the 
meetings 
that 
contains 
the 
board 
resolution 
on 
this 
Pembroke Transaction.  And you will find that at page 1259.   
MS MYENI:   [No audible reply]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you have that? 
MS MYENI:   Can you repeat?  Kindly repeat your question.  
I have to 1250 in front of me. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Yes, correct.  So I was just checking 
whether you have the right page Ms Myeni.  I will then follow 
it up with my next question.  If you go halfway down that 
20 
page, you will see – it says: 
“The board then resolved THAT.” 
 
And then number 1: 
“The update on the A 320 Sail and Lease Back 
Transaction and the process followed (b) and is 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 103 of 120 
 
hereby noted. 
2. 
The initial award of the A 320 Sail and Lease 
Back of 20 aircraft to the Bank of China Aviation 
approved by the board on 6 September 2012 (b) and 
is hereby cancelled or withdrawn. 
3. 
The Sail and Lease Back of the first ten A 320 
Aircraft (b) and is hereby awarded to Pembroke 
Capital.” 
 
Were you aware of those decisions having been taken by 
the board at this meeting on the 27 t h of May 2013? 
10 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, may I worry you, please? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
MS MYENI:   Am I allowed to ask a question, not on top of 
the question, but to ask a clarity question? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you can seek clarification. 
MS MYENI:   Or maybe I could say something.  Then my 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You may ...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   ...legal representative can assist me? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, you may seek clarification to a 
20 
question. 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson...  Please, Advocate Buthelezi.  
Under normal circumstances, minutes are signed by the 
company 
secretary 
before 
they 
are 
signed 
by 
the 
chairperson.  1263.  There is no company secretary 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 104 of 120 
 
signature.  I, therefore, will not answer any question 
pertaining to this in case I incriminate myself Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS MYENI:   And the question then is that...  There is no 
company secretary’s signature here.  So these minutes can 
come anywhere, from anywhere. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   After this decision was taken by the board 
on the 27t h of May 2013, there was then a Section 54 
application sent through to National Treasury to approve the 
10 
transaction.  Were you aware of that at the time? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, may I not answer the question in 
case I incriminate myself? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And why would a Section 54 application 
had to have been sent to Treasury arising from this decision 
to enter into a Sail and Lease Back for ten A 320 Aircraft 
with Pembroke? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, may I not answer any questions 
pertaining to this in case I incriminate myself? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Now after that application was submitted 
20 
on the 30t h of May 2013, you wrote a letter to the Minister of 
Public Enterprises at the time, Mr Gigaba.  And that was on 
the 20t h of June 2014.  Do you recall that letter? 
MS MYENI:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you hear the question Ms Myeni? 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 105 of 120 
 
MS MYENI:   I heard the question Chairperson.  Sorry, I 
delayed a bit to answer. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MS MYENI:   I am not answering the question Chairperson in 
case I incriminate myself.   
ADV HOFMEYR:   I would like to go to that letter if we may 
and you will find it in the same bundle, DD34 and it is a few 
pages on in the bundle at page 1544. 
MS MYENI:   I have it Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Ms Hofmeyr. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you.  Can you ...[intervenes]  
MS MYENI:   [Indistinct]  
ADV HOFMEYR:   ...confirm Ms Myeni that is your signature 
at the bottom of that page, 1544? 
MS MYENI:   I am not responding Chairperson in case I 
incriminate myself.   
ADV 
HOFMEYR: 
 
 
Now 
this 
is 
a 
letter 
dated 
the 
20t h of June 2013. 
 
On 
its 
face, 
it 
is 
addressed 
to 
Minister Gigaba and it is signed by a signature that appears 
to be yours, Ms Myeni under the title:  SAA acting 
20 
Chairperson.   
 
And the letter is dated 20 June 2013.  What I would like 
to focus in on is the second paragraph of this letter.  Well, 
let me start at the first for context.  It reads: 
“Dear Minister.” 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 106 of 120 
 
 
And then it is headed:  Section 54, Update on Novation 
of A 320 Order.  It then reads: 
“Reference is made to the attached letter dated 
30 May 2013 with regard to the Novation of the 
Airbus A 320 order.” 
 
That, as I understand is, that Section 54 application that 
I was just talking about.  Do you understand that sentence in 
the same way? 
MS MYENI:   Can I not answer that question Chairperson in 
case I incriminate myself?   
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And then the letter goes on and it says: 
“We would like to update the Minister on the award 
of the Sail and Lease Back of aircraft to Pembroke 
Capital.   
Whilst reference is made to ten aircraft in the 
previous 
correspondence, 
the 
board 
has 
subsequently resolved to transact for two aircraft 
with Pembroke to allow SAA to further explore 
engaging local financiers such as the Development 
Bank of South Africa, Public Investment Corporation, 
20 
Shari’ah Bank and others.” 
 
Ms Myeni, do you recall writing that to the minister on 
the 20t h of June 2013? 
MS MYENI:   May I not respond Chairperson?  I am not 
comfortable to respond in case I incriminate myself? 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 107 of 120 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   My understanding of that paragraph and I 
want to seek your guidance on whether you understand it in 
the same way, given that you were the author of that letter.   
 
I will come in a moment to why I say that.  It cannot 
really be disputed that you were the author of that letter.  It 
conveys the following.   
 
Minister, 
you 
got 
an 
application 
for 
us 
or 
correspondence from us previously in which we were all 
asking you to authorise the Sail and Lease Back of ten 
aircraft but since then, the board of SAA has resolved to 
10 
transact for only two aircraft with Pembroke.   
 
Do you understand that paragraph in the same way? 
MS MYENI:   Chair, may I not answer Chairperson, just in 
case I incriminate myself? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, we have searched in the 
records of SAA for that resolution.  The one you are referring 
to in the second paragraph here.  Because you say, the 
board has subsequently resolved to transact for two aircraft.  
And we have not been able to find any such resolution.  Are 
you aware of one having been taken? 
20 
MS MYENI:   With respect.  May I not answer that particular 
question?  I would not want to incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, you previously answered that 
question 
in 
an 
affidavit 
that 
you 
placed 
before 
the 
Companies tribunal.  Do you recall that? 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 108 of 120 
 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer the question Chairperson in 
case I incriminate myself?   
ADV 
HOFMEYR: 
 
 
Now 
in 
the 
matter 
involving 
the 
Companies tribunal, as I understand it.  The Companies and 
Intellectual Property Commission had issued you with the 
compliance notice because of what it is contained in the very 
letter that we were just looking at.  Is that correct? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, may I not answer Chairperson in 
case I incriminate myself? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Now in that affidavit, I would like to take 
10 
you to it.  You will find it in the same bundle, DD34-B and 
now we are page 1562.  That is under Tab 26. 
MS MYENI:   I have it in front of me. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And if you turn over to page 1584, that is 
the last page of the affidavit which appears to have been 
deposed to by you on the 10t h of March 2017.  Can you 
confirm that you deposed to this affidavit then? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer that question Chairperson in 
case I incriminate myself?   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Now in the affidavit, you will see – back in 
20 
the affidavit at page 1564. 
MS MYENI:   I have it before me. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you.  I would like to pick it up at 
paragraph 7 there because it is at paragraph 7 that you 
identify what you understand the complaint against you by 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 109 of 120 
 
the commission – the Companies and Intellectual Property 
Commission to have been.  You say at paragraph 7: 
“I 
assume 
from 
our 
correspondence 
with 
the 
respondent that it is finding its space on a letter I 
addressed to the Minister of Public Enterprises 
dated 20 June 2013.” 
 
If I can just pause there.  That is the one that we have 
just looked at. 
“...in which I have stated that “whilst reference is 
made to ten aircraft in the previous correspondence, 
10 
the board has subsequently resolved transact on two 
aircraft”.” 
 
Do you see that? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer that question in case I 
incriminate myself?   
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, if I can just be clear.  You are 
declining to answer the question whether you see a 
paragraph on page 164 on the basis of answering that 
question might tend to incriminate you? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer that question Chairperson in 
20 
case I incriminate myself?   
ADV HOFMEYR:   And then if we go to paragraph 8, you will 
see that what you record in the affidavit there is that that 
letter was written - of what the board of SAA had resolved.  
I subsequently ascertained that I was mistaken and that 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 110 of 120 
 
the board’s decision had not changed, at which point I 
wrote a further letter to the Minister of Public Enterprises 
to clarify the situation which clarification was accepted by 
the minister. 
Do you remember giving that explanation to the Companies 
and Intellectual Property Commission’s tribunal – well, the 
Companies Tribunal in your matter with CIPC? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer this question, Chairperson, 
in case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I would like to just get clear whether my 
10 
understanding of that paragraph of your affidavit and your 
understanding of it is the same.  So what I understand 
paragraph 8 to be saying is you wrote the letter on the 20 
June 2013 but thereafter you realised that the board had 
not decided to go for the two aircraft and you realised that 
its original decision to go for the 10 aircraft had not 
changed. 
 
Is 
that 
also 
your 
understanding 
of 
that 
paragraph? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer, Chairperson, that question 
in case I incriminate myself? 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   So just pushing that a bit further, if your 
realisation was that they had not in fact decided to go for 
two aircraft then that would mean that there was only one 
decision and the one decision was the decision for 10 
aircraft, correct? 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 111 of 120 
 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer that question in case I 
incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And then what you do in paragraph 8 is 
you go on and you say when you realised you mistake you 
wrote to the minister to clarify that you had made the 
mistake and the minister accepted your clarification.  Do 
you also understand your paragraph 8 in the same way? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer, Chairperson, the question 
in case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Now we will shortly go the letter that you 
10 
wrote to the minister on – and I have it that it was written 
on the 11 July 2013 and I would like to again check 
whether you and I are on common ground.  If you identified 
that mistake and conveyed it to the minister in your letter 
of 11 July 2013 then you must have identified the mistake 
somewhere between the 20 June, which was your first 
letter, and the 11 July, which was your second letter, is 
that correct? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer, Chairperson, the question 
in case I incriminate myself. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And, Ms Myeni, what alerted you to that 
mistake, that mistake in thinking that there had been 
another board decision to go from ten to two aircraft? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer, Chairperson, the question 
in case I incriminate myself. 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 112 of 120 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   I would then like us to go to your actual 
letter, that is the letter of 11 July 2013, and you will find it 
in the same bundle, DD34B, and now we need to go back 
to page 1283. 
MS MYENI:   Sorry, the same file? 
ADV 
HOFMEYR: 
 
 
The 
same 
file, 
yes, 
and 
page 
…[intervenes] 
MS MYENI:   DD34B and page? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   1283. 
MS MYENI:   I beg your pardon? 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Page 1283. 
MS MYENI:   1283. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you. 
MS MYENI:   I beg your pardon, the same file and page 
1...? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   1283. 
MS MYENI:   1283.  I have got it before me.  I have the 
document in front of me. 
ADV HOFMEYR:    Thank you. 
MS MYENI:   I have the document. 
20 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   And then if you go; over two pages to 
1285 can you confirm whether that is your signature on the 
page? 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 113 of 120 
 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, may I not confirm and respond 
to the question just in case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Now this is a letter that appears to bear 
your signature and you are identified at the end of the 
letter as SAA Chairperson.  It is a letter dated 11 July 2013 
and it is addressed to Minister Gigaba and what it says is 
the following: 
“Honourable Minister...” 
And then the title of the letter or the heading of the letter 
is: 
10 
“Section 54(2) of the PFMA, SAA Novation of the 
Airbus A320” 
And the first paragraph reads: 
“SAA submitted an application in terms of Section 
54(2) of the Public Finance Management Act 1 of 
1999 as amended for consideration and approval by 
the minister.  For ease or reference a copy of the 
application dated 30 May 2013 is attached hereto 
and 
marked 
annexure A. 
 
Subsequent 
to 
the 
submission of the application a letter dated 20 June 
20 
2013 was written to the minister requesting that an 
approval for two aircraft instead of ten be granted 
by the minister.  The subsequent request has since 
been reconsidered and SAA has decided to revert to 
the ten aircraft as stated in its application dated 30 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 114 of 120 
 
May for the following reasons.” 
And then a series of reasons follow.  Now, Ms Myeni, 
maybe you can help me but I do not identify anywhere in 
that paragraph an identification on your part that you made 
a mistake.  Can you point me to where you have identified 
for the minister that you made a mistake? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, may I not respond to the 
question in case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You see, if I read that paragraph it is 
saying something quite different to what you said in your 
10 
affidavit before the Companies Tribunal.  In your affidavit 
before the Companies Tribunal – I am maybe going to call 
it the fall on your sword affidavit, you say: 
I did write a second letter but I subsequently...” 
Sorry. 
“I wrote a second letter that advised the minister 
that the board had changed its first decision to a 
second decision to now go for two instead of ten 
aircraft but I subsequently discovered, after sending 
that letter, that I was wrong and the board had only 
20 
decided to go for the ten aircraft.” 
By contrast what you are conveying, as I read paragraph 2 
of your letter, is that there is not one decision but three 
decisions.  The first decision, taken for ten, then a request 
for that to change to two and then that subsequent request 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 115 of 120 
 
you say in your own words has since been reconsidered 
and SAA has decided to revert to the ten aircraft.   
 
So this letter, Ms Myeni, I put to you is conveying to 
the minister nothing about a mistake, it is conveying to the 
minister that three board decisions were taken, the first 
decision for ten aircraft, the second decision for two 
aircraft and the third decision for ten aircraft.  Do you 
understand that as I understand that paragraph? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, may I not respond to the 
question just in case I incriminate myself. 
10 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You see, I would put it to you, Ms Myeni, 
that when Minister Gigaba received this letter on the 11 
July 2013 he was being told that the board of South African 
Airways had taken three decisions, two of which you 
admitted in an affidavit before the Companies Tribunal 
later in 2017 had never been taken.  Why would you make 
such a false representation to the minister? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, may I not respond to this 
question in case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Ms Myeni, do you know what fraud is? 
20 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, may I not confirm respond in 
case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you know that fraud is a crime, Ms 
Myeni? 
MS MYENI:   I am sorry? 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 116 of 120 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you know that fraud is a crime? 
MS MYENI:   I have answered, Chairperson. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   The second question was slightly 
different.  The first question was do you know what fraud 
is?  The second question was do you know that fraud is a 
crime?  Is your answer to the first question the same as 
your answer to the second question, that you decline to 
answer whether you know that fraud is a crime because 
your answer might tend to incriminate you? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer the question, Chairperson, 
10 
in case I incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You see, fraud is generally or takes 
place – fraud is perpetrated or takes place when a person 
intentionally misrepresents a factual position to someone 
which causes them actual or potential prejudice.  Do you 
have any understanding of that being what happens when 
fraud is committed? 
MS MYENI:   May I not answer the question, Chairperson, 
in case I incriminate myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you know whether fraud is a bad 
20 
thing in society? 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, I respect your Commission and I 
am sure your Commission’s terms of reference cover a 
number of issues pertaining to broadly corruption not in a 
selective way but broadly.  Certainly, Chairperson, as a 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 117 of 120 
 
responsible citizen, it is known that I know the definition of 
fraud and what fraud means. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS MYENI:   But, Chairperson, with your respect, I am not 
going to answer this question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MS MYENI:   I do not want to incriminate myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Ms Hofmeyr? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Now at the time that these letters were 
written to the Minister of Public Enterprises there were a 
10 
number of members of the board of SAA that were very 
concerned about the fact that you had written these letters 
and misrepresented the factual position to the minister.  
You were aware of their concerns. 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, may I not answer the question, I 
do not want to incriminate myself. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   You see, they were not only concerned 
about the fact that a misrepresentation had been made, 
they 
were 
concerned 
that 
as 
a 
result 
of 
that 
misrepresentation the Pembroke transaction had been 
20 
substantially delayed and that delay cost South African 
Airways in excess of R800 million.  Are you aware that that 
was the second part of their concern? 
MS MYENI:   Sorry, Chairperson, may I get clarity?  Who is 
Pembroke? 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 118 of 120 
 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Pembroke, as I understand it, is the 
party that the board resolved on the 27 May 2013 to enter 
into a transaction with for ten aircraft. 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson, may I not respond to this 
question in case I incriminate myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Ms Hofmeyr?  
ADV HOFMEYR:   Do you …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, we are at four. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Oh, alright. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  We did not speak about what we 
10 
would do when we reached four o’clock, I know we lost 
quite some time in the morning so I do not mind us 
proceeding.  What do you propose subject to what Mr 
Buthelezi say and what Ms Myeni would say? 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Chair, from my side I can say evidence 
has never gone so quickly, so I am cautiously optimistic 
that given that we set aside today, tomorrow and Friday for 
Ms Myeni’s evidence, I could quite comfortably finish within 
that period of time.  I am available to remain later if it 
would be convenient to make a bit further advance. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   But I do not see a risk that I will not 
complete my questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine.  Mr Buthelezi, 
have you got any particular view? 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 119 of 120 
 
MR BUTHELEZI:   Sorry, I have to run it past Mr Mabuzu 
and Ms Myeni herself given her current state, so I just 
would 
not 
want 
to 
commit 
her 
without 
having 
first 
confirmed, so maybe if you give me five minutes just to run 
it past the attorneys to see if they want us to proceed? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, but maybe what we can do because 
Ms Hofmeyr says she is confident she will finish within the 
time that has been allocated.  Maybe we can stop now for 
today and we could add another hour if we thought we are 
not going to finish within the time allocated.  So maybe 
10 
that would be fine with you as well. 
MR BUTHELEZI:   So are we saying, Chair, we adjourn 
now for the day? 
CHAIRPERSON:   That we adjourn now, it is four o’clock.  
If that would be fine with you. 
MR BUTHELEZI:   That is okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and then tomorrow we can start at 
ten. 
ADV HOFMEYR:   Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright.  Alright, Ms Myeni? 
20 
MS MYENI:   Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are going to adjourn now for the day 
and then we will resume tomorrow at ten o’clock. 
MS MYENI:   Thank you very much, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, we will adjourn for the day 
04 NOVEMBER 2020 – DAY 298 
 
Page 120 of 120 
 
and tomorrow we will resume at ten o’clock.   
We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 5 NOVEMBER 2020 
