 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
13 JANUARY 2021 
 
 
DAY 327 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 167 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
13 JANUARY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 3 of 167 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 13 JANUARY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Seleka, good morning 
everybody. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Are you ready? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Chairperson we are ready.  Chairperson 
the hearings today is scheduled for Mr Anoj Singh the 
former CFO of Eskom.  Mr Singh is represented legally by 
Counsel and an attorney and maybe they could place 
themselves on record. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes you may do that from where you are 
if you are able to.  Yes. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  Good morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Members of the commission.  It 
is correct my name is Anneline Van Den Heever I am an 
advocate of Johannesburg Bar and a member of the Legal 
Practice Council.  I am here on instructions of Tshepho 
Mathopo of Mathopo Attorneys and we represent Mr Singh. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
20 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  I will in due course Chairperson 
allude to when we actually took over as a team. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV 
VAN 
DEN 
HEEVER: 
 
And 
the 
difficulties 
we 
encountered. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 4 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  Now we are appreciative 
Chairperson of the fact that we did not comply with your 
directives.  However… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes hang on.  Let us just – you will get a 
chance to address me fully.  I just wanted you to place 
yourselves on record then Mr Seleka can continue and then 
we take it from there. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  As it pleases. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chair.  I am sure my learned 
friend is at pains for me to draw to your attention that they 
have served – not served but handed us up an affidavit this 
morning which deals with the issue my learned friend was 
seeking to raise with you now. 
 
But what I will do is to have Mr Singh take the oath. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think what you should do is tell me what 
… 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The legal teams’ plans are and then – in 
20 
terms of plans for today as well as what evidence Mr Singh 
is supposed to – what matters Mr Singh is supposed to 
cover in his evidence and the questioning.  And then after 
that you can tell me what Counsel for Mr Singh’s attitude is 
and then at that stage we can allow her an opportunity to 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 5 of 167 
 
address me. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  Thank you Chairperson.  Chairperson 
from the side of the commission the hearing today was 
scheduled in order for Mr Singh to deal with matters that 
pertains firstly to his secondment from Transnet to Eskom 
and after arriving there to deal with matters that then 
unfold while he is at Eskom.   
 
Those matters in a sequential order of events in a 
chronological order will include matters of contracts given 
to McKinsey and Trillian and I use contracts given in a 
10 
loose sense.  But he can give us insight into that and give 
the Chairperson evidence into that. 
 
And then you have transaction relating to Tegeta 
that has been the focus of the teams’ attention lately.  And 
that is – is related to the acquisition of Optimum.  The 
events leading up to Eskom making a decision in regard to 
a pre-payment of R1.68 billion. 
 
A submission was prepared which from the evidence 
it is apparent that it was signed by both Mr Singh and Mr 
Koko and Mr Singh can testify on that and the purpose for 
20 
that submission and the decision that was made. 
 
From there Chairperson we have the submission 
also made in regard to the R659 million pre-payment.  Mr 
Singh could also give the Chairperson what he knows 
about that and the purpose for the decision being made in 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 6 of 167 
 
regard to that pre-payment. 
 
He might address the Chairperson also… 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think you might wish to bring the 
microphone closer to you so that your voice will be louder. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  He might address the Chairperson also 
in regard to the issue of the R2.17 billion penalties that 
Eskom was seeking to enforce against Optimum and how 
that matter ultimately gets – got to be dealt with in regard 
to Tegeta. 
 
The – there is an issue of the guarantee that pre-
10 
payment of R1.6 billion gets to be converted the next day 
into a guarantee.  Mr Singh from the evidence played some 
role in that regard and we are expecting him also to – to 
testify on that before the commission. 
 
So from our side we are ready to lead his evidence 
on all those issues and we have a particular order and the 
main focus is the Tegeta but we know that since last year 
after 
Mr 
Singh 
was 
served 
with 
a 
10.6 
directive 
Chairperson an affidavit directing him to file an affidavit on 
matters 
set 
out 
in 
the 
directive 
with 
documentation 
20 
provided to him relative to those matters. 
 
The affidavits that were due according to the 
directives on the 4 September 2020 have not been 
provided.  I believe in the affidavit now submitted this 
morning my learned friend will address you on the reasons 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 7 of 167 
 
for that. 
 
There is a letter from us which is the last annexure 
I saw in that affidavit.  I only wish to refer the Chairperson 
to that letter. 
 
My learned friend can do so as well but I think as 
for me the nub of the issue. 
 
So what we have in the file for Mr Singh absent his 
affidavit is his submission – written submission to the 
Parliamentary Portfolio Committee.   
 
That submission Chairperson was – is dated 5 
10 
December 2017.  So that is how far back that submission 
was prepared. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Did it cover all the matters that he has 
been told he needs to testify about? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It has… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Or those that were in the 10.6 directive? 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It has covered the Tegeta transactions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The Tegeta matters both the 1.6 well I 
say the Tegeta because it will be explained how these 
20 
decisions were made. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  It has covered that pre-payment R1.6 
billion.  It has covered the pre-payment of R659 million.  It 
has covered the McKinsey and Trillian relationship.  I am 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 8 of 167 
 
not sure whether Mr Singh covered his secondment but I 
am sure he would – he would deal with how he was sent to 
Eskom. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  So those matters are covered. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  The main issues.  And then we also 
have 
the 
transcript 
of 
Mr 
Singh’s 
testimony 
at 
the 
Parliamentary Portfolio Committee which is I think Mr 
Singh testified on the 23 January 2018.  We have that. 
10 
 
We have shared that with our learned friends and 
indicated that that is what we will rely on at the present 
stage. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay.  That is where you are okay. 
ADV SELEKA SC:  That is the position from our side. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The Counsel for Mr Singh.  I think you 
can move to the podium because I think you may have 
quite some substantive issues to deal with.  They will 
sanitise first and then you can move to the podium.   
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  As already stated for the record I 
appear on behalf of Mr Singh.  We prepared an affidavit a 
relatively comprehensive dealing with all the issues since 
the directive were issued. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 9 of 167 
 
 
I understand the original does form part of the file I 
would beg leave to hand up a copy or if you are in 
possession of the copy I wish to take you through the 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no I do not think I have – I do not 
think I have got a copy. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  I am handing – I think it is the 
original.  Oh this is a copy.  Chairperson let me hand you 
mine at this point because it is stapled together.  I think it 
would be better for you to follow in that regard. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Tell me what the purpose of this 
affidavit is? 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  Chairperson the purpose of the 
affidavit is set out in paragraph 5 page 2.  May I take you 
to that? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Paragraph 5 you said? 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  Yes it is on page 2.  We state 
here: 
“The purpose of this affidavit to set out and 
give 
reasons 
to 
the 
Chairperson 
the 
20 
Honourable 
Judge 
President 
Zondo 
– 
supposed to be Deputy of the Judicial 
Commission of Inquiry to allegations of 
state capture, corruption and fraud in the 
public sector regarding my failure to comply 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 10 of 167 
 
with the two directives issued to myself in 
terms of Regulation 10.6” 
 
So this is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  You might just wish to raise your voice or 
bring the microphone closer. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  I will do so. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  The – we then go in paragraph 6 
Chairperson and we refer to the directives and the dates 
on which they were issued.  And in paragraph 7 state: 
10 
“It is common cause that we did not …” 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well before you proceed why is this 
explanation brought at the last minute today when he is – 
he has had ample time to have done so? 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  Chairperson if I go through the 
affidavit you will understand to a large extent why it is 
brought at this point in time. And in due course I will 
address you on various issues that arose during the course 
of 
an 
exchange 
of 
communication 
and 
finally 
this 
culminated as I said and this will come in due course in a 
20 
virtual or a Zoom meeting that was held between ourselves 
and the legal team for the commission including the 
investigators and at that point we explained to them what 
our position is. 
 
And all of that Chairperson is contained in our 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 11 of 167 
 
affidavit.  I think it is quite important that I… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let us start with that because it is 
inconvenient that I should be given this affidavit on the 
morning of the day when he is supposed to testify. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  About his explanation.  That could have 
been dealt with earlier so that by today we would have had 
certainty about what is happening. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And if for argument sake I have come to 
10 
the conclusion after seeing his affidavit maybe two weeks 
ago that I will allow him not to testify today.  We could 
have made arrangements to have another witness to use 
today.  But when the affidavit is brought on the morning of 
the day when he is supposed to testify it is important that I 
know whether there is a proper explanation why it is 
brought so late. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  Indeed I take note of what you 
say Chairperson.  The situation is that the events that led 
us to filing such a late affidavit has its roots in the – the 
20 
events that unfolded visa vie what our client needed to do. 
 
I think there was an intention at some stage that we 
would try and be in a position today to present you with an 
affidavit and give evidence. 
 
But as you will see from the comprehensive affidavit 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 12 of 167 
 
it was impossible to do so.  We tried Chairperson to – as I  
say to be here today – that was our wish but for the 
reasons set out in this affidavit it turned out that we were 
not in a position to get to this point 
 
In fact we raised the issue as I have already stated 
on 
Friday 
with 
the 
legal 
team. 
 
There 
is 
various 
communications and I will refer you to that.  We have dealt 
with it in the – in our affidavit. 
 
But it deals with the predicament if I can call it 
which my client finds himself in.  So this is in no ways 
10 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think what we should do is – it is going 
to be faster if we adjourn.  Let me go and read this 
affidavit and then when I come back then we can have a 
proper engagement.  Rather than me reading it as you 
continue to address me. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  We are quite happy that we… 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is not satisfactory. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  We do that Chairperson.  I must 
just – I might just add and this is again not as an excuse 
20 
we did last night send – yesterday afternoon late a draft 
through and we undertook to give the signed one with the 
annexures this morning.  As I said I think it is a good 
suggestion by yourself Chairperson to go through it and we 
can then engage in the content of the affidavit. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 13 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  But just in short Chairperson so 
that you understand where we come from in this.  Our 
client’s is not in a position to give evidence today for the 
reasons set out herein.  He was also not in a position to 
file his affidavit as per the directive because of the 
reasons set out herein. 
 
So we have got the affidavit and we refer to the 
various annexures that is email exchanges, requests for 
further documents in the annexures. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja, no, no. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:  Just so that you understand this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine let me go and read it.  We 
are going to adjourn for fifteen minutes I think that should 
be enough for me to read but if I finish earlier then we will 
resume earlier that fifteen minutes.  Okay we adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have read this affidavit.  I have not 
20 
looked at the – I have not read the annexures but the 
deponent deals with the gist of what was in the annexures to 
a large extent, in his affidavit.   
 
Now that I have read it.  So what do you say or what do 
you want to say about it? 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 14 of 167 
 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Chairperson, what we are 
requesting of yourself is that we be afforded an opportunity, 
having regard to the content of our affidavit with all the 
annexures, 
to 
file 
a 
comprehensive 
affidavit 
with 
the 
Commission. 
 
We belief in doing so, we will curtail any evidence that 
needs to ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, we will lose today.  That is for sure. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Yes, and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The Commission simple does not have 
10 
time left.  There is very little time left.  There are many 
witnesses 
and 
implicated 
person 
who 
must 
still 
give 
evidence.  It is just very, very difficult to allow any day to be 
lost. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Chairperson, we understand that 
but we verily belief, once the Commission has sight of our 
client’s affidavit ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That affidavit should have been brought a 
long time ago.  And I have read what Mr Singh says here and 
I am not convinced that he gives an acceptable reason for 
20 
not filing – complying with the directives. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   With the greatest of respect 
Chairperson, we believe that there is good reason why he 
did not do so and it relates to, first of all, the change of legal 
teams.  You will then notice, once Mathopo Attorneys got 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 15 of 167 
 
onboard, 
they 
immediately 
corresponded 
with 
the 
Commission.   
 
And throughout, you will see Chairperson, there is 
communication.  We did not sit back and just let it be.  We 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well... 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   We communicated, explained our 
position to the Commission and almost in ...[indistinct] 
[00:02:32] said to them this is the problems that we felt.  And 
specifically – I think if you take note of what our clients 
10 
says, Mr Singh says in the beginning.  He wants to play ball 
with the Commission if I can look – if I can refer 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, his – the history of his conduct does 
not show that.   
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   That is an inference to be drawn 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   But take it from us as the legal 
team and from our client, we place on record, we want to 
20 
assist the Commission.  And the client verily believes, as he 
set out here, that the best way to assist the Commission is 
to give the Commission a comprehensive version.  And that 
comprehensive version ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no.  Well, you – he would be 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 16 of 167 
 
seeking to be treated differently from how other people have 
been treated.  We – the way the Commission has dealt with 
issues from the beginning is that people who may have a 
number of matters to testify about and be questioned about, 
they get called for a specific matter at a particular time or 
specific matters.   
 
And they are told:  For now, you are just coming to give 
evidence about A, B and C.  We will ask you to come back 
later and deal with D, E and F.  And almost, without 
exception, everyone has cooperated with that.   
10 
 
That is why there are many witnesses who have come to 
the Commission to give evidence about other matters.  So all 
that is required and has been required of Mr Singh, is that 
today he comes to testify only about the matters that he has 
been told about.   
 
And he has had ample time knowing what those matters 
are.  He would have been given, even before the directives 
and even before the summons, he would have been given 
Rule 3.3. notices in regard to the matters.   
 
Of course, also one cannot ignore the fact that there is 
20 
no way that somebody like Mr Singh could have thought that 
this Commission would finish his job without calling him to 
come and give evidence.   
 
So he has known from the inception of this Commission 
– it was established early in 2018 – so he has had three 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 17 of 167 
 
years of knowing that in all probability, at some stage or 
another, he would be called.   
 
And he knew what matters are likely to be raised with 
him.  And he could easily have made sure that if and when 
he is called, he is ready. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Chairperson, may I address you 
on a few of the issues that you have raised? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Now first of all.  The summons we 
received in December. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   And you would have noticed from 
the affidavit, Mr Mathopo immediately dealt with it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   And I do not want to go, again, 
into the details but the fact of the matter is.  Only on Friday 
afternoon did we understand and we were given – and I do 
not want to go into an off the record discussion but it is 
common cause.   
 
We were at that point informed exactly what we were 
20 
going to be called about.  That it is the Tegeta issue.  And 
we, at that stage, played open cards with the legal team and 
the investigators during this.   
 
And we have explained to them, we have got issues in 
the following things.  We have not had the benefit, one, of 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 18 of 167 
 
being presented with a reference style.  We have taken note 
of the way the Commission works and when witnesses give 
evidence, they refer to a Reference File and they refer to 
documents.   
 
In order for us, and in fairness for us, to prepare we 
need that.  So then the Commission, I think, late Friday or 
early evening forwarded to us, not the updated but the 
documents they had electronically.  We also, at that stage, 
pointed out to them.   
 
Insofar as you want to lead our client’s evidence with 
10 
reference to the Portfolio Committee.  We want to place on 
record, and there is documents.  It is documented.  But our 
client has not received the transcript of his evidence that he 
gave to the Commission.   
 
And we explained to him, and you will appreciate this, 
that at the time our client was no longer with Eskom.  Written 
submissions were prepared in vacuo.  In other words, relying 
on memory, not the benefit of certain documents, etcetera.   
 
And on that basis, the client also gave evidence there.  
You will appreciate, for him now to from memory deal with 
20 
issues that he gave evidence on, I think the date was in 
January of 2018.  It is just not fair.   
 
He needs an opportunity to go through his evidence and 
deal with the issues that arose there.  To that extent, I think 
yesterday afternoon, quite late, we finally got an electronic 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 19 of 167 
 
version of the evidence.   
 
And you will appreciate Chairperson, and forgive me for 
repeating this, we dealt with it.  We constantly asked, we 
need it.  It is important for us to have it.  We need it to 
comprehensively deal with the issues raised.   
 
So you will understand that this is not a question of not 
having prepared all along.  As we have stated.  We worked 
on an affidavit.  There was a draft which we constantly had 
to amend because of the new evidence that came up.  And 
we ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  You were required as at a certain date 
to give your version based on what was available at the time.  
Obviously, if subsequently something else cropped up that 
needed, that you supplement.  A supplementary affidavit 
could be put in.  But all you would be required to is, to give 
your version to the best of your knowledge and belief and 
your recollection. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Ja, but Chairperson, again, you 
need 
to 
understand 
the 
reason 
why 
the 
client 
was 
apprehensive to do that because he once before found 
20 
himself in a position where he had to give evidence and it 
led to difficulties.   
 
He deals with it in his affidavit, where he has not had 
the benefit of documents, other people’s input, et cetera, to 
give a fair, reasonable and truthful explanation at the time.  
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 20 of 167 
 
And for that reason, he explains to the Commission:  I was 
apprehensive to in vacua just deal with – because Tegeta, 
you will recall, is Annexures A to G.  So just ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Where is that?  Can I have a copy of the 
summons that was served on him?   
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   The summons to appear today? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Ja, because these are the 
directives.  Mr Mathopo...  Chairperson, may I just approach 
my attorney whilst you read? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, this summons says: 
“He is directed to appear before the Commission for 
the 
purpose 
of 
giving 
evidence 
before 
the 
Commission and being questioned on the affidavits 
that he had submitted to the Commission and issues 
arising from or relating thereto.” 
 
What affidavit had he signed, had he filed at the 
Commission? 
20 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   [Microphone not switched on.] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Please switch on the mic. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Sorry.  At that point, he had not 
filed an affidavit and my instructing attorney went on record 
to say:  We do not know what affidavit you are referring to.  
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 21 of 167 
 
Please enlighten us.  And you will appreciate, and again, I 
do not want to put blame at the door of Mr Seleka and his 
team, but the first communication that we got back from them 
was on the 7t h of January.  That is after the letter of 
Mr Mathopo of 18 December.  And just more point that was 
brought to my attention Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   The first time our client was 
informed or that he will be needed for purposes of giving – 
potentially giving evidence in the Commission was in August 
10 
last year.  So it is not an issue – and we have taken note of 
the fact that many people that has been involved in the 
issues that has been canvassed, were not – were never 
called.   
 
So with that again as background, there potentially could 
have been a reasonable thought process by the client that he 
might not be called, that says that he might not be needed to 
come and give evidence.   
 
And it was on that basis, as I said, that the client 
prepared the draft affidavit.   
20 
 
And constantly amended it as the evidence came up 
because the though process was that if we present the 
Commission 
with 
a 
thoroughly 
thought 
through 
comprehensive affidavit dealing with these issues – and I 
can place on record that in the way we dealt with the draft – 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 22 of 167 
 
and I have informed my learned friends about it – is to deal 
with the issues as we were informed you wish to deal with. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Assume that you persuade me, and I am 
far from being persuaded, but assuming that you persuade 
me that I should allow Mr Singh not to testify today.  This 
affidavit that you are talking about, which I assume would 
deal with the issues contained – he was required to deal with 
in the directives and deal with the – certainly those.  Maybe 
to deal with some of the matters that he was supposed to 
testify about today.  When would you undertake to file it with 
10 
the Commission? 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Chairperson, the only issue that 
we are basically left with at this point is, we last night 
received his oral evidence.  It goes in quite a number of 
pages.  We need to peruse that.  We need to take 
instructions on that, and we need to prepare on it.   
 
Our suggestion to our learned friends was, that we file 
our affidavit on Friday, next week.  It will then be dealing 
with all the issues.  I think the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is too long.  Ja.  It is too long. 
20 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Maybe if you can give us 
guidance Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   If we can be so bold, to give us 
guidance as to when you would find it reasonable for us.  As 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 23 of 167 
 
I said, I place on record, we are relatively far in our 
preparations.  It is literally – we need to deal with our oral 
evidence and we need to deal with, I think some of the 
evidence that was presented yesterday.   
 
And then we can – and we have to – sorry, there is one 
more issue.  We have to deal with the Reference File.  There 
are issues contained, documents in the Reference File that 
is utilised by my learned friends for the Commission, and 
there are certain documents in there that we have to deal 
with.   
10 
 
And that is having regard to the manner and the way 
evidence was led and the issues that was highlighted by both 
yourself Chairperson and my learned friend that you find 
important where you need a proper explanation on, and that 
is what our client wants to give you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Can I see the directives that were 
issues as well? 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   The directives? 
CHAIRPERSON:   The directives, ja.  Or was it one or was it 
two? 
20 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   It was two directives Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   In the affidavit, we state that the 
one that relates to the Tegeta issue, if I can call it 
...[intervenes]  
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 24 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   ...simple is a directive with 
Annexures A to G. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   These annexures are pure 
documents in vacuo if I can be so bold to state it like that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   And if you – if we were to file, and 
that was our problem at the time, and you would notice that 
we asked for numerous documents in order to assist us to 
10 
deal with the issues that – or to deal with Annexures A to G.  
If we were file in vacuo, we would have said:  Yes, we agree 
that this is – the document is recorded correctly.  Yes, we 
agree.   
 
But that would not have assisted you Chairperson.  What 
you want to have is to understand how document or 
Annexure A came about.  What role did you play?   
 
And in – to that extent, what transpired – and again, we 
dealt with it in the affidavit – what transpired is that 
witnesses came to give evidence and their diversion on it.  
20 
And on occasion we agree and on other occasions we do not 
agree.   
 
And then documents came up that we never had sight of 
and those documents, of course, refreshed our memory and 
we – by looking at the document, we can objectively say to 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 25 of 167 
 
the Commission in our affidavit:   
 
If you look at the document, this is our version.  And we 
are not taking issue, for instance, with the Commission’s 
approach on this.   
 
Or, if you look at this document – and a lot of these 
documents, if I may interrupt myself, only came up during 
December with the evidence, and to that extent – I do not 
want to highlight it.  Ms Daniels’ evidence is quite important.   
 
And documents were presented to her that we did not 
have.  And that, of course, again prompted us to deal with 
10 
that.   
 
So 
I 
hope 
you 
understand 
Chairperson 
what 
our 
predicament is.  We want to assist the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   And we want to curtail, client 
sitting here and going through written submissions that we 
might say:  Take it as a given.  It is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Except – I want to amplify this 
point. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Instead to taking the client 
through that:  But did you say this?  Yes.  Did you say this?  
Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 26 of 167 
 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   So with that as a background, we 
really literally beg you to give us an indulgence to assist the 
Commission and file this affidavit.  And we – and take it from 
us, we believe it will curtail his evidence and we will not – 
and I am not going to say, today will be wasted if he is taking 
through that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   But it might not even be 
necessary to deal with it ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   If I grant you the indulgence.  My 
10 
inclination would be that it should be enough if you have – if 
you file on Monday. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   We understand and if that is your 
directive, we will file on Monday. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  Okay alright.  Let me hear what 
Mr Seleka has to say. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Thank you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson.  Chairperson, I 
have listened carefully to my learned friend.  I have two 
20 
issues that needs to be addressed from what she is saying.  
One is the reason for the failure.   
 
I think that is apparent from the affidavit that the 
position taken by Mr Anoj Singh is that:  I waited to hear the 
evidence of other people in order to file an affidavit or 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 27 of 167 
 
submit one, and that the evidence in regard to the Tegeta 
matters only came up only in December 2020.   
CHAIRPERSON:   I tell you what Mr Seleka.  The only thing 
that might persuade me to grant effectively a postponement 
of the hearing of Mr Anoj Singh’s evidence.  I am not sure 
about all the arguments that have been advanced about the 
reasons and so on.  But I have looked at this summons. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Have you looked at this summons that was 
issued to him? 
10 
ADV SELEKA SC:   I have looked at it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It says:  He is directed to appear before 
the Commission...  And it gives the address and the date, 
which is today.   
 
And then it says: 
“...for the purpose of giving evidence before the 
Commission and being questioned on the affidavit 
that you had submitted to the Commission and 
issues arising from or relating thereto.” 
 
Now, what affidavit was the legal team talking about 
20 
there? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chairperson that is an important 
question.  Chair, I want to read from the letter that we 
addressed to him because ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, let us talk about the summons first. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 28 of 167 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Because ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So I am asking the question.  The 
summons called him to appear today. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   His evidence ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...and to be questioned on the affidavit, he 
alleged he had submitted to the Commission and the issues 
arising from or relating thereto. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   What affidavit was the legal team talking 
about? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.   At that stage Chairperson, as my 
learned friend said for Mr Anoj Singh, he had not served an 
affidavit but it was expected from him the day after the 
summons was served. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So the summons it was talking about, a 
non-existent affidavit? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   It was talking about an affidavit at the 
time that was not – had not been given. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was ...[indistinct] ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Correct, Chairperson.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Does this make this summons – does not 
that make the summons defective? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Well, Chair I think in discussion with the 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 29 of 167 
 
legal team at the time they were assisting me with attorneys 
for Mr Anoj Singh, there was an undertaking from their part 
that there will be an affidavit on the 18t h of December.  I 
believe the summons was served on the 17t h of December.   
CHAIRPERSON:   How does that help, whether or not the 
summons is defective?  If, at the time, the summons was 
issued, it referred to a non-existent affidavit, that he must 
come and testify about a non-existent affidavit and issues 
arising from that affidavit ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...which did not exist. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Well, what I am saying to the 
Chairperson is that.  If there is any defect in that regard 
Chairperson, it is taking care of by the arrangement 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But why was a summons issued which 
said he had submitted an affidavit when factually he has not 
submitted an affidavit? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, that point I have myself also raised 
Chair.  But I was given – to understand that.  Look, it was 
20 
against 
the 
background 
of 
an 
undertaking 
given 
by 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But you cannot issue summons that says, 
you filed – and now somebody has filed an affidavit, if 
factually that has not happened. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 30 of 167 
 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Chair, the summons is issued 
against a particular person. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   And that person has been engaging with 
the Commission in regard to the filing ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But it does not matter.  The summons 
must tell the person to whom it is issued what he is required 
to testify about on the day when he is required to appear. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And effectively, what this summons is 
10 
requiring Mr Singh to come and testify about, is an affidavit 
that did not exist then and actually does not exist even now, 
as far as I am concerned because I do not think that the 
affidavit that has been handed up is that affidavit. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   No, it is not.  No, it has not. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So how do I insist that he must give 
evidence today when the summons told him to come and 
testify about a non-existent affidavit. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja.  Chair, when the issue was raised, 
you will see from the letter that I then wrote Chairperson 
20 
personally, which is the last annexure in this affidavit, I 
explained the position that:  Okay, I understand that the 
communication between you and the Commission, which is 
my assistance in the Commission, was that you – and I think 
with the secretariat – was that, an affidavit was anticipated 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 31 of 167 
 
from you on the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But the moment you say it was anticipated 
...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It does not help.  You as the leader should 
not have authorised your team to give the secretariat a 
summons to sign which said Mr Singh was required to 
appear and give evidence and be questioned on an affidavit 
that you had not seen.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   I accept that Chairperson. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   You agree? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That it could not have been written that 
way.  Ordinarily, you would not write it that way Chairperson.  
That I accept.  I accept that they would have then based 
their summons in that regard in the light of the anticipation.  
That is not giving you the answer Chairperson but I am 
saying that is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Just help me. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because in the first place, the summons 
20 
did not have to refer to any affidavit. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair.  Correct.  I have raised that 
issue Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You and your team ought to have known 
what the issues are or were that you wanted him to testify 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 32 of 167 
 
about. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And those could have been listed in 
annexures, as Annexure A.  So the summons could have 
said:  For the purpose of giving evidence before the 
Commission and being questioned on the matters listed in 
Annexure A.   
 
Then you could list the issues or you refer to the 
affidavits of witnesses that have implicated that you would 
want to question about.  That could have been done.  You 
10 
did not have to refer to any affidavit by him in circumstances 
where there was no affidavit by him. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Chair, I have raised that issue myself.  
The explanation I have give you Chairperson is how I get it.  
I wrote a letter, explaining to the attorney for Mr Anoj Singh 
that the issues that he would be expected to testify about, 
are those that were listed in the directives. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the summons should stand or fall on 
its own.  It should be completely.  It should tell the person to 
whom it is directed what the matters are that he is required 
20 
to testify about.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And this summons, as it stands, does not 
tell him anything meaningful because everybody knows that 
whereas it says he would give evidence and the questions on 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 33 of 167 
 
the affidavit he had submitted, everybody knows he had not 
submitted any affidavit.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair that is – what I am saying to 
the Chairperson.  I accept your position Chairperson.  That 
is correct.  What I am saying to the Chairperson is how the 
communication 
unfolded 
between 
the 
parties. 
 
So 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, no.  My interest was whether or 
not I can insist on the basis of the summons that he testifies 
today and it seems to me that I cannot or I should not 
10 
because I am not satisfied that this summons sufficiently 
tells him or tells him ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   What is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...what he is going – he is required to 
testify about.  There may be have been correspondence 
between ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Between the parties. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...the Commission’s legal team and – but 
the summons which required and compelled him to appear 
before the Commission, does not tell him.  The only thing 
20 
you can ask him about today, strictly speaking, is this non-
existing affidavit. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, for him to...  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He would be entitled to say:   I have been 
asked to – I have been told through this summons that I will 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 34 of 167 
 
give evidence and be questioned on this affidavit and issues 
relating to it.  And he can say:  Where is that affidavit before 
you ask me questions?  What would you say?  He would be 
entitled to say:  You cannot ask me questions on other 
matters. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The matters you have called me here to 
deal with, are the matters that are in the affidavit.  And the 
affidavit is talking about a non-existing affidavit. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m.  Chair, if the – and I am not 
10 
answering the Chairperson but I am answering him on the 
hypothetical question Chairperson.  But it will not be fair for 
him to ask the question if there has been an engagement 
between... [technical cut in recording] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, but the fact of the matter is.  Why 
would he not be entitled to say:  I am here under compulsion 
on the basis of this summons? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And this summons says, today my 
evidence must relate to this affidavit.  You cannot outside 
20 
the scope of the summons.  So I must say that I was very 
inclined to refuse the indulgence, the request for indulgence 
that counsel for Mr Singh asked for.  And wanted to insist 
that Mr Singh begins his evidence today and be questions. 
 
But in the light of this summons, I do not think that I can 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 35 of 167 
 
do that.  But I also take note that counsel for Mr Singh has 
very passionately undertaken that they intend to file a 
comprehensive affidavit and – when I indicated that, if I 
grant the indulgence, I would not grant them up to Friday but 
up to Monday.  She has said that they will comply with that 
deadline.   
 
So if you have something to say, something else to say, 
you can say it but right now, I am inclined to reluctantly 
grant the indulgence but may be order that they must file 
their affidavit, comprehensive affidavit on Monday. 
10 
 
But if you ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...you would like to deal with some 
matters to argue that I should not grant the indulgence, you 
may do so.  But that is my difficulty.  I have indicated to you 
how I feel about this. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  No, Chair I understand because on 
the one hand you have discussions between the parties, 
exchange by letters, and you see how parties accommodate 
each other or the Commission and the parties. 
20 
 
On the other hand, you have the formalities of the rules.  
So if you go strictly by the formalities of the rules 
Chairperson which I appreciate, that is what the Chairperson 
is focussing on, that is the approach to be adopted. 
 
But I think it is really opportunistic Chairperson, after 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 36 of 167 
 
having engaged along the lines of the Commission and the 
party have done, and mind you Chairperson, reliance was 
not placed on that summons to seek a postponement.  It is 
placed on other things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it might not have been placed on it 
but if I am going to insist that Mr Anoj Singh takes the 
witness stand and give evidence and be questions, I must be 
satisfied that he has been properly summoned because he 
could be entitled and that is not what his counsel has said, I 
mean.   
10 
 
But he could be entitled to say:  Well, if I am being 
forced to give evidence, I am going to approach the court 
and have the summons set aside because it is fatally 
defective.  And he might have a good point.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   H’m.   
CHAIRPERSON:   So it is more about whether in these 
circumstances and in the light of this summons, I can insist 
that he gives evidence.  That is where my difficulty is and I 
am inclined to – that I cannot or should not. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes, Chair ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   The...  I get the impression that certainly 
his counsel is committed in assisting the Commission by way 
of this comprehensive affidavit.  And so that will be helpful. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Yes.  Yes, Chair.  Certainly, I have been 
– she has communicated that much to me. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 37 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But can I also – and I do not need to 
persuade the Chairperson because she has already told the 
Chairperson that we have informed them that he will be 
testifying on the Tegeta matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   But that does not have to change. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Because the emphasis is on the 
summons as it is.  I myself have had to question the 
10 
summons.  The Chairperson will appreciate the workload and 
not everything passes under one’s eye.  So. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well ...[intervenes]  
ADV SELEKA SC:   yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But a summons must – in a summons in 
your work stream should not go out without you having 
authorised it.  That should not happen.  And as you see, this 
is, as far as I am concerned, a fatal defect of the summons.  
The summons is fatally defective.  Okay.  I... 
 
Unless you have some other points to make, I am 
20 
inclined to grant the indulgence, make it an order that 
Mr Singh must file his comprehensive affidavit by close of 
business on Monday.   
 
And then one will have to find another date when he 
must come back.  And you will just have to make sure that 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 38 of 167 
 
that time the summons is not defective.   
ADV SELEKA SC:   I will certainly attend to that one 
Chairperson.  I do not think I have any further to say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Except that my learned friend will bear 
in mind that there has been a long string of indulgences. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   So. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Ja. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  I am going to adjourn the 
hearing of Mr Anoj Singh’s evidence to a date yet to be 
determined 
and 
then 
order 
that 
he 
delivers 
to 
the 
Commission 
by 
close 
of 
business 
on 
Monday 
a 
comprehensive affidavit as indicated by his counsel, dealing 
with all the issues referred to in the affidavit in the 10.6 
Directives.  But counsel, it goes beyond that what you want 
to put up.  It is actually also other issues that he would 
testify about.  Is that right? 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Indeed Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Our intention is to deal with the 
evidence, the documents, et cetera. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Based on the issues that we know 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 39 of 167 
 
you wish to hear. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Those evidence on.  This will be 
Tegeta. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay.  No, that is fine.  Okay.  So 
the order I make is the following.   
1. 
The hearing of Mr Anoj Singh’s evidence is 
adjourned to a date to be determined. 
2. 
Mr Anoj Singh is ordered to deliver to the 
Commission by close of business on Monday, the 
10 
18t h of January 2021, a comprehensive affidavit this 
counsel has referred to that will deal with, among 
other things, the issues referred to in the two 
directives as well as all the issues that he is 
required to testify about. 
3. 
Another date for Mr Anoj Singh to appear 
before the commission will be determined in due 
course. 
 
That is the order. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.   
ADV VAN DEN HEEVER:   Thank you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  We are going to adjourn for 
the day but later on, the Commission will hear evidence.  So 
there will be a sitting later on, I think at four.  We will hear 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 40 of 167 
 
evidence from Mr Chris Todd relating to Transnet.  But then 
tomorrow, the Commission will continue with evidence 
relating to Eskom.  Who are the witnesses for tomorrow? 
ADV SELEKA SC:   That is – in the morning is Ms Matsietsi 
Makholo.  Then there are two further witnesses, Ms Mosilo 
Mothepu and Ms Bianca Goodson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright.  Okay.  We adjourn. 
ADV SELEKA SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon, Mr Myburgh, good 
afternoon everybody. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Good afternoon, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, are we ready? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
Chairperson, 
this 
afternoon’s 
evidence relates to the Transnet [indistinct] 00.00.43   Mr 
Todd is being recalled as a witness to deal with two things 
…[intervenes]. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just one second, I think they will need 
to adjust the air con, it is quite noisy.  But in the meantime 
you can try and raise your voice. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, certainly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 41 of 167 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Todd will deal with two things and 
I will go into more detail in a moment, GNS and the third 
payment of legal costs made to Mr Gama upon his 
reinstatement.  Mr Gama is present this afternoon together 
with 
counsel. 
 
Perhaps 
I 
should 
afford 
his 
counsel 
opportunity to place himself on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let him place himself on record or 
herself.  You can do – ja, okay, alright.  Let them just 
sanitise first. 
ADV 
OLDWADGE 
SC: 
 
Thank 
you, 
Mr 
Chairperson, 
10 
Oldwadge.  I will spell that, it is O-l-d-w-a-d-ge, K C.  Is 
my name, I am a member of the Johannesburg Bar.  I 
appear on behalf of Mr Gama. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE SC:  I am instructed in this matter by 
Brian Kahn Incorporated.  Ms Barker seated to my right 
from the aforesaid firm is in attendance with me.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE SC:  I have appeared before you in these 
proceedings. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think I remember. 
ADV OLDWADGE SC:  Indeed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
ADV OLDWADGE SC:  Thank you, Mr Chair.  We are 
merely here to observe today and there may very well be 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 42 of 167 
 
an application that follows the testimony. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV OLDWADGE SC:  I am indebted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine, thank you. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Chairperson, if I could just take a 
few minutes to sketch the background then to Mr Todd’s 
evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The name GNS, General Nyanda 
Security has featured in these proceedings when Mr Todd 
10 
first gave evidence.  You will recall that Mr Gama was 
dismissed as the Chief Executive Officer of Transnet 
Freight Rail on a number of charges of misconduct.  He 
was found guilty inter alia of negligent conduct in relation 
to his signature of the confinement tender in favour of GNS   
They were then appointed as a security provider at 
Transnet.  So evidence has been given by Mr Todd in that 
context.   
 
Today the focus shifts to evidence by Mr Todd 
relating really to the proprietary of the contract and 
20 
ultimately the settlement of litigation that ensued between 
Transnet and GNS. 
 
Between the time that Mr Gama was dismissed and 
reinstated, Transnet instituted legal proceedings against 
GNS where they effectively reclaimed the R95 million that 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 43 of 167 
 
had been paid to GNS during the course of the contract 
after they had terminated it.   
Sometime after that, by which time Mr Gama was 
reinstated Transnet and GNS or Nyanda Security, its 
successor in title, entered into a settlement agreement in 
terms of which Transnet withdrew its application and 
agreed to pay costs on an attorney and own client scale 
and ultimately …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was it not an action? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It was an action, yes, an action for 
10 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   An action, ja, it claimed for damages. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That Transnet had instituted GNS. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, to recover effectively money that 
they had paid to GNS pursuant to the contract that Mr 
Gama had approved. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Allegedly an irregular contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Ja, so that action, Mr Chairman, you 
are correct, it was an action.  It was withdrawn and then 
there was an agreement to pay costs on an attorney client 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 44 of 167 
 
scale.  That litigation was still at quite a premature stage, 
there had been an exchange of pleadings and I think the 
filing of a discovery affidavit.  Ultimately Transnet paid 
some R20 million in costs.   
 
So Mr Todd’s evidence will give you insight into 
alleged irregularities in relation to the conclusion of the 
contract, irregular performance under the contract, the 
decision to settle and the decision to pay the R20 million 
costs. 
 
The other leg of Mr Todd’s evidence relates to the 
10 
third payment of legal costs made to Mr Gama further to 
his reinstatement.  The background to that you will recall, 
Mr Chairperson, when Mr Gama was reinstated, it was 
agreed that Transnet would pay 75% of his costs in relation 
to the High Court application and referral of his dismissal 
dispute to the bargaining council.  Now what we know 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it was taxed cost, hey? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  What we do know is that Mr Gama 
was paid that but then he was paid more, he was also paid 
75% of the costs that were incurred by Transnet by two 
separate sets of attorneys and counsel in the High Court 
proceedings. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 45 of 167 
 
 
When Mr Todd and Mr Mapoma gave evidence 
before because Mr Mapoma dealt with the costs issue, we 
did bring to your attention that a year or two later there 
was in fact a third payment that was made in respect of Mr 
Gama’s legal costs of some 1.5 million. 
 
Mr Todd has undertaken an investigation in that 
regard.  He has been provided with the documents and he 
puts up a short affidavit which he will also speak to but 
that part of his evidence will be very short.  Unless you 
have any questions, Mr Chairman, might I call then Mr 
10 
Todd as a witness? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, thank you.  Good afternoon, Mr 
Todd, thank you once again for coming back to assist the 
Commission in regard to this matter.  We appreciate the 
fact that you have assisted the Commission to understand 
exactly what happened in regard to this matters.  Thank 
you. 
MR TODD:  Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  Please administer the oath 
or affirmation. 
20 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
MR TODD:   Christopher Francis Neale Todd. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed affirmation? 
MR TODD:   No, I do not. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 46 of 167 
 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly affirm that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth the whole truth and nothing 
else but the truth.  If so, please raise your right hand and 
say I truly affirm. 
CHRISTOPHER FRANCIS NEALE TODD:   I truly affirm. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, you may be seated, Mr Todd.  
Mr Myburgh, the latest affidavit of Mr Todd that deals with 
the third payment... 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I read it yesterday, it was separate, I 
10 
wonder whether it is now in this bundle because I do not 
see it separate.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, it has been added to that 
bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It has been added.  Okay, alright. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Chairperson, as you know, Mr 
Todd’s affidavits are contained in EXHIBIT 17 which is – I 
think it is marked as bundle 3 and that contains EXHIBIT 
BB16 and EXHIBIT BB17. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I guess we should start by saying that 
20 
we will be using Transnet bundle 03.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that right?  And then the various 
exhibits are in that bundle. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 47 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   So it is the various affidavits of Mr Todd 
appear in EXHIBIT 17.  If I could, before I get to the detail 
of them, just sketch this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Todd has now produced five 
affidavits.  The first affidavit, which has already been 
admitted 
into 
evidence, 
deals 
with 
Mr 
Gama’s 
reinstatement. 
 
The second affidavit that has also been admitted 
deals with the issue of condonation, the basis upon which 
10 
Mr Gama was reinstated.  You will recall, Mr Chairperson, 
that right at the end of that affidavit Mr Todd also deals, 
gives a bird’s eye view really of GNS. 
 
Mr Todd then has produced a third affidavit that 
deals with GNS, he produced a fourth affidavit which deals 
with GNS but just the payment of costs, that is a very short 
affidavit. 
 
And then the fifth affidavit deals with the third 
payment of legal costs made to Mr Gama after his 
reinstatement.  So I am going to take Mr Todd now to his 
20 
third, fourth and fifth affidavit and then I will ask you as we 
go along to admit them into evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, that is fine. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Todd, do you have in front of you 
bundle 3, EXHIBIT 17? 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 48 of 167 
 
MR TODD:  Yes, I do. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Could I take you please to page – 
and, as you know, we refer in evidence to the black 
numbers – could I please take you to page 486?  Are you 
there?  And perhaps I could ask you to turn to page 508.  
Would you confirm that this is an affidavit of yours together 
with a series of annexures running from I all the way 
through to – I think it is NN at page 797. 
MR TODD:  Yes, that is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Do you confirm then, if you go back 
10 
to page 508, that it is an affidavit of yours deposed to on 
the 25 September 2020? 
MR TODD:  That is correct, yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And would you confirm again under 
oath the accuracy of this affidavit, the truth and accuracy? 
MR TODD:  Yes, I can confirm it. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Chairperson, might I ask you then 
please to admit Mr Todd’s affidavit of the 25 September 
2020 as EXHIBIT 17.3? 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you said that one is the one that 
20 
begins at 486? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:     And goes up to 508 and then it has 
annexures? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes and the annexures run all the 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 49 of 167 
 
way to 797, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  What exhibit number would it 
be? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  17.3. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There is no letter before 17? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It would be BB17.3. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
BB, 
okay. 
 
The 
affidavit 
of 
Mr 
Christopher Francis Neale Todd starting at 486 together 
with its annexures is admitted and will be marked as 
EXHIBIT BB17.3. 
10 
CHRISTOPHER 
FRANCIS 
NEALE 
TODD’S 
AFFIDAVIT 
STARTING 
AT 
486 
TOGETHER 
WITH 
ANNEXURES 
HANDED IN AS EXHIBIT BB17.3 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.   
MR TODD:  Yes 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now you previous gave evidence 
about what Mr Gama said about his signature of the 
original confinement tender but perhaps we could just – I 
am not going to ask you to rehash that, but could we start 
at paragraph 4.  Just to formerly place on record the 
20 
signature of that document by Mr Gama. 
MR TODD:  Yes, Chairperson, that document was the 
original confinement document that was approved and that 
initiated the appointment or was necessary to initiate the 
appointment of GNS.  The document itself appears at page 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 50 of 167 
 
509 and the pages that follow and the signature page of 
that document is at page 515.   
 
So that is the document which sets out the – if one 
looks at page 509, at the start of it, that is the document 
that sets out the title of the submission, is a confinement.  
The heading at the top was confidential, GNS confinement.  
The recommendation which sets out the reasons for issuing 
a confined tender is then explained and they talk about 
how – and I do not want to repeat the evidence, there was 
an unknown tender process, which was stopped and this 
10 
document records …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   There might be – might not be a bad 
idea just go back a little bit just so that even the public 
that is listening they can follow. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Without going too much back, just the 
context.  So that the public can follow your evidence 
correctly. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR TODD:  Thank you, Chairperson.  The – so what this 
document in fact summarises is that there had been a 
public procurement process, competitive bidding process 
and as I gave evidence last time, GNS was not one of the 
bidders, it was not involved in that process.  That process 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 51 of 167 
 
was then stopped. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This was a tender for the provision of 
security services. 
MR TODD:  Of security services. 
CHAIRPERSON:   At Transnet. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:  Yes and as I said last time it was a tender 
which everybody agreed, and Mr Gama was quite emphatic 
about this, that it was not suitable for confinement because 
10 
there were so many available, public providers of the 
service and his evidence was had he known the true facts 
he would never have approved this confinement but, as I 
explained last time, he said he did not read the document, 
he just signed it but the document itself explains the 
background, it explains that it is a confinement, explains 
that there had been a public tender process that had been 
stopped and then says – and I am reading in the second 
paragraph next to the letter 2 on page 509, in that block, 
fourth paragraph from the bottom, it says: 
20 
“A research of potential companies was conducted 
and General Nyanda Security, GNS, was called in to 
do a presentation in a form of a proposal.” 
And then it explains that: 
“GNS’ proposal was in content with our required 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 52 of 167 
 
solution.” 
Etcetera, etcetera. 
“They were highly recommended” 
And so on.  So this document really is the original 
motivation 
for 
the 
confinement 
and 
it 
was 
originally 
intended to be five months subject to a review and that is 
explained over the page at page 510 next to paragraph 4 
which talks about the contract period and it specifies there 
from 1 November to 30 April 2008, five months on a 
performance review period and then it says the total 
10 
contract period is one year, from 1 November to 31 
October 2008. 
 
And then it sets out the pricing, it sets out a 
commercial 
evaluation, 
who 
approved 
it, 
technical 
evaluation and the name of the company itself, the 
tenderer at page 511, is General Nyanda Security (Pty) 
Ltd.  The directors are set out there as being Sylvester 
Sithole and General Siphiwe Nyanda. 
 
Over the page on 512 the BEE requirements are set 
out and it says percentage black ownership of the tenderer 
20 
is confirmed as being 100% and so on. 
 
And then the signatures eventually are appended at 
page 515 and there are really a series of approvals, the 
last of which is Mr Gama’s approval which was given on 
the 5 December in 2007. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 53 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Paragraph 4 initially talks about the 
period being 1 November 2007 to 30 April 2008, which is 
not a year, but it says in the next sentence total contract 
period one year, 1 November 2007 to 31 October 2008, is 
there an inconsistency there or not? 
MR TODD:   Well it is a strange provision because it says 
it is a one year contract, but it says, it also  says it is five 
months performance review and if one – the only that was 
raised was this, one of the complaints, one of the issues 
was that this contract its annual value which on the initial 
10 
pricing of it was estimated to be R18million as an annual 
value, and you find that if you look at paragraph 11, that 
exceeded Mr Gama’s authority which was a R10million 
authority and Mr Gama said no I actually only approved 
five months, which fell within the R10million authority. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm. 
MR TODD: Now whether that was the intention of putting a 
five months in there if the officials were alive to the 
R10million issue they may well have inserted that five 
month review period in order to give an argument that it 
20 
fell within Mr Gama’s authority.  As it happens this contract 
in fact doubled in value within – inside that give month 
period and was then extended further and as we know 
within, it continued for 25 months at a total cost of 
R95million, but that its origins and certainly at a time Mr 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 54 of 167 
 
Gama said that having only approved the first five month 
review period it actually fell within his levels of authority, 
but that argument wasn’t really available to him once he 
said in his disciplinary hearing that actually he never read 
these documents, and just appended his signature, so I 
don’t know, you know he would be able to explain whether 
he relied on that or not.    
CHAIRPERSON:   It is quite strange, and of course the 
Chairperson of the disciplinary hearing made certain 
findings, but it is most concerning that the Chief Executive 
10 
Officer could sign a document committing a company to 
such – to millions of rands without reading the document, 
to the extent that he says he was approving the contract 
that would run for five months when in the document there 
is reference to a year, so you signed something that you 
cannot explain yourself, saying is this contract for five 
months or is it for a year because in the same document 
you have got a reference to a year, then you have got a 
reference to five or six months, ja. 
MR TODD:   Yes that was the finding of the Chairman as to 
20 
why he said it was serious negligence for a chief executive 
and justified ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.   Thanks.   Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH:   Mr Todd if I could take you back to page 
487 of your affidavit, you have already touched on this, 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 55 of 167 
 
you have mentioned the disciplinary proceedings that were 
instituted against Mr Gama, one of the charges that he 
faced, you deal with this at paragraph 5, related to his 
signature of this confinement. 
You then go on to explain what Mr Gama said and 
some of this you have already touched on, about his 
signature 
of 
that 
confinement 
during 
his 
disciplinary 
hearing, you attached the transcripts of the hearing and 
you deal with this at paragraph 7. 
This is also evidence that you have given before, 
10 
but perhaps in line with the direction given by the 
Chairperson for the sake of the public could you just 
summarise or paraphrase for us what Mr Gama said about 
his signature of this consignment during his disciplinary 
hearing? 
MR TODD:   Yes, Chairperson if I may just make it clear, 
the full transcripts run to many more pages, the inquiry ran 
over – I don’t recall the exact number of days, but possibly 
seven or eight, and not all of the transcripts are attached 
that – it seem to be very, well unnecessarily paper heavy, 
20 
but these transcripts do show certain things, key things, 
primarily what Mr Gama actually said in the disciplinary 
hearing and it deals with in paragraph 7 of the affidavit I 
deal with one point which we have already canvassed, 
which is the relationship between Mr Gama and General 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 56 of 167 
 
Nyanda which was a matter of concern, because it was 
alleged by Transnet in the disciplinary hearing of Mr Gama 
that there was a personal relationship and Mr Gama said – 
put it through his counsel through cross-examination that 
there was no such personal relationship and that he knew 
General Nyanda like any other member of the public would 
know him and what then happened was that Transnet 
produced Mr Gama’s cell phone records which showed 
various telephone calls between Mr Gama and General 
Nyanda in the period immediately preceding the award of 
10 
the contract and the – in fact as I point out there, the most 
recent phone call between them had been on 1 December 
2007 which was four days before the contract was signed. 
 
What Mr Gama was obviously called upon to explain 
this discrepancy, having said that he did not know General 
Nyanda, but then having to explain why it was that he had 
been in touch with him and he then said that, and this is 
explained, and this is the portion that is reflected in these 
transcripts, a portion of Mr Gama’s own testimony where 
he said that he had in fact given his counsel in the inquiry 
20 
incorrect instructions because he had wanted to put some 
distance between himself and the General, and he admitted 
that that had been wrong and he apologised to the 
Chairperson and he then stated that General Nyanda was 
not a close friend, but an acquaintance with whom he had 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 57 of 167 
 
played golf in the past, with whom he had spoken on the 
phone when there were family bereavements and who had 
called him to commiserate when he had been suspended.   
So he explained that as being the nature of that 
relationship between him and General Nyanda.  The 
significance of that of course was that the company that 
had benefited from the confinement in fact above General 
Nyanda’s name it was General Nyanda Security and 
obviously that was something which created quite a strong 
inference that Mr Gama was in fact aware and party 
10 
consciously to granting an irregular confinement.   
But Mr Gama’s version as I have said in the inquiry 
was then that he knew General Nyanda but had no idea 
even that the contract was in favour of General Nyanda 
Security and he then said and this is summarised in the 
affidavit.  He then said that actually an official had come 
and asked him to sign the document without letting him 
read the document and he had explained the document 
completely differently and not told him who it was in favour 
of and it said it was the product of a full open tender and 
20 
that he was merely confirming the appointment of the 
successful tenderer after a public procurement process. 
So that was the evidence he gave in the hearing 
including that he had not read any part of the document 
and then what really is important also from those extracts 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 58 of 167 
 
is that in a disciplinary hearing when it was put to him but 
Mr Gama you now concede this confinement document 
which you signed is written all over it that there was a 
confinement and it is written all over that it is in favour of 
General Nyanda Security.  The amount exceeds your 
authority and various other irregularities were brought to 
his attention and it was then that he said in the inquiry that 
in fact now having been shown all of this he realised he 
could smell something fishy and that he realised that this 
was in fact fraudulent it was a complete fraud and that he 
10 
now realised what the scam was all about and by this scam 
he was referring, if one reads the evidence to the way in 
which this procurement occurred which he described as a 
scam and what he said though he was an innocent party in 
the scam.  He had not realised he had been manipulated 
by officials who had as it were pulled the wool over his 
eyes. 
So that was the evidence and when he was asked in 
those portions of the transcript if one can see he is asked 
well 
who 
should 
be 
accountable 
if 
you 
signed 
this 
20 
document and it was a fraudulent scam and he then 
pointed to various officials.  Two of them already had been 
dismissed in fact; one Mr Senemela and Mr Kanye and the 
other person he suggested should be held accountable is a 
Mr Beatty who had in fact presented him with the document 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 59 of 167 
 
and who by then was living in Australia.   
So that is what we deal with here and that really 
leads to I think the point that this contract with General 
Nyanda Security rather than being cancelled and the 
money recovered it was cancelled but when Transnet sued 
for the return of the money it had paid under this contract 
two things happened.  One, Mr Gama was reinstated into 
his employment and then through a series of over a period 
of time the management of Transnet gradually effectively 
poured 
cold 
water 
on 
the 
litigation 
and 
ultimately 
10 
persuaded the Board that it was appropriate to withdraw 
the litigation.   
CHAIRPERSON:   But the transcript of his evidence in the 
disciplinary inquiry that you have referred to would my 
understanding be correct that what he in effect was saying 
when he said that he has given his counsel incorrect 
information about the relationship between himself and 
General Nyanda because he wanted to create a distance 
between himself and General Nyanda, that in effect he was 
admitting 
to 
having 
given 
his 
counsel 
untruthful 
20 
information.     
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   To use to challenge the evidence of 
witnesses.   
MR TODD:   Yes, Chairperson that is exactly what he did.  
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 60 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is what it means.  
MR TODD:   Yes and that is what he – and he apologised 
for having done so.  He accepted that that is what he was 
doing and then he said it was wrong. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But it was also he was caught out.  
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because the telephone records were 
produced and then he was in a corner he could not deny 
the telephone records.  
MR TODD:   That is what happened Chairperson, that is 
10 
correct.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes and at the disciplinary hearing as I 
understand the position everybody agreed including him 
that there was no basis for General Nyanda’s company to 
have been awarded this contract on the basis of a 
confinement in other words 
without an open tender, 
everybody accepted that.     
MR TODD:   Correct Mr Gama is very clear on that he said 
he would never have signed it, had he known of the 
irregularity. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   And of course that just helps us to 
compound the whole subsequent withdrawal of the action 
which you will deal with in due course.  Okay alright Mr 
Myburgh you may continue.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you, Mr Todd you go on in 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 61 of 167 
 
paragraph 9 to explain that the finding of this hearing as 
well as the finding of the Cassim enquiry which dealt with 
Mr Senemela and Kanye which we dealt with last time 
formed the backdrop to the civil claim.  You also mentioned 
in paragraph 9 that what was also relevant to bringing the 
claim was the inability to obtain information from GNS as 
to what they had actually done under the contract and you 
say at paragraph 9 that this is something that you deal with 
in your first affidavit and you refer to paragraph 37, A to E.  
Could I just take you there please 37, A to E in your first 
10 
affidavit you will find it on page 61. 
MR TODD:   Yes, Chairperson really what I dealt with there 
is the irregularities in the appointment which ultimately 
were confirmed by Mr Gama that the appointment itself had 
been completely in breach of the procurement regulations 
and had arisen as was very clear particularly in the inquiry 
involving 
Mr 
Senemela 
and 
Mr 
Kanye 
had 
involved 
collusion between – it was not it was put rather coyly in the 
confinement document here was research done and that 
GNS was identified, in fact there were emails exchanged 
20 
between the Transnet officials and GNS in a way that is 
described in the finding of a Chairperson in that inquiry 
which showed that Transnet helped GNS to compile its 
proposal and that in fact GNS contrary to what it said it 
had zero track record and it had adopted, really plagiarised 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 62 of 167 
 
from an American security companies in pitching for its 
long track record and its experience.  There were a whole 
lot of indications that this was a completely irregular 
contract which as I said Mr Gama used words like fraud 
and scam when he was confronted with what had actually 
happened here and that was what had happened at its 
inception.   
In fact, the contract was then doubled in size quite 
soon afterwards and I will come to that in a moment and 
what ultimately led to the total amount paid to GNS being 
10 
R95.5million over, just over two years, twenty-five months.  
The total amount paid was R95.5million for those twenty-
five months.  But the peace that is the dealt with and this 
is what is really important to understand how this contract 
was, I have said and I have given evidence about the 
irregularity in its inception but what became equally of 
concern was the irregularity of its execution and by that I 
mean that Transnet attempted at that stage to ascertain 
what GNS had actually been doing and whether it had 
actually rendered services to Transnet and it became 
20 
immediately apparent that there were serious questions 
over whether it had actually done what it was contracted to 
do and what it had been paid for and that is a piece that I 
can actually explained.                 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Perhaps we can start if we can have 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 63 of 167 
 
a look at the paragraph 37 at page 61.  At little [a] you 
then make reference to the contract which is attached as 
G.   
MR TODD:   Yes.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Could I take you to Annexure G, that 
you find at page 110 and you go on to make the point that 
of particular significance is Annexure C to this contract 
which you find at page 141 and that sets out the resources 
that GNS were to deploy.  
MR TODD:   Yes.  
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Page 141. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Myburgh initially you said 
we should go to 110 and then 140? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, 110 is the commencement of 
the contract it runs through and is signed at 136 and then 
there are series of annexures A, B and C.  C you will find 
Chairperson at page 141. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.    
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You want to address that annexure 
and page Mr Todd.  
20 
MR TODD:   Yes, this document is important because the 
contract effectively says the services to be rendered are 
set out in Annexures A, B and C and Annexure C is the 
costing, the basis on which the cost was calculated the 
cost of the contract.  And so Annexure C sets out it refers 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 64 of 167 
 
to a budget based on cost estimated using current 
resources available.  The cost includes disbursements and 
any other project related costs and they exclude VAT and 
then it sets out the resources that are going to be 
allocated to each of three elements of the contract or the 
services and those are explained in the contract.  There is 
an investigations element, a monitoring and evaluation 
element and an intelligence element.   
Overall those are overseen by a project director and 
that is at the top, project director with a cost per month of 
10 
R40 000 and then a project coordinator at a cost of R25 
000 per month and then under each of those three 
headings that I have mentioned the resources that would 
be made available.  In relation to investigations a manager 
at R25 000,00 a month and then ten investigators would be 
deployed at an hourly rate of R320,00 giving rise to a 
monthly cost of R537 600 and one can do the maths 
effectively there at R530 000 is the monthly cost of ten 
investigators at a rate of R320,00 an hour.  And then that 
gives a total for the investigation team of R562 000 and 
20 
then the same breakdown is given for the monitoring and 
valuations team.  There they have a manager at R25 000 
but they do not have investigators they have researchers 
and there are eight researches also at R320 an hour and 
they then result in a cost of R430 080.    
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 65 of 167 
 
And then under the intelligence stream of this 
contract again a third manager, again at a cost of R25 000 
a month, eight handlers at R320 an hour now they are 
handling informers.  So they are eight handlers at R320 an 
hour again leading to a monthly cost of R430 000.  Twenty 
informers at R2 000 a month each, R40 000 a month giving 
a total of R495 000 under that stream and that leads to a 
sub-total of R1 577 760 per month excluding VAT.   
So I have referred to it in some detail Chairperson 
because as it happened this was attached to the contract 
10 
and each invoice issued for this work reflected that 
breakdown of those charges for the contract.       
CHAIRPERSON:   Which – or the information contained 
herein Annexure C including the total and it said total per 
annum would all indicate that the intention was for the 
contract to run for a year.              
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because otherwise why calculate on the 
basis of a year if it is four, five months.   
MR TODD:   Yes, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  
MR TODD:   This is the number that was written into the 
confinement agreement as the annual cost.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  
MR TODD:   And then it had that sort of proviso which said 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 66 of 167 
 
well we will review it after five months.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, it is just difficult to understand how 
anybody would not have seen all of these things, yes okay 
alright.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   So if you go back to page 61 you 
then say at [b] that there were extensions, I am going to 
leave that for a moment Mr Todd we will come to the detail 
of that when we return to your third affidavit.  But then 
importantly at [c] page 62 you talk about the fact that 
consideration as given to terminating the contract and that 
10 
you then attended a meeting, perhaps you could address 
what transpired at that meeting and thereafter leading up 
to the issuing of the summons that is [e].   
MR TODD:   So the backdrop to this is that while preparing 
and formulating the complaint against Mr Gama and Mr 
Senemela and Mr Kanye who had effectively entered into 
this highly irregular fraudulent corrupt scam whatever 
words are most appropriate to attach to it.  The fact of the 
matter was that every month Transnet was paying this 
company at that stage roundabout R4.5million after two 
20 
extensions 
to 
this 
contract 
and 
Transnet 
wanted 
to 
terminate that arrangement and so they engaged with GNS, 
with the company and they set up a meeting which I was 
asked to attend because I had now become familiar with all 
of the background facts and they wanted to know – one of 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 67 of 167 
 
the particular concerns that Transnet had was of course it 
was not entirely sure whether this was just an irregular 
procurement but the services were being rendered as 
required or whether it was worse and one of the things 
which would worse meaning in fact the services weren’t 
even being provided or at least not as they should be and 
one of the biggest alarm bells that rang for Transnet was 
that on a very quick analysis of GNS by the forensic 
investigations team it immediately transpired that GNS in 
fact had no employees still.  It had no employees at all, it 
10 
was not even registered as a PAYE payer and it wasn’t 
registered with PSIRA, which is the private security 
industry regulatory authority, and that was a very – so that 
was the backdrop actually of the meeting that I went to 
which Transnet said look you don’t have any employees, 
are you – we are paying  you every month for all of these 
resources, what is going on, and at that meeting GNS 
representatives were there and they said well you don’t 
understand our business model, and so we said well – 
please we are here, explain the business model. 
20 
 
And they said actually we are a platform and we 
operate as a platform and we procure employees from 
other security companies, who then render services to 
Transnet.   So we said to them well that is interesting to 
hear because your contract, and I can point to the 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 68 of 167 
 
provisions, says you cannot sub-contract unless you have 
our consent as Transnet, we have contracted with you on 
the basis that you are General Nyanda Security, with two 
directors, wholly black-owned and you will deliver the work 
because of your track record in delivering services, so if 
you want to sub-contract you are supposed to have our 
permission, but let us put that aside for the moment.   If 
you have been procuring, and in fact delivering these 
resources through other service providers then you will be 
able to provide us with details of those other service 
10 
providers are, your contractual arrangements with them, so 
that we can get comfort that there are ultimately, to use 
colloquial 
language 
warm 
bodies, 
there 
are 
actually 
people, there are managers and investigators, researchers 
and handlers who are actually doing the work, because at 
the moment there is just no evidence that any such people 
exist and they – at that stage in the meeting they asked for 
a caucus, which meant that we were asked to excuse 
ourselves while they considered whether they would give 
us this information. 
20 
 
I may mention it was quite theatrical, they had 
arrived at the meeting with suitcases on wheelie – wheelie 
suitcases saying we have got all of the information that 
you are asking for in all of these suitcases and we said to 
them when – before they had their caucus we said to them 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 69 of 167 
 
all we suggest – we don’t all need to be in a meeting, we 
will just nominate one or two of our people and they can sit 
with whoever on your side and can go through the 
information you have and then just reconcile it and show 
who the people are who have been doing the work over the 
period of the contract that we have been paying for, and 
which companies have been contracted to do so. 
 
They then had a caucus which lasted a few minute 
and when we came back into the meeting we were told they 
had decided, their attorney who was present in the 
10 
meeting, that they discussed the matter with their attorney 
and they would not be disclosing anything to Transnet 
concerning any of the matters that we had asked, they 
weren’t going to disclose anything about their contractual 
arrangements with these other entities that had supposedly 
provided these services nor where they going to disclose 
the details of the warm bodies or the personnel who had 
actually delivered the service and they then withdrew with 
their suitcases of information, and as a consequence of 
that Transnet gave a letter following that, saying well we 
20 
have tried to engage with you but we are terminating your 
contract and that ended the contract at the end of 25 
months.    
 
Had they not,  had Transnet not ended it then the 
contract – their position was that it should just keep going, 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 70 of 167 
 
they thought they were doing a good job, but that is what 
led to the cancellation of the contract, but it also led to 
concerns on Transnet’s side which said not only was this 
contract entered into irregularly but we are now very 
worried that actually what we paying every month for might 
not even be being provided to us because we are being 
given no information by our service provider about who the 
people are on the job.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Todd you mentioned a clause in 
the contract prohibiting sub-contracting, could I ask you 
10 
please to turn to page 127 and can I direct your attention 
to Clause 20.  
MR TODD:   Yes that is the contract, and in fact it is not 
just approval it is more than approval that is needed, and I 
think that is a sensible, I mean it is a standard and a 
sensible position if you contract with General Nyanda 
Security you don’t want to find out without your express 
agreement that actually somebody else is providing the 
job, is doing the work, otherwise you are being misled. 
 
So it requires written approval for any kind of 
20 
assignment or sub-contracting. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And that you see at 20.1 read with 
20.1.2? 
MR TODD:   Correct.  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Go back to page 63 of your affidavit, 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 71 of 167 
 
you have now told us of the meeting, you have told us of 
the letter ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Just one second Mr Myburgh I just want 
to make sure that my understanding of this is correct.   So 
in the meeting GNS representatives told you that their 
business model is in effect, was in effect such that they did 
not have – they did not keep employees that would go and 
do the job in terms of the contract, they would sub-contract 
and get other service providers to effectively do the job 
that they were supposed to do.  
10 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But now the contract prohibited sub-
contracting on their part without written approval of 
Transnet.  
MR TODD:   Correct.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Which that will mean that they couldn’t 
be said to have performed in terms of the contract. 
MR TODD:   No, but Chairperson there is no doubt about 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR TODD:   On their own business statement about their 
business model they were from the get-go in breach of the 
contract. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
MR TODD:   Right from the beginning, but the Transnet 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 72 of 167 
 
attitude in that meeting had been however let’s not at this 
stage exercise our rights on the technicality and say you 
are in breach of the contract on that ground.  First let’s see 
who these people actually are and then we can possibly 
decide ex poste facto we could have decided ex poste 
facto to give written consent and say now that we’ve 
understood it, but it gave rise to other very serious 
concerns, 
one 
of 
which 
is 
raised 
in 
the 
– 
by 
the 
Chairperson of the disciplinary hearing of Senemela and 
Kanye which is, is this not simply fronting, you hold 
10 
yourself out as being an experienced company capable of 
delivering services, actually you have no track record, no 
staff, and you don’t even tell us, you are just getting other 
people to come in and do the work.   What are the 
commercial terms on which those other people are coming 
in to do the work, and they never had to contract with 
Transnet, they never even pitched with Transnet, so that is 
a gross – you know that was a very serious problem that 
Transnet had about this supposed business model but at 
this stage it went even further, because Transnet was 
20 
saying irregular business model aside who is actually doing 
the work, have these people actually been – you know 
obviously we would like to know ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That they have been through the field 
and dug ...[intervenes]  
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 73 of 167 
 
MR TODD:   It is one thing to tell us well you have sub-
contracted but how do we know that the work is even being 
done, and that these people are being deployed in the 
field, and who are these people, and they said well we 
have got the information but we are not going to share it 
with you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So actually what GNS wants to represent 
to Transnet that they had the expertise and the experience 
and the track record necessary for them to provide these 
services but once they tell us about their business model 
10 
then 
it 
becomes 
clear 
that 
then 
they 
had 
made 
a 
misrepresentation in the first place. 
MR TODD:   Yes.  Chairperson GNS did say and they said 
it later, that Transnet knew so when we come to the 
litigation and when Transnet sued for repayment of the 
R95.5million it had paid to GNS, GNS rather bizarrely 
denied that it had ever had a contract as GNS with 
Transnet and I say that is bizarre because they have 
confined the documents in their favour and mentions no 
other entity, and the contract is in their favour and 
20 
mentions no other entity with an express provision of sub-
contracting but despite that in their High Court pleading 
defending their claim they said there was never a contract 
with GNS, our company, they said there was only a 
contract 
with 
something 
which 
they 
called 
the 
GNS 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 74 of 167 
 
consortium 
and 
they 
said 
that 
consortium 
included, 
represented our business model.  I think – I mean I can 
explain why that is just totally inconsistent with any of the 
documents, but I think they felt forced to do that because 
at that point they had admitted to Transnet, and they had 
to, that they had none of their own staff and they had no 
ability themselves to deliver it, it was other companies that 
they needed to deliver the services. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But also I am sure the contract didn’t 
refer to GNS Consortium it referred to GNS.  
10 
MR TODD:   Correct Chairperson, that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.   Okay, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  At page 63 paragraph 
[e] you then mention what you have already touched on 
and that is that following the termination of the contract 
with 
GNS 
Transnet 
then 
issued 
summons 
and 
that 
summons and the particulars of claim are at or attached as 
Annexure H, perhaps I could just take you there Mr Todd, 
you find that at page 142, one four two. 
MR TODD:   Yes, that was High Court summons for 
20 
payment – repayment of R95.5million. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And the particulars of claim 
commence at page 144, and then the amounts you see at 
page 154, the R95million, I just wanted to ask you to 
address the fact that here the defendant was cited as 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 75 of 167 
 
Abalozi Risk Advisory Services. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Why was that so?   
MR TODD:   Yes, between the period when the contract 
was terminated and Transnet issued summons the legal 
entity, General Nyanda Security, with which Transnet had 
contracted, had changed its name, the company name, so 
it is the same company but with a now changed name and 
now it was called Abalozi Risk Advisory Services, it had 
been called General Nyanda Risk Advisory Services as one 
10 
contract that was concluded with. 
ADV MYBURGH:  If I could then ask you please to go back 
to your third affidavit to turn up page 489. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  So we have dealt with the signature of the 
confinement and you have dealt with the run-up and the 
issue of the summons and then what you go on to do in your 
third affidavit at page 490 is you analyse the charges as 
reflected in the invoices and you deal with the initial services 
and then you deal with the first extension and the second 
20 
extension. 
 
You have already touched on this but do you want to 
just summarise your evidence in that regard? 
MR TODD:  Yes so if I can refer – I did take the Chairperson 
and show Chairperson Annexure sheet C to the contract but 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 76 of 167 
 
what is – the point that I thought it was appropriate to make 
then is that when invoices were issued and I have just 
attached examples that were available to me when I deposed 
to this affidavit.  But I am very confident because I have 
seen all of the invoices they take the same or similar form.   
 
But at page 623 – 623 is an example of a tax invoice 
for the first initial services that were contracted for with 
GNS.  And that tax invoice shows that – it shows the 
breakdown as in Annexure C to the contract.  In other words 
it shows a project director.  It shows the project coordinator 
10 
at 
R25 000.00 
and 
then 
it 
has 
investigation 
stream 
R562 600.00.  The monitoring and evaluation stream at 
R455 080.00 and the intelligence stream at R495 080.00 
giving a total of R1 577 780.00 to which VAT is then added 
for once to give a total of R1 798 645.00 for a month. 
 
But I make – made that point because later it was 
suggested that actually this contract was not for the 
particular resources specified in Annexure C.  That it was 
just a globular number and that GNS could do whatever it 
thought appropriate for that number to try and manage 
20 
security. 
 
But it seems to me that that argument is – cannot be 
reconciled with the way in which GNS invoiced and it is very 
clear that the invoice ties back to Annexure C to the contract 
which sets out that there is going to be a project director, a 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 77 of 167 
 
project coordinator and in each of these three streams a 
manager, ten investigators, a manger, eight analysts or – 
and a manager and eight intelligence handlers.  
 
And so those are the resources which make up these 
numbers and then this amount is invoiced to Transnet every 
month of the 25 months of the contract for that – for those 
initial services.  
ADV MYBURGH:  And then you deal with the first extension 
at page 491. 
MR TODD:  Yes.  So what happened once this contract had 
10 
got – had kicked off in December 2007 is that within a few 
months and it is described in the document which is at page 
624.  It is in fact the document over the page from that 
invoice. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What is the page? 
MR TODD:  624 Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
MR TODD:  That is a document which is referred to as an 
extension of scope and this was a document – a procurement 
document which effectively described the background and 
20 
reasons for extending the scope of GNS’ contract in – in 
effect it was in March I believe – with effect from March 
2008. 
 
And the background to that is explained in paragraph 
2 at page 624 where it says: 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 78 of 167 
 
“Recommendation reasons for extending the 
scope of work.” 
And it says: 
“Due to theft irregularities at the Kaserny 
Yard.” 
And that is a yard in south of Joburg where a lot of 
containers and other things are stored. 
“An appropriate decision was taken by TFR 
Security Management to suspend the TFR 
security 
personnel 
at the 
yard and the 
10 
contractor 
on 
site 
Sinqobile 
question 
Security Services.” 
So what happened was and then it is explained: 
“On the 14 February 2008 a container was 
found 
outside 
Kaserny Yard 
without 
the 
relevant authority and as a result they 
dismissed the – they suspended the TRF 
Security personnel.  It was irregular that a 
container 
was 
outside 
the 
yard 
without 
authority and they suspected insiders so they 
20 
suspended the – Transnet’s own security and 
they dismissed Sinqobile which was the 
outsourced service contractor at that yard 
and they pulled in extra GNS resources and 
they said the extra GNS resources will be 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 79 of 167 
 
used for the following conclusion of the 
investigation for suspended TFR security 
employees after internal disciplinary process. 
2. Executing security operational functions 
that were previously done by those TFR 
security employees and 
3.  Escort and protect train drivers.” 
I am not sure where – why that follows from the Kaserny 
Yard but they – they explain those three reasons for 
extending the scope of this contract. 
10 
 
But what is then important if I may say Chair over the 
page – oh on the next page 625 again this procurement 
document describes exactly what resources are now being 
procured through this extension of the contract from GNS. 
 
So it says there at page 625. 
“16 resources at R150.00 per hour.” 
Giving a total of R884 000.00 or R864 000.00 per month for 
16 resources at R150.00 an hour.  So these were now people 
who were going to secure the yard and escort and protect 
train drivers working twelve hours for thirty days a month. 
20 
And in item 2: 
“7 investigators.” 
So that is 7 additional investigators.  We have seen that the 
first 
leg 
of 
the 
contract 
had 
8 
investigators 
in 
the 
investigations on this was an additional 7 investigators at 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 80 of 167 
 
R320.00 an hour R376 000.00 a month and they would be 
deployed nationally to investigate cable theft incidents linked 
to syndicates. 
 
Again it is not clear why that follows from the 
Kaserny Yard incident it is just another seven additional 
resources for the first scope of the contract and then the 
third item. 
“6 investigators” 
That is another 6 at R320.00 an hour for R322 000.00 a 
month permanently dedicated to Kaserny and Klascorn Yards 
10 
due to vastness of the area working eight hours for 21 days 
a month.  That is explaining how the investigators you 
multiply their hourly rate by eight hours and 21 days a month 
you multiply it by the number of investigators and you get 
R322 560.00. 
 
And then one resource at R150.00 an hour to be 
deployed at electrical control room to monitor the call and 
reporting incidents for 24 hours for 30 days with a change of 
shift and a reliever. 
 
So this extension again specifies per person what the 
20 
cost is either on an hourly basis so that you get to the 
additional monthly cost of and it explains that there 
R1 670 880.00.  So R1.6 million per month additional cost. 
 
And what you then find after that is every month from 
this point of view a second invoice is issued by GNS to 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 81 of 167 
 
Transnet for that amount plus VAT and that is why I said in 
the affidavit that effectively doubled the value of the contract 
when you looked at the cost.  In fact it is slightly more than 
double the value of the contract. 
ADV MYBURGH:  If you go to paragraph 19 at page 491 that 
is where you set out the figure. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  The second invoice each month in the 
amount of R1 781 000.00. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Page 4? 
10 
ADV MYBURGH:  491 Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  491. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Paragraph 19. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Yes you can continue. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Then Mr Todd you go on to deal with the 
second extension. 
MR TODD:  The second extension the services occurred a 
year – about a year later in March 2009 and the background 
to that is again set out in a similar procurement document.  It 
is attached – actually there is a – this time it is in a letter 
20 
which is at page 630 of the documents. 
 
And what it explains there is and what – what I can 
go into the detail but this was actually expos facto what had 
happened after the event. 
 
What had happened was that an additional resources 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 82 of 167 
 
had been procured from GNS but there – it had – there have 
not been regularised through a procurement process and this 
letter asked for – this letter is dated in May it is the 12 May 
2009 and it is actually explaining why additional resources 
have been procured from GNS and asking for those to be 
approved. 
 
And the background to this is that on the 28 February 
2009 a Mr Herbert Msagala who one can see I think later on 
he approves it as the General Manager for Resource 
Management at that stage in TFR – Herbert Msagala General 
10 
Manager Resource Management. 
 
He received a message that a train crew driver had 
gone missing with a company official vehicle without a trace.  
And this was described as a security risk; as a hijacking of a 
Transnet employee and that this person never turned up 
again.  And some of the documents I am not able to say what 
the details is but there was a reference in the documents to 
this person being presumed dead which was regarded as a 
very serious risk to train crew and train drivers. 
 
And so what they did was they acquired additional 
20 
resources from GNS.  And the additional resources from 
GNS are then explained.  They wanted armed vehicle, escort 
officials 
and 
security 
to 
give 
train 
crew 
management 
protection 
and 
that 
led 
to 
an 
additional 
amount 
of 
R856 800.00 due to GNS excluding VAT per month. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 83 of 167 
 
 
So that extended the contract by a further amount.  
An example of the invoice is over the page at 62. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Sorry can I just – so the – the additional 
resources that were required they set out in the second 
paragraph of page 631.  The required resources as you said 
are armed vehicle, escort officials and security to give train 
crew management.  Is the – were those the additional 
resources? 
MR TODD:  Yes that is what this letter says but the invoice 
that is – has been – was rendered for March they refer to the 
10 
March 2009 and that amount of R856 800.00 excluding VAT 
being due.  That very invoice one can see over the page at 
633 which then sets out what the – how those resources are 
in fact made up.  
 
So at page 633 that is an invoice dated 25 March 
2009 and there you see the resources there what has been 
invoiced for are two supervisors at a total monthly cost of 
R108 000.00 and 16 train crew monitors and rapid response 
at a total cost of R748 800.00. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Again warm bodies. 
20 
MR TODD:  Those are – exactly warm bodies.  16 people and 
this is in addition to the earlier extension which I referred to 
which – which had involved also involved 16 resources to 
secure the yard and escort and protect train drivers. 
 
So this was an additional 16 over and above the 16 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 84 of 167 
 
that had been procured a year earlier and were being 
provided every month. 
 
So an additional 16 train crew monitors and rapid 
response at that cost of R748 000.00 giving another monthly 
cost of R856 000.00 with VAT amounting to R975 752.00 and 
that again became a third invoice from that point onwards a 
third invoice was rendered every month to Transnet and that 
it was those three invoices together by this stage that 
cumulatively was approximately R4.5 million a month. 
ADV MYBURGH:  So that you deal with at paragraph 25 of 
10 
your affidavit at page 492.  There payments of services 
initially procured that is the R1.7 million then the first 
extension another R1.7 and then the second extension the 
R976. 
MR TODD:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  And you go on to say that that is in effect 
how you computed the claim of R95 million. 
MR TODD:  Yes that is correct and what Transnet I have 
included it is was provided to me by Transnet’s I have got no 
reason to doubt it is correct.  It is from their payment ledger.  
20 
From their SAP system which shows that throughout the 
whole period of this contract three invoices were rendered – 
well not for the whole period.  From the beginning the first 
invoice is rendered and once this – the extension was 
granted from that month a second invoice was rendered 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 85 of 167 
 
every month and then when the third – second extension a 
third invoice was rendered every month from that point 
onwards. 
 
But the amounts remain the same in each of those 
invoices. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Mr Todd at page 493 you then deal with 
Abalozi’s plea and counter claims do you want to summarise 
that for us please? 
MR TODD:  Yes I have attached the documents themselves.  
There were various technical points raised I have mentioned 
10 
of them already which is they put in a plea of misjoinder or 
non-joinder and there they said you have sued the wrong 
person.  GNS or now Abalozi Pty Limited was never the 
counterparty.  The GNS consortium was the counterparty.  
And that as I have already dealt with it is an odd thing to say 
both because a consortium is not a legal entity and secondly 
there was no contract with the consortium.  The contract all 
along was with GNS now known as Abalozi. 
 
But that became central to the defence.  Throughout 
the plea they say it is the GNS consortium and they mention 
20 
two other companies which they say were part of the GNS 
consortium which they name. 
 
And ja in essence what they do is say the consortium 
has been doing what it was asked to do.  The invoices – I 
mean again the invoices have all along been rendered by 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 86 of 167 
 
GNS the company and a suggestion that any other entity was 
involved.  But perhaps the most significant to say then is 
about their counterclaim because what Abalozi did is said 
you suing me for R95.5 million well I am counterclaiming for 
something close to R500 million for damages which have 
been caused to me by your conduct.  Because you have 
cancelled my contract and this has created reputational harm 
to me I have lost various contracts in the public sector and 
we have lost various other hopeful contracts and in total we 
suffer damages of – when you add it all up it is very poorly 
10 
pleaded and it is difficult to make out exactly what they 
claiming.  But it amounts to in the R400 millions as a counter 
– as counter claims which they say they bringing against 
Transnet. 
ADV MYBURGH:  But you say you attach that document that 
is Annexure R. 
MR TODD:  Yes that is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Or in file it is at page 636, is that correct? 
MR TODD:  Correct. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Running through to page 661.. 
20 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Alright.  Then if we can turn to the next 
main topic and that is Transnet’s decision not to pursue the 
claim. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 87 of 167 
 
ADV 
MYBURGH: 
 
That 
you 
deal 
with 
at 
page 
495 
commencing at paragraph 32.  Please take us through that. 
MR TODD:  Yes – just the – the context for that Chairperson 
if I may say when I dealing with the reinstatement of Mr 
Gama one of the points I made is that a reinstatement of 
somebody in these circumstances has consequences and 
one of the consequences if you follow through is what 
happens in a case like this. 
 
And – so what we then deal with is that you have now 
reinstated a chief executive who was charged with a 
10 
conclusion of this contract in an inappropriate – ultimately 
found guilty of negligently and he admitted acting with 
serious negligence when entering into this contract.  He is 
being reinstated. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think he was … 
MR TODD:  Into the business. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think he was lucky that the arbitrator – 
the chairperson did not find that he had intentionally. 
MR TODD:  Yes.  But in the course of doing so as I have 
shown from the transcript he say that effectively this was a 
20 
fraud, 
a 
scam 
the 
contract 
should 
never 
have 
been 
concluded.   
 
So one might have expected the very first thing on 
his desk when he was reinstated to say let us get that money 
back.  It was all a fraud, a scam, inappropriate, the wrong 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 88 of 167 
 
thing was done here. 
 
But in fact what happens over a period of time as we 
see is that the management within TFR which Mr Gama is 
again leading now starts to say actually there is no reason to 
sue these people.  And I am paraphrasing.   
 
But they said and I am really then set out what 
through the minutes that were given to me.  We represented 
Transnet in the litigation and there were long periods of 
silence when we had no instructions and nothing was really 
happening.   
10 
 
But then we got requests to say we had had monthly 
reports from them about the services they have rendered 
does that not show that they actually did the work?  And then 
we had another thing which – and I – really that is what this 
section of the affidavit takes you through.  So the Transnet – 
the management team over which Mr Gama now presided 
started to say and I say it is the management team it is one 
manager in particular under Mr Gama started to say, well we 
actually – the work was done there is no problem here.  So 
why are we suing them?  That is really – I am paraphrasing. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH:  Alright and then you – you mention along 
the way at paragraph 37 page 496 that there was a time 
where you were asked to obtain counsel’s opinion. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Just address that please. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 89 of 167 
 
MR TODD:  Well if you – the backdrop to that is you can see 
that in April 2012 and the minute is there – there is a Risk 
Committee meeting which shows that the management team 
now – so now you have members of the board interacting 
with members of the management team.  The board sub-
committee is the Risk Committee which has got a long 
agenda.  One of the items on its agenda is that Transnet is 
suing Abalozi for the repayment of R95.5 million.  And 
Abalozi has counterclaims. 
 
And the management team say well we have actually 
10 
now – what is reflected in the minute and I of course was not 
at the meeting.  I can only read the minute.  And the minute 
says: 
”Management members of the management 
team 
informed 
members 
of 
the 
Risk 
Committee 
that 
they 
have 
uncovered 
information that had not been available in the 
past and that we may not actually have a 
case against Abalozi.” 
 
And what then happens is in September of that year 
20 
Mr Ndpiwe Salinga he is the legal advisor within Transnet 
who is responsible for managing this litigation.  He is the 
general manager for legal services and Mr Salinga gets a 
memorandum and he has attached an email which we were 
provided with by Transnet. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 90 of 167 
 
 
Now I have been provided with it by Transnet.  I have 
not – again it is part of Transnet providing me in its capacity 
as a legal advisor with information internally.   But that email 
says well we have now got a monthly report for every month 
each of the 25 months that Abalozi rendered services.  GNS 
rendered services.  We have got a written report setting out 
what they did. 
 
Does that not prove that they did the work and we 
should not be suing for the R95.5 million.  And so what 
Bowman Gilfillan was then instructed to do was to get 
10 
counsel’s opinion on whether the existence of these monthly 
reports you know had a material impact on the – on the case. 
 
And 
effectively 
counsel 
gave 
opinion. 
 
I 
have 
included it in – as an annexure to the affidavit and said well 
this does not change it at all.  It does not really show what 
services were actually provided. 
 
And it is possible if  - if GNS Abalozi comes along in 
the litigation and says we can prove that we deployed 
resources on Transnet business.  We have deployed 16 train 
crew rapid response.  Here are their – here is the evidence 
20 
that they were deployed.  Here are the – here is the 
evidence of the people who actually worked.  There could be 
some reduction in the amount claimed.  There is still an 
argument that the procurement was irregular from the start 
and so it must be repaid.   
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 91 of 167 
 
 
But there is a possibility that if GNS could prove that 
they actually rendered services that that might reduce the 
amount of the – that we would claim. 
 
But up until this point and really it continued until this 
date GNS had never produced any evidence of those warm 
bodies those 16 train crew and the other – the next 16 train 
crew.  They never produced the names and the entities and 
the contracts under which those people were provided.  And 
they never had them. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And they had had all the opportunity to 
10 
produce those names. 
MR TODD:  They had had all of that opportunity before the 
contract was cancelled.  Once the litigation started.  In the 
discovering process they never produced that information. 
 
So it remained a big question mark and really what 
then became the question was well they have got these 
monthly reports saying we have done all this work. 
 
Now that monthly report either is a true reflection.  
What they should have said is not just this is our report but 
here is the list of people who we deployed and here are their 
20 
hour time sheets. 
 
That would have been good – a good start.  But they 
never did that.  They produced monthly reports but those 
reports could also simply have been a desktop analysis 
produced by one person. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 92 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  But they – they had been asked before the 
contract was terminated. 
MR TODD:  Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To produce such information and they did 
not produce it. 
MR TODD:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And took the risk that the contract would 
be terminated because they did not produce the information.  
So one ask the question.  If they had provided – if they had 
that information and they had actually got some companies 
10 
to provide the services why would they not have given you 
the information in order to avoid the cancellation of the 
contract? 
MR TODD:  Yes Chairperson it would have been the obvious 
thing to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TODD:  And it would have been the obvious thing to do 
when they were sued as well for repayment. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TODD:  They never did it. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  But now the reports that were said to exist 
now that was being said was that being said by some people 
within TFR after Mr Gama had been reinstated? 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That had not been said in the meantime 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 93 of 167 
 
and the contract was terminated early in 2010 is it? 
MR TODD:  Yes in January. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In January 2010.  So – and Mr Gama was – 
came back to the company in April 2011.  So for more than a 
year after the contract had been terminated they never 
placed before Transnet that information to say here is the 
information.  And then after Mr Gama had come back 
suddenly managers under him began to say we – Transnet 
might not have a case against GNS. 
MR TODD:  Yes.  Chairperson GNS had produced irregularly 
10 
reports.  They were required to provide a monthly account of 
what they had done. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TODD:  But those reports and there are versions of them 
and they come – become relevant because they were 
subjected to close analysis later. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TODD:  Before Transnet ultimately settled this case.  
They are monthly reports of the kind which describe what 
activities 
generally 
have 
been 
conducted. 
 
What 
20 
investigations are on-going and what police’s cases have 
been opened for criminal conduct and so on. 
 
So as I have said they could be a good summary of 
the – of what is going on with the actual deployment of 10 
investigators, 8 researchers, 8 handlers, 16 train crew and 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 94 of 167 
 
so on. 
 
But you would still expect to be – see some evidence 
that those people were actually deployed in the field.  
Because if they were not deployed in the field those reports 
could equally have been produced by somebody sitting at a 
desk plagiarising other reports and simply writing up a 
fantasy about what has been going on. 
 
So in other words the reports themselves looked like 
a narrative of services that were being provided but they did 
not – they were not evidence that in fact those services have 
10 
been provided and particularly where Transnet was paying 
for all of these warm bodies those resources in the field and 
there was no evidence that those people existed and GNS 
had never provided that evidence. 
 
So it was a worry that those reports. 
CHAIRPERSON:    Yes. 
MR TODD:  Simply reflected. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR TODD:  You know anybody can write oh I have been 
working really hard this month and this is what we have been 
20 
doing. But which prove that that actually – that that work had 
actually been done. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH:  Thank you.  At paragraph 39 on page 497 
you then deal with what becomes quite a significant event 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 95 of 167 
 
and that is the memorandum produced by Mr Mtetwa that 
was copied to Mr Gama. 
MR TODD:  Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH:  On the 14 January.  Please deal with that. 
MR TODD:  Yes just to round off.  After counsel’s opinion 
said these reports are not sufficient you can see that Mr 
Salinga then sends a memorandum to his superior Ms 
Mabandla who is the Group Executive for Legal Services at 
that time and says and this is at page 497.  I have actually 
quoted from the memorandum which is Annexure V which is 
10 
at page  
ADV MYBURGH SC:  677. 
MR TODD:  6 – is it 677.  Thank you.  So the memorandum 
itself is at page or is at page 8 I think.  Yes.  Oh, sorry.  It is 
at page 677. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.   
MR TODD:   There is a memorandum from Mr Selinga.  It is 
in December 2012, saying: 
“Having received various monthly reports which 
were intended to demonstrate that Abalozi did in 
20 
fact rendered security services to TFR.” 
 
So having received various monthly reports which were 
intended to demonstrate that Abalozi did in fact render 
security services.  That was – that explains what was the 
intention of these reports.   
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 96 of 167 
 
 
These reports were trying to show, yes there was – they 
do – they did do the work.  Group Legal was requested to 
obtain a brief opinion from counsel and whether or not the 
reports would be sufficient to demonstrate that Abalozi had 
indeed performed in terms of the agreement and if so, 
whether Transnet would be justified in withdrawing the action 
it instituted against Abalozi.  The language is ...[indistinct] 
[00:00:55], it’s would it be justified in withdrawing the action 
it instituted?  Not whether it would be wise or whether it 
would be – whether it was likely to lose the case.  It says 
10 
whether this would constitute a good enough reason to 
withdraw the case.   
 
Anyway, the counsel’s opinion was...  You know, there is 
an opinion given and the opinion is, there is no reason to 
withdraw.  But very soon after that, from that time, that is 
December 2012.   
 
The 
very 
following 
month, 
in 
January 
2013, 
a 
memorandum appears from Mr Twetwa who, at that stage, 
was the General Manager, Rail Network.   
 
And he sent a memorandum to Ms Mbandla and copied it 
20 
to Mr Gama.  And that is the memorandum which is at page 
...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   678. 
MR TODD:   678.  Now.  So that is January 2013.  Mr Mtetwa 
writes a memorandum and he says the purpose of this 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 97 of 167 
 
memorandum is to provide feedback on the performance of 
GNS Risk Advisory Services and the cost of services they 
provided in comparison to the current service provider. 
 
And in 
a 
nutshell 
what 
Mr 
Mtetwa 
does in that 
memorandum is he says if you analyse cable-theft loss per 
month in a period before GNS was appointed when we had a 
couple of months where we had no security provider and 
then when GNS provided their services.   
 
And you analyse monthly cable-theft.  And then you 
analyse it now with a new security provider where we 
10 
actually paying a lot more.   
 
Overall, he says, actually we got a very good deal with 
GNS.  And I am paraphrasing.  It is what Mr Mtetwa says.  It 
is basically an analysis of the length of the copper cables 
stolen per month in kilometres and he sets that out in his 
memorandum.   
 
Now – and he says in his conclusion which is at page 
682, he says it is evident from the performance statistics 
that the use of specialised security services produced 
positive results in combat copper cable theft, the period 
20 
which TFR did not have the service being provided, resulted 
in copper theft deteriorating significantly. 
 
The cost comparison reveals that – and that was the 
period 
between 
February 
and April 
2010 
– 
the 
cost 
comparison reveals that CPIR must be made almost twice 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 98 of 167 
 
what GNS was paid monthly.  The aforementioned facts 
refute the two claims made that GNS was over paid and paid 
for work they did not perform.   
 
And then he said:  I would have asserted these facts if 
anybody had asked me.  Unfortunately, I was never made 
part of the investigation or told of the claims. 
 
So what Mr Mtetwa says.  He says:  I am not looking at 
whether any warm bodies were deployed in the field.  I am 
not looking at train crew.  I am not looking at the 
...[indistinct] [00:04:13] yard and the protection of other 
10 
assets.  I am just looking at cable-theft.   
 
And if I look at cable-theft, I think that GNS did a good 
job.  That is what he says.  If I look at the cable theft 
statistics. 
 
And so having been sent the monthly reports to say is 
this a justification to withdraw the claim.  In January, the 
attorneys – us as attorneys are sent this report and said but 
Mr Mtetwa says that actually we got good value for money 
from GNS.  Is that a reason to withdraw the claim?   
 
And I am again paraphrasing what he said but that is 
20 
really the next instruction that comes is that he get asked to 
see counsel’s opinion on whether or not the memorandum 
from Mr Mtetwa will change the game in terms of the 
litigation.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  And you then obtained a 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 99 of 167 
 
further opinion from counsel. 
MR TODD:   Yes, let us have a look. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It is Annexure Y at page 689, is it? 
MR TODD:   Ja.  I mean, I jumped a step because actually 
what happened was, after Mr Mtetwa’s memorandum in 
January 2013, without – before going to the attorneys.  
There is a meeting of the Risk Committee again.  Where 
management again say there is a need to review the 
decision, to litigate in Transnet versus Abalozi Risk Advisory 
Services.   
10 
 
So management are again saying we have got – you 
know this is new and there is a new issue which shows that 
perhaps we should review our decision to be suing other 
Abalozi and ...[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you deal with it at paragraph 40. 
MR TODD:   Yes, correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Right. 
MR TODD:   And then we were then asked to brief counsel 
and did so.  And as you say, the counsel provided a further 
memorandum and that is at page ...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   689. 
MR TODD:   689.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And what was the upshot of counsel’s 
advice? 
MR TODD:   Ja.  What counsel’s advice is – I mean, it is not 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 100 of 167 
 
equivocal.  But effectively what counsel say is – says in that 
memorandum, if I – and I have not read it right now.  That is:  
Look, this may indicate that some services were rendered.  
May indicate that Transnet derived some value from GNS.   
 
If GNS did in fact help to curb cable-theft, that is – it 
may become an indication of value that mitigates or militates 
against the amount, the quantum that is being claimed.   
 
But he really points to a different problem, counsel does, 
he says; I am a bit worried here because I advised – we 
were advising Transnet and our own people are telling us 
10 
that they – you know – who are the witnesses for Transnet in 
TFR who are going to say it is going to be our witnesses?   
 
They are going to say that GNS did not provide the 
services that they were contracted to provide and that...  
Who is going to give the version of events here that was the 
basis on which we sued GNS for return of the money?  And 
he raises that problem and this is at page 698.  He says... 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   He deals with that in the last sentence 
of paragraph 25. 
MR TODD:   Ja, the upshot is.  Unless Transnet has 
20 
witnesses available who are willing and able to contradict 
Mr Mtetwa’s assertions that Transnet received fair value for 
the money expended and who can do so on firm grounds, 
pursuing the case further, would be wasteful. 
 
So counsel is now saying, effectively, if we cannot get 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 101 of 167 
 
somebody to stand by the arguments that the reasons, the 
cause of actions that he put up in the summons and if the 
client itself – if the client itself is saying well, the work was, 
based on Mr Mtetwa’s memorandum, we are going to have a 
problem in the litigation. 
 
And that then led to a meeting with the Group Chief 
Executive, Mr Molefe that I also ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Now just to make sure I understand this 
part.  Mr Mtetwa’s memorandum does not say here is 
evidence that shows that GNS provided the services.  It does 
10 
not say that.  But it simple says, we have looked at the 
statistics of cable-theft and we have seen that there was 
some significant reduction during the period of the contract, 
of the GNS contract.  And we, therefore – I, therefore, think 
that might be an indication that GNS did perform the 
services.   
 
Is that what it says in effect or does it say more than 
that? 
MR TODD:   Ja.  Chairperson, I mean, you are correct with 
respect that the memorandum does nothing to say the 
20 
various 
warm 
bodies, 
the 
resources 
that 
were 
being 
contracted from GNS were in fact provided. 
 
It actually operates on the assumption that they were 
and says I can show that they were effective.  That is only 
what the memorandum does. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 102 of 167 
 
 
It does not say I can confirm that ten investigators were 
deployed from the outset but another seven of them – 
another six were then added.  That is 16 people. 
 
And also, it does not deal with the train crew point at all 
that resources were or were not provided to the train crew.  
That is not dealt with in that memorandum at all. 
 
It simple deals with copper theft and it presupposes, 
actually, that GNS were in fact delivering the resources that 
they had been contracted to deliver and were invoicing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But you said the only reports that GSM did 
10 
provide at some stage, were reports that did not show, in 
terms of the information they put forward, did not show that 
the services were actually provided.  And the people who 
were supposed to – the stations where they were supposed 
to be stationed, were stationed.   
 
The reports, as I understood what you are saying, could 
well have been prepared by somebody sitting at his desk and 
not having seen people actually working. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So Mr Mtetwa’s memorandum must be 
20 
understood in the context of the fact that he does not put up 
evidence that says the services were actually provided, were 
rendered as a matter of fact.   
 
And in circumstances where GNS itself had not provided 
any evidence showing that the services were as a matter of 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 103 of 167 
 
fact provided.   
 
Only provided was something that, you know, really did 
not go that far.  Is that a fair summary of that part of your 
evidence? 
MR TODD:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  Okay.  I get the impression and 
you must tell me whether – maybe getting that impression 
and not justified – I get the impression that at this time, 
which is after Mr Gama had come back, had been reinstated, 
I get the impression that managers within his department, 
10 
TFR, seemed to be going quite an extra mile to try and not 
have Transnet pursue its claim against the GNS.   
MR TODD:   Yes, all the information available to me suggest 
that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   And in fact, that is then exactly what we then 
said ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   ...to the then Group Chief Executive, Mr Molefe, 
when we had a meeting with them in March of 2013. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   We said that – we said exactly what you have 
just said.  We are getting the impression – we did not 
mention the fact that it was post Mr Gama’s reinstatement 
but we said we are not getting... 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 104 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   The management, the executive or management 
team within TFR appear to be more aligned with GNS’s 
position in this litigation than Transnet’s. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR TODD:   And if that is the case, it can be very difficult to 
run this case. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Ja, it seems that they were more 
concerned really about protecting Transnet – I mean, GNS’s 
position 
than 
protecting 
Transnet’s 
interest. 
 
Yes, 
10 
Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  You deal with your 
meeting with Mr Molefe in paragraphs 42 and 43 at page 
499. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Perhaps you could just describe to the 
Chairperson what Mr Molefe informed you of – at that 
meeting? 
MR TODD:   Yes.  I mean, in essence it was – it is not usual 
that, you know, in a litigation that – ninety five million is – 
20 
that is a relatively large case but we would not normally deal 
directly with the Group Chief Executive.  But we were asked 
as attorneys to – together with counsel – to attend the 
meeting with the Group Chief Executive. 
 
And he said to us:  I need to go on with this case 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 105 of 167 
 
because I am – and I am gain paraphrasing – feeling heat.  I 
am getting called.  I am getting called – calls from this 
fellow. 
 
And he did not say who he was getting calls from but he 
was getting calls from somebody who was putting a lot of 
pressure on him to – about this litigation and to withdraw the 
litigation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Who was speaking, saying that? 
MR TODD:   Mr Molefe, the then Group Chief Executive. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Yes.  H’m. 
10 
MR TODD:   And so we said to him – and in effect I have 
attached a note.  I kept a file note at the time which I have 
attached to page 699.   
 
In fact, I have prepared that note in advance of the 
meeting because it was really a note of what I wanted to 
communicate to Mr Molefe in the meeting because we have 
been called there to and discuss.   
 
We were – we – and we were getting the feeling that you 
have just described Chairperson.  We are getting one thing 
after another, showing that internal managers thought that 
20 
we should not be pursuing the litigation.   
 
And we kept getting asked:  Well, does this change it?  
Is this a reason to withdraw?  And so, effectively what we 
communicated and I am confident that I communicated.   
 
These were my talking points for that meeting on the 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 106 of 167 
 
18t h of March 2013.  I had prepared them at the time.  And 
the point he made were:  Look, this contract was invalid from 
its foundation.   
 
It was fundamentally invalid from a procurement point of 
view and it was the product of – I use the words of Mr Gama 
– a scam. 
 
As to whether GNS actually did anything.  It is possible 
if they proved so.  We have asked them to show us evidence 
and 
so 
far 
we 
have 
been 
given 
a 
monthly 
report, 
summarising what they say they did. 
10 
 
But they have not given us any underlining evidence of 
the warm bodies deployed that we have paid for.  And so, it 
is possible.   
 
If they prove that they did do valuable work for Transnet, 
equity, to the extent that it would come into play.  To the 
extent that a court could say:   Well, to some equitable 
remedy to reduce the amount of damages you are claiming.   
 
There are various other, you know, possible grounds on 
which a court could reduce a claim.  But an equity might 
justify reducing the total amount that Transept has repaid if 
20 
actually GNS are able to show but these are the resources 
we deployed.  This is what it cost us to work for Transnet.   
And yes it was invalid but we spent these amounts.   
 
It might be that that would result in a reduction of the 
amount we claimed by Transnet.  But then, on the prospects 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 107 of 167 
 
of success – and I made this point in my – and I made this 
point very specifically to Mr Molefe. 
 
We 
have 
to 
get 
cooperation 
from 
the 
Transnet’s 
Executive Team and a commitment to pursuing Transnet’s 
interest in the litigation. 
 
If we, as the lawyers, are faced with the instructions all 
the time which say we do not really think we got a case.  We 
think GNS did a good job.   
 
You know, unless we have somebody who is going to 
pursue Transnet’s interests that it is entitled to pursue under 
10 
the contract as a result of this whole exercise then we can 
really battle and to run the litigation successfully. 
 
We will be hamstrung by the kind of instructions we get 
and we said we would actually like and we wanted him to 
give direction that we get given – somebody would be given 
clear instructions to work with us to do a proper analyses of 
whether we got the witnesses we need to win the case and 
whether we are right. 
 
And we said, in the interim we should put GNS to the 
proof of their claim that they did actually rendered the 
20 
services because they have not satisfied us to date that they 
did anything. 
 
So that was effectively what we communicated to 
Transnet at that point in time.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:   You say that Mr Molefe said he was 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 108 of 167 
 
taking heat and he was being persistently called by someone 
who was asking why Transnet was persisting with the 
litigation.  Who did you think he was referring to? 
MR TODD:   Ja, it is my – I surmised that he was referring to 
General Nyanda but because what the context showed it was 
aw powerful person that was unhappy with the litigation 
continuing.  I can put it that way.   
 
He felt very uncomfortable about it and he did not 
mention a name but I cannot say whether it was in fact 
General Nyanda.   
10 
 
It seemed logical in the context that he was referring 
having been called by General Nyanda. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Then Mr Todd.  Perhaps I can just 
paraphrase what you deal with next so that we can come to 
the next important part of this.  In paragraphs 45 and 46, you 
deal with the fact that Mr Selinga addressed a memorandum 
to Mr Molefe where he proposed or recommended the 
rescission of the decision really to blacklist GNS. 
MR TODD:   That is right. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And that ultimately, Mr Molefe 
20 
approved of that.  And by blacklisting, I mean, that they had, 
on the face of the document, being traced on a list of so-
called excluded tenderers. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Is that correct? 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 109 of 167 
 
MR TODD:   Yes.  We were not aware of that.  There is the 
documents at page 700, at that stage.  Even before we met 
Mr Molefe internally without recourse to us.  Transnet, 
Mr Selinga 
had 
recommended 
to 
Mr 
Molefe 
who 
had 
approved 
actually 
removing 
the 
bar 
on 
doing 
further 
business with – now it is called Abalozi – on grounds that 
really of Mr Mtetwa’s memorandum.   
 
To say we are satisfied internally on the strength of Mr 
Mtetwa’s memorandum that actually we should remove – we 
should uplift the bar to doing further business with Abalozi.   
10 
 
And in fact, it even includes that it was suspected that 
Abalozi may have colluded with some Transnet employees in 
order to be awarded the contract.   
 
However, there is no direct evidence to corroborate 
those suspicions.  Is what it says.  Now there was a 
disciplinary process in which Mr Senamela and Mr Kanye 
were dismissed which found precisely that there was that 
corroboration.   
 
And that is precisely why Mr Senamela and Mr Kanye 
were 
dismissed. 
 
And 
Mr Gama 
had 
described 
this 
20 
procurement process as a scam and a fraud.   
 
So on what basis - it is now being suggested – but 
Mr Gama was the Chief Executive of TFR at this point.  But 
Mr Selenga sends a memorandum to Mr Molefe supported by 
the Group Legal Services, saying there is no reason to 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 110 of 167 
 
believe that there was anything improper in the conclusion 
with the contract of Abalozi.   
 
And TFR are actually happy dealing with their joint 
venture partners, mail and revert to security providers that 
were working in their consortium and so actually we should 
clear them for further business with Transnet.   
 
But that was done without resource and we did not know 
when we went to see Mr Molefe that that was the attitude 
that was being pursued by the management team at the time.   
ADV MYBURGH SC:    Then at paragraph 47 of your 
10 
affidavit, page 501, you deal with a memorandum dated the 
8t h of October from Mr Gama to Mr Molefe.  Please deal with 
that.   
MR TODD:   There is typographic error in page – paragraph 
47.   It is the memorandum dated the 8t h of October 2013, 
signed by Mr Gama on the 22 n d of October 2013.  It says 
2010.  It is – obviously, that memorandum of October 2013.   
 
And really this is the culmination of these regular 
meetings at Risk Committee of the board and that the board 
where management are saying, there is no real – we – there 
20 
is new information.  We should not be pursuing with this 
litigation against GNS. 
 
And so this culminates in the Risk Committee saying:  
Well, somebody must come and tell us why.  And so 
Mr Gama 
attends 
this 
memorandum 
or 
approves 
this 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 111 of 167 
 
memorandum.   
 
He writes it to Mr Molefe, asking for him to get a slot on 
– at the Board Risk Committee meeting.  That is at page 
705.   
 
Now the purpose of the submission to request approval 
from the Group Chief Executive for TFR to present its 
responses 
to 
the 
Transnet 
Group 
Risk 
Committee 
to 
questions raised by the committee in respect of other laws 
Risk Advisory Services. 
 
And so what appears from that is that it says in 
10 
January 2013 – that memorandum says – Mr Gama.  This 
memorandum is prepared by Mr Mtetwa and it is effectively 
signed by Mr Gama, addressed to Mr Molefe.  
 
And it says in January 2013, TFR was requested to 
respond to the performance of GNS Risk Advisory Services 
and the costs in comparison to the current service provider. 
 
This was done in January 2013.  One assumes that is 
the Mtetwa memorandum being referred to.  And then in 
October 2013, TFR was informed that the Transnet board 
Risk Committee was not fully satisfied with the responses 
20 
and raised the following three specific questions.   
 
Ascertain 
whether 
the 
contractual 
agreement 
was 
adhered to in terms of the number of security personnel 
required and the sites that were to be covered by the 
contract. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 112 of 167 
 
 
So the Board Risk Committee are saying, can you 
actually tell us, did we actually get the security personnel 
that we were paying for.  Report on the KPI’s and for 
deliverables and reports on investigations conducted during 
the contract period should be submitted to the committee. 
 
So – and so then the – under discussion at page 706, 
the memorandum writes – reads:  In an attempt to bring this 
matter to finality it is our request that that the TFR General 
Manager 
Rail 
Network 
within 
whose 
portfolio 
security 
services resides and the TFR General Council address the 
10 
committee in order to explain the background to the problem 
which the service aimed to solve, the context and the nature. 
 
And it is anticipated that such discussion will have to 
resolve in moving the matter to closure.  And let TFR 
address the Board Risk Committee. 
 
So this is Mr Gama sponsoring or either Mr Mtetwa – 
Mr Gama asking Mr ...[indistinct] [00:26:14] can we bring 
Mr Mtetwa and deal – explain to the Risk Committee why we 
say there is no reason to continue with the litigation against 
GNS. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it not strange that if GNS had actually 
provided security personnel at the places where they were 
supposed to have been provided, that there would have been 
nobody within Transnet who had seen that they had been 
there? 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 113 of 167 
 
 
I mean, if the City of Johannesburg contracts GNS to 
say, provide security services and there must be 50 
personnel during the day at the following points, surely there 
must be City of Johannesburg officials who would see that 
those people are there.   
MR TODD:   Absolutely Chairperson.  So we had asked GNS 
to provide information of who have they had posted, where 
and when. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   They have not provided it. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   Then one thing that is nowhere to be found in 
any of these TFR interaction with the board, is any statement 
exactly like you have made.  I confirm that 16 trained drivers 
worked a full shit and we hired another 16.  And I can 
confirm that those people did their shifts. 
 
There is no indication – in fact, what Mr Mtetwa then 
does is, as you will see, he goes to the Risk Committee and 
he says, this is very specialised and actually we do not pay 
for the resources.  We pay for the outcomes.  That is 
20 
actually what Mr Mtetwa does to deal precisely with that 
problem. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  I mean, the contract is clear.  Provide 
X number of personnel. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 114 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And you cannot – you could not have 
provided personnel over a certain period and nobody from 
Transnet would have seen them.   
 
And it should not be a problem to say, here are the 
points at which we provide the people and the people were 
working from eight in the morning to eight in the evening or 
whatever the period, over this period.   
 
Here are even the names.  And then Transnet would 
simple go there and say:  Well, who are the people who are 
in charge of that point?  Were there people here during that 
10 
time?  And then they will say yes they were there or they 
were not there.   
MR TODD:   So what Transnet – what TFR Management did 
at this point is retreated into the idea that this is very 
specialised and it was entirely up to GNS to decide who to 
deploy, when and where and we did not – we merely monitor 
the outcomes to see if we have noted a reduction in theft or 
something like that over that period.   
CHAIRPERSON:   But then that point or position seems to be 
inconsistent with the expressed terms of the agreement 
20 
which say deploy so many people. 
MR TODD:   I would agree with you Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, Ja.  Okay.  Mr Myburgh. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Mr Todd, you go on then 
at paragraphs 48 and 49, page 502 and 503 to deal with a 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 115 of 167 
 
presentation that was prepared for the Risk Committee. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And then the meeting of the Risk 
Committee on the 7t h of November.  You deal with those two 
things, please. 
MR TODD:   Ja, the presentation ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Which page are we now? 
MR TODD:   Sorry Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   502? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  I have got it. 
MR TODD:  And the – so for that October 2013, so Mr 
Gama says to Mr Molefe can we get Mr Mthethwa  an 
audience for the risk committee and he will explain things.  
So then a presentation is prepared for the risk committee 
and I have referred to that.  The presentation itself is at 
page 707 where it is prepared by Mr Mthethwa  and it 
contains – includes in it the extract that I have referred to 
there which is at page 710.  And that is where in response 
to the question specifically raised by the board risk 
20 
committee: 
“Ascertain 
if 
the 
contractual 
agreement 
was 
adhered in terms of a number of security personnel 
required and the sites that were to be covered by 
the contract.” 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 116 of 167 
 
That is the question that Mr Mthethwa  is asked to address 
the board subcommittee and his response is to say: 
“Specialise security contract different to traditional 
guarding contract.  Performance/outcomes focused 
is based on a targeted reduction in theft incidents, 
length of cable stolen, arrests and convictions.  
Number of type of resources required are not 
prescribed to the service provider, as with guarding 
contracts.” 
Now that statement, the board subcommittee have not read 
10 
the contracts, but it is false, it is completely untrue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes because the contract says exactly 
the opposite, says specify. 
MR TODD:  Yes and every time – when further resources 
are procured, which more than doubled the contract, the 
two extensions, they specifically mentioned the exact 
number and it is not just for cable theft, it is for trained 
crew guards and it is for somebody to sit at the – 
supposedly to guard the Kaserne yard and it is for another 
set of trained crew guards.   
20 
So to say that the GNS contract, the number and 
type of resources required are not prescribed is just – it is 
completely misleading the board, quite frankly, that is what 
this did.   
 
But it is something which was necessary, if I can 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 117 of 167 
 
put it that way, if you wanted to defend – if you were 
determined to defend this contract, it is hard to know why 
any Transnet would be determined to not – to undermine 
Transnet’s claim for recovery of money paid to GNS but it 
is a logical thing to say when in fact there are no time 
sheets and no list of staff deployed.  Then you say oh, 
well, actually they did not have to and in fact what he then 
says is the security – he in fact then goes further, he says: 
“It 
is 
a 
monthly 
project 
budget, 
reviewed 
an 
evaluated.  Service provider deploys resources 
10 
such as investigators, researchers and handlers at 
its discretion within the limit of the monthly budget 
and according to changing crime patterns.” 
So what he is actually saying is, they put all these 
numbers together but they do not really have to deploy 
people like that, they can do something totally different 
and the invoices say this is how much I am charging for 
and this is who I am charging for, the invoices say two 
supervisors and 16 train crew but whether they provide 
them or not depends on their assessment of the risk at the 
20 
time, of whether it is a good idea to deploy train crew or 
not but they still invoice us for it.  I mean, that is really Mr 
Mthethwa  was telling the board sub-committee, it seems to 
me, 
but 
it 
is 
just 
completely 
inconsistent 
with 
the 
contractual arrangements that had been concluded from 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 118 of 167 
 
the outset. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You might not be able to say anything 
about this but I wonder whether somebody who could – who 
had read the contract could put up this version without 
intentionally seeking to make a misrepresentation.  One 
does not know whether Mr Mthethwa  had read the 
contract. 
MR TODD:  Yes and Chairperson, read the contract and the 
extensions to it and understood what was going on there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes.  And, in any event, the 
10 
question that was sought to be addressed actually required 
the person who gives response and answer to have 
checked the contract because the question is certainly if 
the contractual agreement was adhered in terms of the 
number of security personnel required and the sites that 
were to be covered by the contract, to answer that 
question you must go to the contract. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR TODD:  Seems to me, Chairperson. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  Then could you deal with 
what happened before the risk committee? 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  At paragraph 49 you say that the 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 119 of 167 
 
presentation which you have just spoken of was duly made 
to the risk committee at a meeting on the 7 November 
2013. 
MR TODD:  Yes, I was not at the meeting but I have read a 
minute of it, it is an approved minute of that meeting 
provided by Transnet and that says that the intention – 
there 
management, 
again, 
you 
have 
got 
the 
minute 
recording what did management tell the committee and 
management told the committee that the intention of the 
exercise was to establish if there was value derived by the 
10 
company from the contract or not.  So they change it, they 
say oh no, this is not – were the personnel there or not, 
they say well, did we get value from the contract?  The 
quantum of the value derived was set out in the monthly 
reports and matched by invoices.  So whatever that means, 
management are saying if you read a monthly report saying 
we have done a whole lot of work for you and here is our 
invoice, that is proof that the invoice …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   The work was done. 
MR TODD:  Services – that the work was done.  That is 
20 
what management are saying.  They say that the supplier 
was appointed to perform a data gathering function.  I do 
not know what that means.  But Abalozi adhered to the 
contract and that the company did not have a KPI that 
required the service provider to provide a list of security 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 120 of 167 
 
personnel.  So management says, you know, you are 
asking the question but they were not obligated to tell us 
or to even have any specified number of people on the job.  
They just had to give us reports and give us an invoice and 
that is all they needed to do. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is a very strange situation that an 
entity can spend and pay 98 million – R95 or R98 million to 
a service provider without being able to say we know that 
the service that they were supposed to provide was 
rendered. 
10 
MR TODD:  Well, it obviously is ripe for abuse, that 
situation, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Please just repeat that, Mr Todd? 
MR TODD:  I just it makes – it is ripe for abuse, a situation 
where a management team is either unable or does not – is 
not required to actually verify that services were provided, 
that is …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then maybe they were not interested 
in knowing. 
MR TODD:  It is a classic case where clearly a service 
20 
provider can with the right support internally abuse that 
position by …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the question then arises, the person 
who had the final authority to approve that these millions 
be paid, should he not have sought proof that the services 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 121 of 167 
 
had been rendered first so that that question would arise.  
I would imagine that if you authorise payment of millions of 
taxpayers’ money, the least you should do is to say let me 
be satisfied that this payment is due. 
MR TODD:  Yes, Chairperson. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Myburgh, I think we should take a 
short adjournment, just ten minutes, and then we can 
continue.  What is your assessment of how we are doing in 
terms of time? 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I think that we should still be able to 
finish in the three hours that I indicated. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  If we take a ten minute adjournment 
now, I hope to finish by quarter past six. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  No, that is fine.  Let us just 
take a ten minutes adjournment.  We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue.  I think I just 
20 
wanted to say before we proceed, I think just from one’s 
own experience, I mean, when it comes to the deployment 
of security in companies and government departments 
there would even be a record that is kept when security 
guard reports for duties they would sign somewhere and 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 122 of 167 
 
when they leave and somebody else starts.  They would do 
that.   
So it ought to have been very easy for GNS to 
produce such documents if they did, they had actually 
provided the services and actually they would have had – 
they would have asked the companies who might have 
done the work for them also to say just provide the names 
of those employees and they could even provide, that is 
GNS, 
proof 
of 
the 
money 
that 
they 
paid 
to 
those 
companies.  All of that should have been easy if indeed 
10 
they had actually subcontracted and work had been done.  
I would have imagined that all of that should be easy, 
should have been easy for them to produce, to say here 
are amounts that we were paying monthly to company A, 
company B, company C.  Each of whom – each of which 
provided x number of security personnel during that period.  
Okay, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Mr Todd, just to finish off on the risk 
20 
committee which you deal with at paragraph 49 at page 503 
and it goes over to 504 at paragraph C.  You mentioned 
there that what the committee resolved is that the matter 
should 
be 
referred 
to 
the 
Arbitration 
Foundation 
of 
Southern Africa for Resolution preceded by mediation, is 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 123 of 167 
 
that correct? 
MR TODD:  Yes, that is what the minute shows the 
committee decided. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And what happened after that? 
MR TODD:  Ja, so this I – I had glean this from the 
documents but it is apparent that that did not happen, it 
was a strange suggestion that it would somehow that the 
Arbitration Foundation would produce a resolution unless 
they – but, in any event, what happened was that in 
December 2013 instead what Transnet did was they went to 
10 
fresh attorneys, an independent law firm to ask the 
question whether Transnet received value for money for 
the services that it had paid for. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This was – was this similar to what 
happened to your law firm in regard to Mr Gama’s 
dismissal matter, Mr Todd, because as I recall, in regard to 
his dismissal matter your law firm had been representing 
Transnet and had given certain advices to Transnet but at 
a certain stage Transnet then decided to terminate its 
mandate, your mandate and then they went to another law 
20 
firm or other law firms in terms of seeking to have the 
matter settled and this seems to be something similar. 
MR TODD:  Yes, perhaps, Chairperson.  It is an indication 
that Transnet wanted to ask another law firm whether or 
not the question that they put in their brief was did 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 124 of 167 
 
Transnet receive value for money and was the payment at 
95.6 million justified, is the question they ask and – I 
mean, the question is differently formulated, if I may just 
say, what had been sued for, for Transnet, and the claim 
that had been brought by our firm on behalf of Transnet 
was 
the 
contract 
was 
invalid 
from 
a 
procurement 
prospective and then it suffered all the various further 
defects that it suffered and services were not rendered. 
 
We had said look, there may be some grounds for 
producing the claim against proof of services actually 
10 
rendered but this seems to be the board saying well, let us 
ask somebody else if you can say that the payment was 
justified.  That was the mandate given to another law firm, 
anyway. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You then go on to mention that y9ou 
attended 
a 
meeting 
with 
these 
attorneys, 
HNR, 
and 
perhaps I could then take you to paragraph 53. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  They, HNR, briefed a security 
20 
consultant.  Who was he? 
MR TODD:  Ja, they explain it in the report.  So the – I do 
not know this person but his credentials are set out by 
HNR Attorneys as somebody properly qualified to analyse 
the reports that had been provided to Transnet by GNS and 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 125 of 167 
 
to comment on certain key questions that they asked of 
this specialist security consultant.  So they effectively 
engaged an expert in security services to look at what had 
been done here and answer various questions that they set 
out.   
And if I – I mean, they then deal with that in their 
report and I think there is a report in – I have attached to  
my affidavit the report – the full report of that security 
consultant but the key provisions of it and the questions 
that were specifically asked are also summarised in the 
10 
report from HNR attorneys and that is probably the easiest 
way to look at what this security consultant actually said.  I 
do not know, I can refer to any page but that is at page 
762.  At page 762, this is in the report of HNM Attorneys, I 
do not know why I said HNR, it should be HNM, I think, 
Attorneys. 
And that reflects – there were six questions, they 
say we posed six questions to Peritus, is the name of the 
specialist firm that John Pearson worked for. 
1. Do 
the 
reports 
reflect 
that 
services 
were 
20 
provided? 
That is the first question, do the reports reflect that 
services were provided?  He says: 
“Yes, partly.” 
Is his answer and he then explains what was provided in 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 126 of 167 
 
indicates that work was actually done and what is not 
shown and then the second question at page 763 says: 
“Would the services as set out in the reports 
represent, in your opinion, what one might expect to 
have been provided given the mandates?” 
“No” 
Is his conclusion there. 
“Reports were nonspecific, vague, no evidence of 
internal 
involvement 
of 
Transnet 
employees, 
contents were more often than not conjectured with 
10 
baseless opinions, never indication that any of the 
intelligence-based 
information 
was 
properly 
profiled.” 
Dah-de-dah-de-dah.  So the answer to that question is no.  
There were six questions.  So the first one was yes, partly.  
The second question, no.  The third question: 
“Would the level of reporting in terms of detail of 
information provided represent, in your opinion, 
what one might expected to have been provided in 
reports of this nature?  If not, please elaborate.” 
20 
“No, they did not contain security objectives”  
And then there is a long explanation of what they did not 
do. 
“Do the report reflect an account of services?” 
This is the fourth question. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 127 of 167 
 
“…which, if rendered, would represent in your 
opinion contractual compliance?” 
“No.” 
They pursued the agreement and they say no, there was no 
contractual compliance.  Question five: 
“On the basis of the content of the reports can you 
identify any apparent material gaps in services that 
the service provider was mandated to provide?  Can 
you identify material gaps?“ 
“Yes police CAS were falsely reported and did not 
10 
exist.  There was no feedback in criminal cases.” 
And they go on to define that.  Now, I mean, that is a 
pretty material conclusion.  They say yes, these reports 
say we opened cases with the police and here are all the 
case numbers and when you read the report in any detail 
they list a significant number of police case numbers which 
just do not exist and are false.  And then: 
“Would you render an opinion representing an 
overall assessment of the services rendered based 
on the contents of the reports?” 
20 
“Report writing is poor.” 
Etcetera, etcetera.  So effectively they hired an expert to 
look at whether, you know, what the reports show about the 
level of security services provided and overwhelmingly the 
expert says something was done, people travelled to 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 128 of 167 
 
certain sites, there were photographs attached to certain 
reports so there is some evidence that something was done 
but nothing like the contract contemplated. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then what was the conclusion then of 
this report? 
MR TODD:   Well, what these attorneys then conclude, 
rather extraordinarily, in my opinion, but they conclude, 
they say the following, if I am – and I am just summarising, 
paraphrasing what they say.  They say, first question: 
“We tried to find out if, from GNS, if they actually 
10 
could provide any evidence of personnel deployed.” 
So we had seen the request from Transnet, we had been 
told they had given no information, we wrote to, at that 
stage, Werksmans Attorneys who were representing GNS 
and they ignored us.  They ignored our calls, they gave us 
nothing and in light of the long history of this matter we 
have got no reason to believe – we do not think we are 
going to get anything from them. 
 
So that is the first rather, in my view, rather a 
crucial part of the report which says well, no evidence in 
20 
that sense of warm bodies. 
 
The second question is, they say well, we have 
looked at this comparative analysis of cable theft during 
GNS, during the new contractor, we have looked at Mr 
Mthethwa’s report, we have extended it beyond, we cannot 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 129 of 167 
 
reach any conclusion based on a comparative analysis that 
actually these services were provided. 
 
Then they look at the third thing and say well, 
based on our interviews with staff members and their 
interviews that they specifically mention, the interviewed 
Mr Gama who emphasised to them how the consequences, 
the financial consequences and the losses suffered when 
cable theft occurs is huge and it is very difficult to quantify 
because of all the knock-on effects.  So Mr Gama’s 
evidence say they recall from their interview with him was 
10 
to 
say 
that 
cable 
theft 
has 
huge 
consequences 
for 
Transnet. 
 
Mr Mthethwa said that actually the cable theft 
statistics were not bad or quite good or moderately good 
during GNS’ contract and that Mr Msigala said that after 
the hijacked train crew member had disappeared with a 
vehicle, they did not have another incident like that and it 
had been a good thing for Transnet to have additional train 
crew support. 
 
So they describe that and they say essentially on 
20 
the basis of that we conclude that Transnet on balance did 
get value on cable theft, we cannot say that it got any 
value on protecting Karsene yard or anything like that, the 
middle portion, let us call it, of the contract, the first 
extension.  And as regard train crew, on the basis of what 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 130 of 167 
 
Mr Msigala said, what value can you place on a human 
life?  We conclude that value was given to Transnet for the 
money paid.  That is the conclusion that the attorneys 
reached.  And they said on balance then, Transnet got 
value. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That you summarise in paragraph 55 
at page 505.   At page 506 you then go on to mention that 
the risk committee then held a meeting, it was presented 
with these findings and it resolved at the risk committee, 
that the litigation against Abalozi should not be pursued.  
10 
MR TODD:  Ja, that is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Part of what is changed is – and maybe 
it is something that I mentioned earlier, is internally 
Transnet is really going quite far to do – to itself do what 
one would have thought they would call upon GNS to do, 
day provide us with proof.  But they are doing all of that 
themselves and it is like they want to find a basis to 
withdraw the claim.   
 
I know that when we were dealing with the question 
20 
of the settlement of Mr Gama’s dismissal dispute, also one 
got the impression that there was quite a serious effort to 
make sure that he was reinstated, not matter what.  Yes, 
okay, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Thank you.  And then at paragraph 57 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 131 of 167 
 
you say that the Transnet met on the same day and you 
attach a copy of the minute.  Could I take you there, 
please?  That annexure is LL at page 787. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You will see that what you attached 
to your affidavit was really an extract, paragraph 7.4 under 
the heading Board Risk Committee, but if you drop down to 
7.4.3 you will see that it is cut off: 
“One of the members indicated that the committee 
had approved the finalisation of the Abalozi matter 
10 
based 
on 
the 
findings 
from 
an 
independent 
mediator. 
 
Moreover, 
management 
had 
also 
informed…” 
And then there is nothing after that.  Mr Todd, you have 
managed to procure the full minutes of that meeting and it 
is apparent from the full minutes and I will hand up them in 
a moment that the minutes went on to state that: 
“Management had also informed the committee that 
the criminal matter on Abalozi was withdrawn by the 
NPA due to a lack of information to prosecute.  The 
20 
committee requested management to compile a 
lessons 
learnt 
document 
from 
the 
Abalozi 
challenges and then the board noted the update.” 
So the real decision, the actual decision was taken by the 
committee and simply noted by the board.   
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 132 of 167 
 
 
Mr Chairperson, if I could just hand up this 
document which we will formally add into the exhibit to be 
marked and to be placed after page 787 marked A and B, it 
includes the missing sentence that I have just read. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR TODD:   Would you give it to Mr Todd as well?  Alright, 
then …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, this will be page 787A and 
787B? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, Mr Chairperson.   
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   You know, your handwritten looks to me 
like 75A. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I beg your pardon.  787, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  Now, Mr Todd, let us 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, I am sorry. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So you say do they replace the current 
787? 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well, 787, as it stands …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the name. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Is cut off, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Well, it is …[intervenes] 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 133 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or should we replace it or …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I suppose the only important page is 
actually 787B, Chairperson, because that contains the 
missing sentence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  So what do you say finally do we 
take out 787A or do you say we just replace …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I suppose that perhaps could be the 
easiest way to do it just to add one page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It is not 787A that I have referred to. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  But the 787B, we could turn that into 
787A. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And it then includes the missing 
sentence and only one page needs to be added. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  So the one you had marked 
as 787B becomes 787A. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That is correct, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the we slot it after page 788. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Comes after the existing 787.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  It will be marked A. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Ja, it goes up to – the minutes 
start on 787 and then go up to 788, hey?  Ja.  788. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 134 of 167 
 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes, I beg your pardon. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So we slot it after that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then it will be – or should it be 
788A? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I think it is probably better to be – 
upon reflection, and I am terribly sorry, 788A. 
CHAIRPERSON:   A, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Then maybe for the record you 
10 
can just place on record what the effect is of doing this so 
that whoever reads the transcript can follow. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So, Mr Todd, just to retrace our 
steps.  If I could ask you go to 787. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  You see there is a report of the risk 
committee and it ends off with a sentence saying that: 
“One of the members indicated that the committee 
had approved the finalisation of the Abalozi matter 
based 
on 
the 
findings 
from 
an 
independent 
20 
mediator. 
 
Moreover, 
management 
had 
also 
informed…” 
And if you could then go to what is now marked page 788A, 
it continues: 
“…informed the committee that the criminal matter 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 135 of 167 
 
on Abalozi was withdrawn by the NPA due to a lack 
of 
information 
to 
prosecute. 
 
The 
committee 
requested management to compile a lessons learnt 
document from the Abalozi challenges and that the 
board noted the update.” 
MR TODD:  Yes, I can confirm that that is from the full 
version of the approved minutes provided to us by Transnet 
and that …[intervenes] 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Chairperson, why I asked for this 
and have gone to the trouble of adding it, is I think it might 
10 
be an important fact for the purposes of the material facts 
of this case, that it is really the risk committee that took 
the decision. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  And then that that is noted by the 
board. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  I thought it was important to add this 
page. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  No, no, I think it is …[intervenes] 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  So that becomes clear to you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think it is important, ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Alright.  Now, Mr Todd, the decision 
is taken to withdraw from the litigation and then at 
paragraph 58 at page 507 of your affidavit you go on to 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 136 of 167 
 
explain that a settlement agreement was then concluded, is 
that correct?  
MR TODD:   Yes and it parallels with the previous matter 
on which I gave evidence but it was indeed the case that 
this settlement agreement too did not involve the attorney 
or Transnet did not involve the litigation attorneys who 
were representing it in this High Court litigation when they 
negotiated and concluded this settlement agreement.  It 
was concluded without our advice. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  That settlement agreement you find 
10 
as annexure MM at page 789 and the terms of it are set out 
at 790 where it records that: 
“Transnet 
hereby 
withdraws 
its 
action 
against 
Abalozi.  Abalozi hereby withdraws its counterclaim 
against Transnet.  Transnet will upon signature 
hereof issue a media statement in the form as 
agreed and attached hereto marked A.” 
And then of some significance, 4: 
“Transnet will pay all the legal costs incurred by 
Abalozi, 
its 
directors 
and 
the 
cofounders 
and 
20 
directors of GNS on an attorney and own client 
scale.  Terms of the settlement agreement are 
confidential and should not be disclosed to any one 
of the parties, to any third party.” 
Could I just ask you to comment on 7Could I just ask you 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 137 of 167 
 
to comment on paragraph 4 of the provision dealing with 
costs? 
MR TODD:  Ja, it is unusual in two respects.  I mean, the 
first is that it purports to refer to costs of not only the 
company that was party to the litigation but also its 
directors 
and 
the 
cofounders 
and 
directors 
of 
GNS 
suggesting other individuals’ legal costs would be covered, 
not just Abalozi’s but I do not know to what extent that was 
intended or played a role.  As I say, we were not asked to 
advise on it.  So it is unusual. 
10 
 
And then obviously, an attorney and own client 
scale is what is generally referred to as a punitive scale as 
if Transnet it was – somehow should be punished for 
having conceived of a case like this in the first place. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, as if Transnet has done something 
reprehensible. 
MR TODD:  But there is one other point that I just make 
here, is that Abalozi did withdraw its counterclaims and 
that is important.  It will appear in a moment important for 
what Transnet subsequently did to settle the legal costs. 
20 
And just, as far as the legal costs are concerned, 
when you settle High Court litigation like this, this is a 
matter which had only been pleaded.  So any taxed bill of 
costs is going to be the cost even on an attorney and own 
client scale consequent on pleading the case, taking 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 138 of 167 
 
instructions and drafting the pleadings and so on and so 
forth.  There were no preparation for trial or trial in this 
matter.  In fact discovery had occurred but on a very 
limited basis and that is it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And actually there might not have been 
many witness statements that had been taken already. 
MR TODD:  It – ja, I will comment in a moment when we 
deal 
with 
the 
legal 
costs 
themselves 
that 
were 
subsequently paid. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Do you by any chance know whose 
10 
signature that is that signed on behalf of Transnet?  You 
might or might not know, Mr Todd? 
MR TODD:  It is consistent with other documents signed by 
Mr Molefe.  It appears to be signed by Mr Molefe. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:  I am not a handwritten expert. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR TODD:  But it appears to be signed by Mr Molefe 
himself. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
MR TODD:  And the other signature is legible, appears to 
be Siphiwe Ayanda.  But that, again, I am not a handwritten 
expert. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes. 
MR TODD:  It appears to say legibly that that is the person 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 139 of 167 
 
who signed that document. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Then, Mr Todd, you go on in your 
affidavit at paragraph 60 to refer to two letters from 
Abalozi, the one dated the 8 September and the other the 
16 October.  Could you just deal with those letters?  You 
find them at page 791 and then 793. 
 
So these are letters that were sent to Transnet after 
the settlement agreement. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  The settlement agreement was 
…[intervenes] 
MR 
TODD: 
 
The 
settlement 
agreement 
was 
signed 
apparently on the 4 August 2014 and the following, within a 
month, Abalozi – or at least somebody on behalf of Abalozi 
writes a letter to Transnet, to Mr Molefe.  And this is at 
page 791 saying: 
“The following should be taken into account in 
finalising the lump sum payable to Abalozi in full 
and final settlement Abalozi’s legal costs.” 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, you said 791? 
MR TODD:  791. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh you are reading from paragraph 2? 
MR TODD:  Paragraph 2, yes.  Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  The letter is addressed to Mr 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 140 of 167 
 
Brian Molefe. 
MR TODD:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it comes from – the letterheads are 
those of Abalozi. 
MR TODD:  Abalozi Risk Services. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay, alright. 
MR TODD:  And it appears to be picking up on the 
obligation in paragraph 4 of the settlement agreement for 
Transnet to pay all legal costs incurred by Abalozi and 
various parties.  So it says: 
10 
“The following should be taken into account in 
finalising the lump sum payable to Abalozi in full 
and final settlement of Abalozi’s legal costs in the 
action 
instituted 
by 
Transnet 
and 
damages 
claimable in connection with…” 
And then they refer to other matters which – neither of 
which I think was ever pursued.  But they then say in 
paragraph 3: 
“The essence of this is, in our view, an amount of 
R40 million will be reasonable compensation to 
20 
Abalozi.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, Mr Todd, I think the contents 
of that letter are important in their entirety.  Could you just 
read it into the record, the letter at 791? 
MR TODD:  Yes.  So it say – it is written without prejudice 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 141 of 167 
 
and it says: 
“Dear Brian…” 
Which I take to be referring to Mr Molefe. 
1. We refer to our letter of 20 August 2014. 
The following should be taken into account in 
finalising the lump sum payable to Abalozi in full 
and final settlement of Abalozi’s legal costs in the 
action 
instituted 
by 
Transnet 
and 
damages 
claimable in connection with: 
 
2.1 
The pending review application, and 
10 
 
2.2 
The pending defamation claim. 
 
3. 
Our view is that amount of R40 million will  
be reasonable compensation to Abalozi in 
this regard. 
 
4. 
As this matter has been dragging on for too  
long we need your response within seven 
days from today’s date failing which we will 
have no choice but to ask our lawyers to 
issue the bill of costs and proceed with the 
pending 
claims. 
 
Should 
our 
proposed 
20 
settlement amount be acceptable, it should 
be 
deposited 
into 
our 
attorneys’ 
trust 
account as follows.” 
And it gives the details of Werksmans Attorneys bank 
account. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 142 of 167 
 
 
 
“We await to hear from you.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:  Now, Mr Todd, perhaps I could just 
ask you to comment on what you know of this so-called 
pending review application and pending defamation claim.  
What did they involve? 
MR TODD:  Well, I do not know – I will tell you what I am 
able to say but as regards the review application, I believe 
the findings in the disciplinary hearing which resulted in 
the dismissal of Mr Senemela and Mr Kanya.  An article 
10 
was published in a newspaper referring to those findings, 
and Abalozi believed, ...[Indistinct] said it was going to do 
two things, one was it was going to review the findings of 
the disciplinary chairperson, Abalozi as an external party 
was going to bring an application to review and set aside 
the disciplinary chairperson’s findings, and secondly, they 
were going to sue Transnet because they held Transnet 
responsible for the publication of the disciplinary matter.  I 
don’t recall whether a review application was ever brought 
or if it was, it certainly wasn’t pursued, and I don’t believe 
20 
that deformation proceedings were ever instituted.  I made 
the – certainly, I don’t believe, to the best of my 
knowledge, 
our 
firm 
certainly 
wasn’t 
briefed 
in 
any 
deformation proceedings, there’s no reference to any 
proceedings that have been instituted.  So, my – as far as I 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 143 of 167 
 
can tell this is reference to a threatened claim rather than 
one that is currently pending before the Courts, but I’m not 
able to say more than that. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Alright and then you’re also going to 
deal with the letter of the 16 t h of October, that you find at 
793.  
MR TODD:   Yes, so there is missing correspondence 
because that refers to a response from Mr Molefe dated the 
29 t h of September and I did not have a – don’t have a full 
picture of all of those – or a full record of that – the 
10 
missing correspondence but this is the stance of Abalozi 
after Transnet responded and it says – if I should read this 
one too, Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   Again, 
“Dear Brian, your letter dated 29 September 2014 
refers.  1) In reference to our letter dated 8 
September 2014, we have indicated that we would 
request our attorney to issue the bill of cost and 
proceed with the review application, deformation 
20 
claims 
and 
the 
Directors/Employees 
pain 
and 
suffering claims, should our proposed settlement 
not be acceptable”. 
 
So, 
it 
does 
appear 
that 
they 
are 
threatening 
additional proceedings that haven’t yet been brought or 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 144 of 167 
 
certainly, not proceeded with.   
“As this matter has been dragging for so long,  our 
consideration was that a lump sum would eliminate 
any 
further 
legal 
processes 
and 
thus, 
swiftly 
conclude this matter.  3)  In light of Transnet’s own 
admissions, after appointing an external law firm 
which 
conducted 
a 
vigorous 
and 
exhaustive 
investigation and concluded that we were unjustly 
persecuted”. 
 
Now, that’s a rather strange thing to – sorry, I’m 
10 
reading, 
“4)  Restitution and compensation would be a due 
remedy for the deformation Abalozi, its employees 
and Directors.  5) It should also be noted that 
prejudice was also carried over to companies which 
had 
the 
Directors 
of 
Abalozi 
as 
members 
or 
Directors in their companies as all those companies 
were 
placed 
on 
Transnet’s 
list 
of 
excluded 
tenderers.  This could pose further litigation against 
Transnet, and 6)  The consequence of Transnet’s 
20 
actions, including the criminal charges have caused 
irreversible affects, which Abalozi and its Directors 
have suffered in the business arena.  Reputations 
of its Directors and officials were severely tainted 
rendering them unemployable and not trustworthy in 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 145 of 167 
 
the sphere of security services.  The nature of the 
company’s core service is it requires integrity and 
honesty, and then, 7)  The following were taken into 
account when considering the proposed amount and 
exclude the counterclaims that were subject to 
settlement agreement on the 4 t h of August”. 
 
And then there’s various further provisions which 
suggest very large counter claims would still be brought 
after – including a R700million deformation claims and they 
then say, the R40million at paragraph 8,  
10 
“The 
R40million 
proposal 
of 
settlement 
was 
believed to be a fair restitution and compensation 
inclusive of the legal costs incurred in all matters 
with Transnet”. 
 
Given the extra information required by Transnet in 
response, a letter dated 29 September 2014, 
“And the detail of lost revenue provided in this 
communication, 
we 
think 
that 
a 
settlement 
of 
R60million would be justifiable.  It would be prudent 
to have this matter concluded expeditiously so as to 
20 
avoid any further legal and consequential costs, we 
wait to hear from you”. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now, Mr Todd, if you go back to 
page 507 of your affidavit, after having dealt with those 
two letters at page 61 at 508, you go on to say that you, at 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 146 of 167 
 
that time, were not aware of what actual costs were paid, 
correct? 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   That, then takes us to your fourth 
affidavit, could I ask you, please, to turn to page 798, you 
say at paragraph 5, 
“That, since I deposed to that affidavit, that’s the 
one we’ve just dealt with, by being provided with 
certain documents by Transnet, whose authenticity I 
have no reason to doubt, which indicate that 
10 
Transnet ultimately agreed to pay an amount of 
R20million to Abalozi”.   
Would you just pick up from paragraph 6 please? 
MR TODD:   Yes, thank you, Chairperson, these documents 
were provided to me by Transnet from its records, but they 
appear 
to 
reflect 
they 
come 
from 
Transnet’s 
files, 
particularly reflecting payments that were actually made 
and they – so they appear to come from the financial 
records and other credible records of Transnet, I’ve got no 
reason to think they don’t – aren’t correct.  They show that 
20 
– and really what the rationale for this R20million payment 
is set out in a memorandum at page 801 dated the 30 t h of 
January 2015 addressed by Mr Ndiphiwe Silinga to the 
then, Group Chief Financial Officer, Mr Anoj Singh and it 
says, 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 147 of 167 
 
“The purpose of this submission is to request the 
Group Chief Financial Officer to authorise the 
payment of an amount of R20million in full and final 
settlement of the legal disputes between Transnet 
and Abalozi”, 
 
Then 
they 
reflect 
that 
in 
2011, Abalozi 
sued 
Transnet, this was its counterclaims, for damages in the 
sum of R487million arising out of various claims, including 
loss of business, loss of profit, deformation of character 
and others. So those were the counterclaims in the High 
10 
Court litigation.   
“During 2014 the parties engaged in settlement 
negotiations which resulted in Abalozi offering to 
accept an amount of R60million in full and final 
settlement, all its claims and legal costs against 
Transnet 
per 
letter 
dated 
16 
October 
2014. 
Paragraph 4, Transnet made a counteroffer of 
R20million 
per 
letter 
dated 
16 
January…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry, I think I’ve lost you, I’m at 798 
20 
and 799, what page are you on? 
MR TODD:   My apologies, Chairperson, I was reading from 
– so it’s 798 paragraph 6 (a) refers to a memorandum 
dated 30 January 2015. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 148 of 167 
 
MR TODD:   That memorandum is just two pages further 
on, or three at 801. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, that’s alright, continue. 
MR TODD:   And then so that memorandum records that 
Transnet made a counteroffer, in paragraph 4, Transnet 
made a counteroffer of R20million in a letter of 16 January 
2015 and that counteroffer was accepted and it goes on to 
say that it is due for payment, 
“Effective which will be to settle all legal disputes 
pending between - the parties that were pending 
10 
before the South Gauteng High Court, including 
costs”, 
 
And that was then approved and paid.  The letters 
offering 
the 
settlement 
amounts 
and 
recording 
the 
acceptance of the R20million are then attached to those 
documents. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And you refer there, at page 803 to a 
letter from Mr Molefe to Abalozi where he made the offer of 
R20million, which was then accepted by Abalozi, correct? 
MR TODD:   Yes, correct. 
20 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Now Mr Todd, just to finish off on 
this, could I take you back, please, to page 799 and you 
undertake some analysis and commentary at paragraph 7, 
8 and 9, could you just – and 10, could you go through 
those please? 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 149 of 167 
 
MR TODD:    So, in essence what occurred here is that – I 
mentioned earlier Abalozi had formulated some very broad 
ranging counterclaims against Transnet in response to 
Transnet’s claim of R95.5million.  So, in its plea and 
counterclaims referred to earlier, it formulated broad 
ranging counterclaims against Transnet, totalling in the 
R400millions.  When that – the deed of settlement recorded 
that their counterclaims were withdrawn, thus terminating 
litigation in relation to those counterclaims and what I have 
suggested – said in paragraph 7 (a) at page 799 is that 
10 
having withdrawn its counterclaims on any reasonable 
assumption the deed of settlement, that’s this – that 
settlement agreement compromised each of the elements 
of the counterclaim that were set out in paragraphs 26 to 
31 of the Abalozi plea and counterclaim.  So, this is – back 
in 2011, Abalozi formulates wide ranging counterclaims 
against Transnet and then it compromises them and 
withdraws them, and Transnet pays legal costs.  What, 
immediately happens – so Transnet’s legal costs – and I 
then deal with what legal costs actually would be, I’ve said 
20 
on any reasonable – on reasonable assumptions the tax 
costs would not have exceeded R1million, that would be 
extraordinarily 
generous 
for 
a 
case 
that 
wasn’t…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I was thinking that would be quite 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 150 of 167 
 
serious, I think. 
MR TODD:   It’s more likely to be in the low hundreds of 
thousands at most, since it’s on an attorney and client 
scale but whatever it is, you’re not going above a million 
rand and so, on what conceivable basis could Abalozi claim 
R40million 
or 
R60million 
and 
would 
Transnet 
offer 
R20million.  What appears to be the case, effectively, is 
that Abalozi re-threatened proceedings that had – in 2015, 
re-threatened proceedings that had been compromised 
already.  Already introduced to litigation back in 2011 and 
10 
– well, I say in paragraph 9, either somebody is suggesting 
that R20million if a fair assessment of legal costs, that’s 
absurd, it can’t be.  So, therefore, the overwhelming 
portion of that must be a fresh – a payment to compromise 
a fresh what has already been withdrawn.  Alternatively, if 
they say, to the extent that Abalozi says, well we could 
have 
brought 
new 
claims 
that 
weren’t 
within 
our 
counterclaims, then the point I make is that, this is four 
years later – five years after the – these events.  Any 
claims 
of 
that 
nature 
that 
weren’t 
included 
in 
the 
20 
counterclaims 
have 
long 
since 
prescribed 
under 
our 
ordinary legal principles.  So, Transnet’s apparently acting 
without legal advice, at this point in time…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That, on its own, is quite strange. 
MR TODD:   This is not on the advice – there’s no 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 151 of 167 
 
evidence on any of these documents that there was any 
other law firm involved, advising Transnet.  These are 
R20million offered just by lettering one line by the Group 
Chief Executive in the letter at page 803 and – so it’s just 
– it’s inexplicable. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It’s like – it’s just like some people at 
Transnet decided to give GNS or Abalozi some millions of 
rands for nothing. 
MR TODD:   There was no legal counselling. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Just to – they just decided they 
10 
should get some millions of rands and it’s strange that they 
– I mean we know that, in regard to Mr Gama’s dismissal 
matter, they acted – they had attorneys – different 
attorneys representing them at different times but it’s quite 
strange that, here, they seem to have decided, we will deal 
with this without any external attorneys and they then 
purport to settle, either, things that had been withdrawn 
already or things that may have been threatened, it’s quite 
strange.  It’s like there’s somebody that just decided they 
need to be paid.  GNS or Abalozi needed to be paid some 
20 
millions of rands from Transnet. 
MR TODD:   Yes, Chairperson, it’s – to me, I can see no 
legal – I used the word, counsel, no legal course for having 
made – paid anything remotely resembling this and the 
sensible thing, if anybody is given – asks for legal advice 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 152 of 167 
 
would have been for them to get a bill of costs drawn, 
which they had undertaken in terms of paragraph 4, of the 
settlement agreement, say, draw a bill of costs and we’ll 
pay that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I mean you have the claim, Transnet’s 
claim which is with – against Abalozi or GNS connected 
with 
the 
GNS 
contract 
that 
is 
being 
withdrawn 
in 
circumstances where it’s quite clear that the contract was 
irregular.  Of course, as you said, Mr Todd, maybe there 
could be an argument that if they did render the service, 
10 
maybe in terms of equity, the amount that Transnet was 
claiming 
could 
be 
reduced 
by 
they 
had 
had 
ample 
opportunity to provide proof to Transnet that there were 
services that were actually rendered, they’re paid to do 
that and then the matter is settled and it’s settled on a 
basis that includes that Transnet must not only pay them 
costs but they must pay them costs on attorney and client 
scale, that’s – I’m not going to say that’s unheard of 
because I think I’ve heard of similar settlements in this 
Commission involving one or other SOE, you know.  So, it’s 
20 
settled on a basis that’s very, very favourable to Abalozi 
and very detrimental to Transnet.  Usually if a matter is 
settled, very often each party pays its own costs, but 
Transnet must pay, not only the  costs but on attorney and 
client scale and then Transnet must pay about R40million, 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 153 of 167 
 
Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Thank you.  Mr Todd let’s then turn 
to the other leg of your evidence.  This relates to the third 
payment of legal costs made to Mr Gamma or his attorneys 
after his reinstatement.  You deal with this issue in your 
fifth affidavit which commences at page 841.  Perhaps I 
could ask you to turn to paragraph 6. What you do in 
paragraph 6, is you summarise the position in relation to 
the first two payments, of course the Chairperson has 
heard this evidence before but just to place what you’re 
10 
going to deal with afterwards in context and for the sake of 
the public, could you just summarise what the state of 
claim was before the third payment was made? 
MR TODD:   So, before the third payment was made, two 
previous payments had been made.  Payments one and 
two, payment one was 75% of Transnet’s costs for two 
different legal teams, which was not regulated by the 
settlement 
agreement, 
shouldn’t 
have 
been 
paid, 
completely 
irrational, 
no 
lawyer 
could 
sensibly 
have 
suggested that that amount was payable or should be paid, 
20 
it should never have been paid but it was in the amount of 
a million rand sixteen in legal costs.  Second payment was 
R1.7million and that was 75% of a privately taxed bill 
presented by Mr Gama’s attorneys, Langa Attorneys.   
Langa Attorneys had, in fact presented a bill of some 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 154 of 167 
 
R4.2million and Transnet had appointed a private taxing 
person, an attorney whose experience and cost to tax that 
bill and assess it and she had concluded that it should be 
reduced to R2.293million.  That was the second payment or 
75% of that taxed amount.  Now, what is significant about 
that is, Transnet, even in dealing with that bill, effectively 
accepted that it would pay – that bill covered High Court 
litigation costs and the disciplinary hearing costs and the 
Bargaining Council costs.  The settlement agreement only 
required Transnet to pay the High Court litigation costs and 
10 
the Bargaining Council costs.  The disciplinary hearing 
was, in fact, the greatest portion of the costs in the bill 
presented by Langa Attorneys but Transnet, if I’d heard the 
evidence of Mr …[indistinct] saying, oh well, we thought 
the disciplinary hearing costs were included in Bargaining 
Council costs.  So, Transnet paid 75% of the full amount of 
the costs incurred by Mr Gama throughout, from start to 
finish, for the High Court litigation, the disciplinary matter, 
and the Bargaining Council.  No, I just…[intervenes]  
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Sorry, just before you get there and 
20 
to the third payment, can you just confirm, you deal with 
this at paragraph (g) at page 844, that the first payment 
was made in March 2011 and then the second payment in 
June of 2011? 
MR TODD:   Yes, that’s correct, that’s what Transnet’s 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 155 of 167 
 
records show.  I just want to say one thing further on the 
cost consultant, if I may, Chairperson, she did provide a 
detailed memorandum when she was dealing with the 
Langa bill presented of R4.25million and she taxed it – 
she, sort of gave an – assessed it and allow – and said the 
amount that should be allowed is R2.2million, this is 
apropos the second payment.  Quite apart from the point 
that it covers the whole disciplinary matter which she was 
not apprised or told that it should be excluded but she 
included a commentary at the end of her assessment of 
10 
that bill and it is included as an attachment to the papers, 
it is in a letter that she wrote dated – which is at page 848 
where she returned the marked bill of costs and at page 
853, after concluded that, what should be allowed is 
R2.2million she says, 
“When the above figures are considered, kindly 
bear in mind that as per my instructions, I marked 
the bill as liberally as I thought possible.  As per my 
instructions I marked the bill as liberally as I 
thought 
possible 
taking 
into 
consideration 
the 
20 
difficulty of the matter, the importance to the client 
and the fact that the agreement stated that the 
respondent 
agrees 
to 
payment 
of 
fees 
and 
disbursements as between attorney and own client. 
However, taking into consideration all of the above 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 156 of 167 
 
factors, it is still my respectful view that the bill, 
especially as far as fees are concerned has been 
substantially inflated.  Should this matter proceed 
to assessment or taxation, in my experience, the 
figures set out herein before will undoubtedly be 
reduced even more”, 
 
That is what Transnet is told by the tax consultant 
who it hires to assess the R4.2million bill presented by Mr 
Langa and she says R2.2million can be allowed on this 
very generous basis and Transnet, duly pays, under the 
10 
settlement agreement, 75% of R2.2million and that is the 
second payment in the amount of R1.7million.  So, it has 
now paid R1million that it should never have paid and 
R1.7million which is a very generous interpretation on any 
basis of what it should have paid. 
ADV 
MYBURGH 
SC: 
 
 
Alright 
and 
then 
can 
you…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I’m sorry, who had instructed this tax 
consultant, 
was 
it 
Mr 
Gama’s 
attorneys 
or 
Transnet…[intervenes]? 
20 
MR TODD:   He appears to be writing to Mr Gule, I say that 
because he writes to Sebu…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, so it must be…[intervenes]. 
MR TODD:   At the beginning, but I don’t know, I know that 
Deneys  Reitz were at that stage advising…[intervenes]. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 157 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I’m trying to understand who it is 
that must have given her the instructions to mark the bill 
as liberally as possible, so if the instructions came from Mr 
Gule then that means probably that’s where that came 
from. 
MR TODD:   That appears to be the case, but it is a clear 
indication that Transnet was, to use a colloquialism, 
bending over backwards to try and be as generous as 
possible. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So, I guess maybe Mr Gule had been 
10 
instructed by somebody at Transnet that will tell the 
consultant to mark the bill as liberally as possible. 
MR TODD:   It appears to be the case. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, yes Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Okay so, Mr Todd, can you then pick 
up from paragraph 7, where you deal with the third 
payment…[intervenes]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But – I’m sorry, but I think another point 
that you wanted to make, you did make, Mr Todd, is that 
it’s important to note the tax consultant’s last point, namely 
20 
that she had thought that if this was taken to taxation, the 
amount would likely be reduced further? 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR TODD:   Yes, I think she said significantly. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 158 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Significantly? 
MR TODD:    No, she just said, undoubtedly – will 
undoubtedly be reduced even more. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, and Transnet appears to decide to 
pay 75% of that without seeking any further reduction that 
they might have sought through proper taxation? 
MR TODD:   Yes, they paid 75% of that amount three days 
later. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes, thank you.  So, Mr Todd that 
10 
takes us to paragraph 7 and the third payment. 
MR TODD:   Yes, for a reason that is – I have no idea what 
the reason is, I can only point to the facts based on 
documents provided by Transnet, three years later – so the 
first payment is made in March 2011, it shouldn’t have 
been made but it was, the second payment is made in June 
2011 on the basis you’ve just discussed. For some reason, 
nearly four years later the records show that Transnet 
made the – sorry I know the circumstances in which it was 
made but for some reason it was raised four years later 
20 
and resulting in Transnet making a third payment and that 
third 
payment 
is 
another 
– 
just 
under 
R1.4million, 
R1.399million to Langa Attorneys and what – when I 
disposed to this affidavit, Transnet had dug out the 
documents which showed how that happened and it arose 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 159 of 167 
 
because in June 2014, Langa Attorneys wrote to new 
attorneys representing Transnet in circumstances which I 
don’t know saying, there’s an outstanding cost issue we’re 
still owed money by Transnet.  So, it’s been paid on any 
reasonable assessment a million too much and probably a 
lot more than a million too much but it’s writing three years 
later to Transnet or its attorneys saying, we’re still owed 
money for costs arising out of the Gama settlement and the 
basis of that is explained in a letter from Langa Attorneys 
which is at page 854 and essentially, what they’re saying – 
10 
they’re going back to their original bill of R4.2million and 
they’re saying – and this is at paragraph 7 on page 855, 
Langa Attorneys writes and say, our bill was actually 
R4.244million, 75% of that is R3.183million, we were paid 
R1.7million therefore we’re still owed R1.4million.   
 
Now nobody has told Ningiza Horner, which are the 
firm of attorneys then representing Transnet about the 
previous taxation and work that was done. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Where the amount was reduced? 
MR TODD:   By Transnet’s Tax Consultant it appears, 
20 
because they then appoint a new Tax Consultant to look at 
this and there are some, quite frankly when one reads the 
correspondence that follows it is almost impossible to work 
out how this happens but the new tax consultant says an 
amount 
of 
R776 000 
is 
still 
due, 
and 
...[Indistinct] 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 160 of 167 
 
Attorneys say okay we will accept that provided you add 
interest at 15.5% compounded over the last three or four 
years and Transnet says fine, and it takes the R770 000 
that the new tax consultant says should still be paid to 
them and it address interest in about – about R3million 
worth of interest – oh sorry, not R3million, my apologies, it 
takes the amount up to R1.3million and that is the amount 
that is then paid as a third payment. 
 
So 
effectively 
the 
amount 
is 
taken 
up 
from 
R770 000 which the new taxing consultant says is still due 
10 
and that is rolled up with interest at 15.5% compounded 
over roundabout four years and that takes it up to 
R1 399million, just under R1.4million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I note that in their letter of 25 June 2014 
which appears at page 854, you referred us to the letter, in 
paragraph 2 Langa Attorneys say: 
“We confirm that when this matter was settled ...” 
That is the Gama matter? 
MR TODD:    Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:    
20 
“It was agreed in writing with the then Minister of 
Public Enterprises that the cost incurred by Mr 
Gama would be borne by Transnet.” 
Now that is interesting for certain reasons.   So there must 
be some letter that they are talking about maybe to the 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 161 of 167 
 
then Minister of Public Enterprises who would have been 
Mr Gigaba at the time, of the settlement of the Gama 
matter 2011, so ...[intervenes]  
MR TODD:   Yes it is not clear why he does not just refer 
to the settlement agreement, because the settlement 
agreement provides for Transnet to pay 75% of the costs 
incurred, I am not sure why in writing to Ningiza Horner Mr 
– or Langa Attorneys is now calling the authority of the 
Minister as somehow being the authority under which these 
legal costs are now claimed. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well I think Mr Myburgh and I will 
appreciate the significance of this paragraph in regard to 
the entire Gama matter.   Yes he is not referring to the 
settlement 
agreement 
I 
think 
since 
you 
referred 
to 
something that was according to him between them and the 
Minister of Public Enterprises.  Mr Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes thank you.   Mr Todd you have 
given us a sort of a high level overview then of this.  The 
correspondence and the like is addressed in the balance of 
your affidavit and attached.   Perhaps I could just take you 
20 
to what was the final authorisation and that you find at 
page 877 Annexure M. 
MR TODD:   Yes. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   It being a memorandum from Mr 
Silinga to Mr Singh in which it was recommended that this 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 162 of 167 
 
R1.399million be paid, and that you see at paragraph 10 at 
page 878 and then over the page you see that Mr Singh 
ultimately approved that and we know that that amount was 
paid. 
MR TODD:   Yes. What is a obviously surprising is that Mr 
Pepi Silinga by my recollection was in fact dealing with the 
matter in 2011 as well, but I may be mistaken, it would be 
– it is just surprising that he wouldn’t refer to the previous 
taxation that had happened, but I cannot recall whether or 
not he was apprised of the 2011 taxation, I would have 
10 
thought he was. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I think his name does get mentioned 
much earlier than 2015 and it may be that he was 
mentioned in 2011 as well.  Well I see in Clause 10 at page 
878 that clause says or that paragraph says Transnet is 
liable to pay R1.3million being the 75% amount taxed, and 
allow passengers.  That must be factually incorrect isn’t it, 
because there were no costs that were attached because 
taxed must mean taxed by a Taxing Master or Taxing 
Mistress isn’t it? 
20 
MR TODD:   Yes, Chair and also just the factual statement 
that Transnet is liable to pay it, I mean again this is 
obviously the basis of his opinion, it doesn’t appear to be – 
it is his opinion presumably interpreting the original 
settlement agreement. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 163 of 167 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   But just as I understand it Mr Todd 
there wasn’t – there was an attempt at this time to re-tax 
that bill?  
MR TODD:   Well Transnet appointed new lawyers who 
hadn’t been involved previously. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   And they sought to re-tax the bill without 
reference to the work that had been done previously by a 
Transnet taxing consultant. 
10 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Yes.   And as I understand it, if I 
could take you please to page 860, that then is the 
memorandum of the new taxing consultant for want of a 
better term. 
MR TODD:   Yes, that is correct. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   And that gets one to the 776 and it 
was interest that was added to that, that gets one to the 
1.3. 
MR TODD:   That’s correct, that is correct Chairperson. 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   Mr Chairperson unless you have any 
20 
questions that completes our examination. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes thank you.   Mr Todd are you able to 
express any view about whether there were proper grounds 
to – for Transnet to settle the – its claim against GNS or 
Abalozi in relation to the GNS contract on the terms on 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 164 of 167 
 
which it did or is that something you would prefer not to 
express any view on? 
MR TODD:   Chairperson my view expressed throughout on 
the basis of our assessment of the merits of that case, 
together with counsel, was that Transnet had strong 
grounds to recover all or at least a substantial portion of 
the R95.5million.  There are reasons to compromise 
litigation, there is litigation risk, we had flagged a problem 
of having an executive which was chipping away or 
undermining the case rather than supporting it, which 
10 
presents litigation risk, but a properly motivated case 
based on the contractual entitlements of Transnet if run 
properly in our view it should have been successful. 
 
If you choose to compromise a case because there 
are some weaknesses, or there is some risk associated 
with it or if Abalozi GNS had come to the party and 
demonstrated that although the origins of the contract were 
unlawful it had put in a lot of resources and this is what 
had been paid and these were the people who had done 
the work then an appropriate discount or settlement or 
20 
compromise could have been reached that took that into 
account, but I can say in my view there were no grounds 
for Transnet, no good grounds on which Transnet should 
have abandoned its claim for R95.5million altogether, and 
certainly not to settle it on effectively punitive terms and 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 165 of 167 
 
most extraordinarily to them on top of that pay Abalozi 
R20million 
ostensibly 
for 
claims 
that 
had 
already 
compromised, so really this is a most unusual set of 
circumstances which indicates a state of mind of a party to 
litigation that is more interested – well it is not financially 
motivated, it is not motivated by the financial interests of 
Transnet, I think that must be clear.    
CHAIRPERSON:   The R20million did it go beyond just the 
legal costs, did it involve other claims that were kind of 
questionable as well?  Or was a there a separate amount 
10 
for those? 
MR TODD:   Well Abalozi had laid its store against 
Transnet, its complaints and claims against Transnet fully 
in 
its 
counterclaims. 
 
They 
included 
reference 
to 
defamation, 
reputational 
harm, 
lost 
contracts, 
lost 
economic value, the whole gannet, and that was in 2011.   
 
When the claim was settled, is it 2014 or 2015? 
CHAIRPERSON:   2014/2015. 
MR TODD:   Mr Todd? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm. 
20 
MR TODD:   There are no live claims ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   They withdrew their ...[intervenes]  
MR TODD:   They withdrew their counterclaims and there 
were no other live claims but what Abalozi did immediately 
he said on the costs unless you pay us R20 – R40 000 we 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 166 of 167 
 
are going to bring a whole lot of new claims against you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And they couldn’t have, Abalozi couldn’t 
have – couldn’t revive the claims that they had withdrawn? 
MR TODD:   The claims they were threatening vaguely 
were either had been compromised already. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR TODD:   Or would have expired, prescription, but there 
was no legal advice being given to Transnet, Transnet just 
looked at this and said let us pay the R20million and that 
is what happened. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mmm, so all in all it would have been 
that R95million  of the GNS contract, R95 or R98, I can’t 
remember. 
MR TODD:   It is R95million. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And now R20million on top of that, 
R115million altogether.   Okay, no nothing arising Mr 
Myburgh? 
ADV MYBURGH SC:   No Mr Chairperson thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you very much Mr Todd for 
coming to assist the Commission with regard to this matter, 
20 
we appreciate it very much.   I will now release you, you 
are now excused.   If a need arises to ask you to come 
back, we will ask you to come back, but hopefully there will 
be no need.   
 
Thank you very much, you are now excused. 
13 JANUARY 2021 – DAY 327 
 
Page 167 of 167 
 
MR TODD:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Myburgh we – and Counsel for Mr 
Gama, he indicated that they were just here to observe so I 
guess there’s nothing – we will adjourn now.  Tomorrow I 
will continue with evidence relating to Eskom.  We will 
adjourn now. 
 
We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 14 JANUARY 2021 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
