 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
 
DAY 343 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 104 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 3 of 104 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 12 FEBRUARY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Good 
afternoon 
Mr 
Hulley, 
good 
afternoon everybody. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Good afternoon Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes are you ready? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair.  Mr Chair today we 
intend leading the evidence…air today we intend leading 
the evidence.  
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry.  Will somebody just adjust the 
air conditioner it is making too much noise. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes that is it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   Yes okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair.  Mr Chair today we 
intend leading the evidence of a Colonel W S Mhlongo; you 
will recall that he was to testify if my recollection serves 
me correctly on the 30 t h of July of last year. 
MR PAMENSKY:  Hm. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  He brought an application for a 
postponement one day before that hearing which Your Lord 
– which you granted in Mr Chair.  And then we are going to 
20 
hear also the evidence or the plan is to hear the evidence 
also of Mr Terence Joubert.  He in fact was supposed to 
testify also on the 30 t h of July of last year and in fact did 
testify to a very limited extent on one very narrow aspect 
but then the balance of his evidence was – was postponed 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 4 of 104 
 
to the hearing for today. 
 
Now before you Mr Chair you would have a bundle 
of documents which is marked Bundle LEA10.  Bundle 
LEA10 consists of four different compartments you will find 
in that bundle an Exhibit Y10 which relates to the 
testimony that is relevant to Colonel Mhlongo. 
 
Then you will find a Y11 Exhibit Y11 which is 
relevant to the testimony of Mr Terence Joubert and then 
you will find a bundle or Exhibit Y12 and that relates to 
Captain Edward Zuma.   
10 
 
You will recall that as a result of the evidence of Mr 
Joubert which was given on the last occasion the necessity 
or the need for Captain Joubert – Zuma to come and testify 
has fallen away so we will not delve into his testimony 
today. 
 
And then in Exhibit Y13 you will find the … 
CHAIRPERSON:  By the way did is it Colonel or Zuma did 
he testify?  He did? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  He did not. 
CHAIRPERSON:  He did not. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  It was – it became unnecessary for him 
to testify because he was a Commissioner of Oaths of one 
of the affidavits relating to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh yes and – and Mr Joubert indicated 
that he was not … 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 5 of 104 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  He did not dispute that he was the – 
that he was the Commissioner of Oaths and that… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay, okay and that was placed on 
record? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Correct that was placed – and that was 
why he led that limited evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And then you will find a bundle – an 
Exhibit Y13 and that relates to a Mr Brian Padayachee. 
That evidence relates to certain recordings and transcripts 
10 
of recordings that were taken in terms – in terms of the Act 
70 process.  That evidence will not be led today so we 
would be confined essentially to Exhibits Y10 to Exhibits 
Y11 today. 
 
During the course – during the course of the 
evening late yesterday there was … 
CHAIRPERSON:  The evidence relating to the recording 
why will it not be led today? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  In relation to Mr Padayachee or rather 
Colonel Padayachee what had happened was that we… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh he is the one who needs to give 
evidence about it. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  He would need to give evidence about 
those matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 6 of 104 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  The – depending on whether there is a 
challenge to the – to any aspect of his evidence he may or 
may not be required to give evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Hither to there has been no challenge 
but there has also been no indication of whether there will 
be a challenge or will not be a challenge.   
 
As between – when I say that I am talking about 
formally; informally we have been advised that there will be 
a challenge which means that there will be a necessity for 
10 
him to come and testify and to pay the transcripts. 
 
But his evidence does not go any way beyond. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well… 
ADV HULLEY SC:  The actual content of what is on the 
recordings. 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
Ja. 
 
His 
evidence 
relates 
to 
the 
authenticity of the recording? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So his evidence relates to the 
circumstances in which the recordings were obtained. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay ja. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And there may be a challenge to the 
legality I understand. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Informally and I say informally because 
it has been conveyed to us but never been put – never 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 7 of 104 
 
been put as a formal challenge but I accept that there will 
be a challenge with that and then secondly so it will be a 
challenge to the legality and there may well be a challenge 
also to the authenticity and our learned – our learned 
friends will let us know as far as that is concerned. 
CHAIRPERSON:  By the - was there a recording of the 
conversation between Mr Joubert and Colonel Mhlongo? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  There was indeed but that stands on a 
separate footing because... 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes that is separate from the one you are 
10 
talking about. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Correct.  So we must distinguish – in 
fact the – well some confusion has been caused in these 
proceedings because of the different recordings that have 
been floating about. 
 
There are in fact three sets of recordings. Colonel 
Padayachee refers to one set of recordings which at the 
moment consists of seven different – different recordings 
that have been transcribed. 
 
The recordings relate to a number of different 
20 
witnesses and for present purpose I will not identify who 
the witnesses are but – or who the different people are that 
those – of the speakers on those recordings. 
 
So that stands separately.   
 
Then in relation to the second recording that is a 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 8 of 104 
 
recording that was between Ms – Colonel Mhlongo and Mr 
Joubert. 
 
Then there was a third recording that was between 
as I understand it between Ms Queen Mhlongo and Mr 
Mhlongo and that recording is the one recording that has 
apparently gone missing.  There has been a confusion as 
to which of the different recordings have gone missing.  
That is the recording that has in fact gone missing. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So there will be an application for a 
postponement and I will introduce my learned friend shortly 
insofar as that is concerned. 
 
Then if the – the – if the evidence is led Mr Joubert 
will testify via a video link.  We – he will be testifying from 
the MTA offices in KwaZulu Natal and Colonel Mhlongo 
would also be testifying via a video link and he will be 
testifying from his home. 
 
Mr Joubert is not represented in these proceedings 
20 
but Colonel Mhlongo is represented; he is represented by 
Mr – Advocate Manala and SC and Advocate Madiba.  At 
this stage we believe that Advocate Manala will launch the 
application for a postponement at this stage. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja where is the – where are the papers 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 9 of 104 
 
for the postponement application? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  If I can beg leave – pardon me My Lord.  
I can beg leave to … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Arrange for it to be handed up. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And then Counsel for Mr Mhlongo can 
then place themselves on record. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  If I might just before Advocate Manala 
does so just draw one further thing to your attention?  If 
we do get to the evidence of Colonel Mhlongo dependent 
10 
on what happens with the application for a postponement 
he will be take – he will be testifying through an 
interpreter. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV 
HULLEY 
SC: 
 
Thank 
you. 
 
We 
have 
made 
arrangements for that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where is the interpreter?  Is… 
ADV HULLEY SC:  The interpreter is present. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  I found the documentation. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  But I need to … 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  See the documentation.  Have you made 
sure that it is – it is worded correctly because some of the 
certificates are not worded correctly? 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 10 of 104 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  What I will do it I will try to read 
through it because it was given to me just shortly before 
and trying to prepare for the postponement application. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja I think – 
ADV HULLEY SC:  But I will read through it quite fast. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Reverend Stamela will know which ones 
– which wording is correct because he – he is supposed to 
have kept previous ones that I said would be correct.  So – 
but in the meantime I will deal with the postponement 
application so that might give time if – in case the wording 
10 
is not correct for it to be done in accordance with previous 
ones – certificates. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And – and then once we are done 
depending on the outcome of the postponement application 
then I can look at the documents.  
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Counsel for Mr Mhlongo you can – 
they will sanitise and then – the podium and then you can 
come forward.   
20 
ADV MANALA:  Good afternoon Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good afternoon. 
ADV MANALA:  Chairperson firstly let me express some 
gratitude to my learned friend Mr Hulley.  He has elevated 
me too soon I am not yet there but we hope will that some 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 11 of 104 
 
time in life. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe he is prophesying.  Let us hope 
so.  So you must embrace the prophecy.   
ADV MANALA:  Hence I express sincere gratitude to him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MANALA:  Yes Chair I am Manala and ME I appear 
together with my learned friend Mr LJ Madiba and we are 
instructed by Mr Maringa of Maringa Attorneys. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and is the surname Mnala or 
Manala? 
10 
ADV MANALA:  Manala, M-a-n-a-l-a. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh M-a-l-a-l-a 
ADV MANALA:  That is certain. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay alright.  Thank you.  You from 
the Durban branch of the Bar? 
ADV MANALA:  No I am from the Tshwane Society of 
Advocates it is based Tshwane with Themba 00:10:40. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV MANALA:  Thank you.  Chairperson as it has been 
said by our learned friend… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well before you proceed why is it not a 
good enough reason for me to dismiss this application that 
your instructing attorney cannot spell practicing correctly? 
ADV MANALA:  He cannot spell? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Practicing. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 12 of 104 
 
ADV MANALA:  Well I suspect it would have been a case 
of an auto correction so the computer would have jumped.  
Yes indeed that is not correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you are defending him? 
ADV MANALA:  It does indeed happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I – in 1999 after I had been 
appointed to the then Transvaal Provincial Division and in 
my first admissions that I was doing I found that a lot of 
lawyers do not know how to spell the verb practise.  They 
always put c which is for a noun instead of s and I thought 
10 
that I needed to give them quite a hard time for that and 
say at least you if you know how to – to spell practise if 
you want to practise. 
ADV MANALA:  Yes. No, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright let us proceed. 
ADV MANALA:  Yes we are well aware that we should not 
make that mistake now anymore. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MANALA:  But now Chairperson you are – you have 
already 
been 
told 
that 
there 
is 
an 
application 
for 
20 
postponement 
and 
that 
the 
application 
was 
formally 
transmitted to the commission yesterday. 
 
So part of the explanation would be to address you 
as to why the application was made late in the proverbial 
eleventh hour.   
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 13 of 104 
 
 
You would also have seen that the application is 
made by the attorney of record Mr Maringa and in the 
course of our address to you we will also set out the 
reasons why it had to be him and not Colonel Mhlongo in 
his own capacity. 
 
Now Chairperson I have just now been presented 
with the application for postponement in a bundle similar to 
the one that you have there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MANALA:  And I am going to try acquaint myself of 
10 
the numbering but I am assuming safely that the last two 
digits are the page numbers and as I refer to each page I 
should use those numbers as they appear. 
 
Now Chairperson I want to start off with what we 
characterise 
as 
the 
commencement 
of 
what 
then 
crystallises 
into 
a 
course 
of 
action 
on 
a 
Thursday 
afternoon. 
 
 I am going to refer you Chairperson to page 5, 6 
and 7.  Now from page 5 at the bottom there paragraph 13 
you will note Chairperson that it is indicated that on Friday 
20 
the 5 t h February the commission served to the attorney of 
record of Colonel Mhlongo a summons directing that he 
should appear before the commission today. 
 
So what you have there is a 7 day notice period.  
He is told on the 5 t h to say you have to appear before the 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 14 of 104 
 
commission on the following Friday being 12 February. 
 
Now as you turn the page Chairperson you will see 
bullet points.  There are dark bullet points and there are 
fainter bullet points.  Now that – those bullet points 
Chairperson illustrate what was said in those summons. 
 
He was invited to come and address all of these 
matters which are bulleted here including these sub-bullets 
which you see in a faint colour and ultimately all matters 
incidental to the aforesaid.  That is you find at page 7 of 
the application. 
10 
 
Now upon receiving this summons over the weekend 
telephone correspondence ensues between the attorney as 
well as the legal team arranging a pre-hearing meeting for 
Monday with the aim of securing a – an easy pathway for 
Friday to deal with provisional matters related to the 
hearing. 
 
Now at that pre-hearing conference which was then 
arranged and convened I believe on Friday – I mean on 
Monday afternoon at around half past two.  During that 
meeting we and by we I mean the legal team of Mhlongo 
20 
then raised three queries in the form of objections to these 
bullet points to say we have three difficulties with what you 
say he must come deal with before the commission. 
 
The first one which I believe it is not controversial 
between us on the aspect of his health to say then he 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 15 of 104 
 
should be permitted to appear before the commission 
remotely.  I will tell you in a moment what happened of that 
discussion but it is important that you note for purposes of 
an explanation as to why we had to come this late with the 
application. 
 
We were then directed to mount a formal application 
for his appearance remotely but I will come to that aspect 
in a very short while. 
 
So essentially then you left with two.  Of those two 
we raise an issue about the evidence of Mr Joubert then 
10 
you find that Chair at page 7 of the application under 
paragraph 14.  We – 14.1 and 14.2.   
 
At 14.1 this is where we raise an objection us 
against the evidence of Joubert – Mr Joubert – Terence 
Joubert apologies. 
 
Now there what is indicated is that his evidence to 
the extent that they say implicates Colonel Mhlongo ought 
to be preceded by a notice in terms of Rule 3. 
 
Now when we having that discussion it immediately 
emerges that no a notice in terms of Rule 3 has been 
20 
transmitted but transmitted to Mhlongo’s email.  It was not 
availed to the attorney but it was availed to Mhlongo 
himself who you would see in the affidavit that he did not 
receive it but we make no issue of that. 
 
So upon having addressed this issue the parties 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 16 of 104 
 
then agree that as soon as we conclude that notice 
together with the accompanying annexures will be availed 
to the legal team of Mhlongo on that very day.  That is 
Monday and it was subsequently availed at around eight 
o’clock.  That was the first aspect. 
 
Now the second aspect was to – was with reference 
to the sub – that is the faint bullet points where you see 
the recordings starting from page 6 – those faint bullet 
points.   
 
We then objected to the use of these recordings 
10 
that is the recording between Chairperson would see that 
at page 6 the last faint – I mean dark bullets thereunder 
you would see there are faint sub-bullets.  It refers to all 
matters relating to or emanating from the telephonic 
conversations between Mr Toshan Panday and an unknown 
male/s on this date.   
 
And the next one is that of the same person… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well let us just focus on the important 
things.  What are the reasons for why Mr Mhlongo seeks a 
postponement? 
20 
ADV MANALA:  Yes Chairperson I – just to round up on 
these two points and then we should be there in a minute 
and I will clarify the very reasons why we seek it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The reasons for the postponements are 
the ones that I am most interested in. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 17 of 104 
 
ADV MANALA:  Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MANALA:  So – so Chairperson once we then raised 
those two objections including the legality objection.  This 
is working against the background of the whole sub.   
 
Now a minute later on during that day we received a 
Rule 3.3 Notice which then affords fourteen days within 
which to react to the evidence of Terence Joubert and we 
take that to say it may run either from the Friday when it 
was transmitted or it may run … 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  If you are comfortable to take off the 
mask that might help. 
ADV MANALA:  Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But if you are not comfortable I will 
listen.  I hear you but I would hear you much more clearer. 
ADV MANALA:  Okay let me – let me make sure. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes because I think there is enough 
distance – social distancing. 
ADV MANALA:  Yes let me make sure that we communicate 
his case clear.   
20 
 
So Chairperson we at a point where the two 
objections were raised.  The first one we availed that 
notice in terms of Rule 3.  The second one we raised an 
issue of legality and when we get the Rule 3.3 Notice 
which then affords fourteen days we do so on Monday in 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 18 of 104 
 
the evening. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well the 3.3 – Rule 3.3 Notice I see in 
the papers and that what is – what the legal team has 
commentated to you ultimately is that the evidence that will 
be led today to which Colonel Mhlongo would – about 
which he would be questioned relates to Mr Joubert’s 
evidence about I think their conversation. 
ADV MANALA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And not a lot of other things.  Now as far 
as that is concerned I am under the impression that Mr 
10 
Mhlongo would have received a 3.3 Notice sometime last 
year. 
ADV MANALA:  Yes that is correct.  So… 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so there should be no issue about a 
3.3 Notice in respect of Mr Joubert’s evidence. 
ADV MANALA:  Related to that part of the evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Related to that part ja. 
ADV MANALA:  Yes but Chairperson would recall the 3.3 
Notice was not given from Terence – Mr Terence Joubert; it 
was given from the evidence of General Booysen and that 
20 
of Nxasana. 
 
Those witnesses were mentioning this conversation 
as part of the reasons why they come to the conclusion 
they came to.  They relied also on his affidavits which were 
attached as annexures. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 19 of 104 
 
 
So when Colonel Mhlongo responded to them he 
merely took the view of course firstly guided by your 
previous rulings that he cannot apply to cross-examine 
them because cannot come and say well I dispute that 
which was said you are no longer – Chairperson recalls 
that line of rulings. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MANALA:  So what he then did he put up an affidavit 
where Terence Joubert moves to say the earlier affidavit 
which was relied upon is not an affidavit of his.  
10 
 
So he then asserts that position and leaves the 
matter there.  So to the extent that he has to deal with all 
of those aspects at least relating to that he then relies on 
the second affidavit which he then 00:23:11. 
 
But what you then have Chairperson subsequently 
is that around the 24 t h of July 2020 Mr Joubert deposes to 
another affidavit.  In that affidavit he resuscitates the 
earlier affidavit which was then – which he had distanced 
himself from. 
 
Now we and this is where I should take you 
20 
Chairperson to page 13 – this is page 13 as well as page 
12.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Gone through the whole affidavit in the 
meantime. 
ADV HULLEY SC:    Yes thank you Chairperson. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 20 of 104 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  But you – ja you can make the 
points. 
ADV MANALA:  Yes.  So there Chairperson you would find 
a letter that is written on 28 August last year.  This is after 
we had left here on the 13 t h.  In this letter at paragraph 4.5 
on page 13 Colonel Mhlongo requests an affidavit of 
Terence Joubert because he saw him at the commission 
through his attorney of course and in our notes he is 
available as a witness. 
 
Then he makes a request.  This request is made on 
10 
the 28 t h of August last year to say avail his evidence to me 
so that I can confront him directly. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is the third affidavit of – that is 
Joubert? 
ADV MANALA:  That is the third affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MANALA:  Now if you then turn two more pages or 
rather – yes at page 16 you will find a follow up letter; a 
follow up letter requesting a response to that letter which 
requests that information. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV MANALA:  Now here we do not have it and we 
requested for it in August as well as in September to – we 
– to a point when we are given that on Friday and you will 
see the history as to how the days evolved.  In fact… 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 21 of 104 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  So you – you only get the – Mr Joubert’s 
third affidavit last Friday? 
ADV MANALA:  No.  We say Chairperson we got it on 
Monday after a pre-meeting conference and whilst… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Monday this week? 
ADV MANALA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV MANALA:  Why we say that it is because the 
summons was served on the attorneys.  So we know then 
that the commission knows to communicate with Mhlongo 
10 
they communicate with the attorney to say that the email 
was sent to him that there is no proof of receipt from his 
00:25:33 and all of those. 
 
Then it makes the Friday difficult but whichever one 
that the Chairperson accepts the Friday or Monday they 
will set out how they – how the clock then ticked going 
forward from Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday 
leading to today. 
 
So after we mount this application because we want 
to listen to Mr Joubert’s evidence decide how to deal with 
20 
it between the scheme of the Rule 3.3. 
 
We are then told that no in fact the affidavit – the 
third affidavit was availed to you on the 27 t h of July 2020.  
We are then given an email which Chairperson would have 
found I believe just before the affidavit… 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 22 of 104 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I did not look at the annexures. 
ADV MANALA:  Yes let me refer you to that… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja what page? 
ADV MANALA:  Yes the email you find at page 25. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, yes. 
ADV 
MANALA: 
 
Now 
that 
page 
25 
Chairperson 
is 
addressed by William Nicholson on Monday 27 July at 20 
minutes after 2 o’clock in the morning.  You would see 
there just on the last part. 
CHAIRPERSON:  There are three emails on that page 
10 
which is the right one that you are looking at? 
ADV MANALA:  Yes now the – we are looking at the first 
email; the top email. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The top one ja. 
ADV MANALA:  Yes.  So there Chairperson would see that 
it is addressed to the first addressee thereto it is the 
attorney of record of Mr – I mean of Colonel Mhlongo. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MANALA:  Now it is addressed there on the 27 t h of 
July 2020 at 20 minutes after 2 early in the morning. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Was that before your appearance or 
after? 
ADV MANALA:  Yes.  That is before the appearance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MANALA:  Of 30 July. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 23 of 104 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MANALA:  But here is the difficulty and these… 
CHAIRPERSON:  And I – I also – I was – I seem to have 
thought that by the time when I granted a postponement all 
the affidavits that were – that all the three affidavits would 
have been in your team’s possession.  That was the 
impression so… 
ADV MANALA:   That was not the position because as you 
would see also from the affidavit it is dated that we came 
to know of the availability of Mr Terence Joubert on the 
10 
date of the 30 t h we came to know then that he was 
available as a witness and that is why we took a different 
approach in relation to the approach of his evidence. 
 
But Chairperson I want us to deal slightly with a 
dispute that then arises on this point. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but I want you to say to me the 
reasons for a postponement are abcd.  
ADV MANALA:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then you can elaborate if you need to 
elaborate under each one of them. 
20 
ADV MANALA:  It is because we did not receive the 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The third affidavit? 
ADV MANALA:  The third affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Until Monday? 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 24 of 104 
 
ADV MANALA:  Until Monday. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay how many pages is the affidavit? 
ADV MANALA:  Chairperson that is the other aspect.  Now 
reading the affidavit and we have set that out and I will tell 
you just in a moment where you would find that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MANALA:  Ja in the affidavit.  Yes you would find that 
from page 9 going through to 10. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MANALA:  The difficulty that we have and you would 
10 
have seen the medical evidence around his state of health 
is 
that 
you 
cannot 
consult 
in 
between 
Monday 
and 
Thursday because he is unable to travel outside KZN. 
 
The only model that you have available is the 
telephonic model.  You must telephone whether by those 
other apps and all of that we then gained contact with 
...[indistinct].  He is uncomfortable with consulting because 
based on what you have there is clear evidence that his 
calls are intercepted and are monitored.   
 
So what we heard and this is in terms of a solution 
20 
to what we have ...[indistinct].  What we have resolved was 
that we should make time in the course of next week in the 
first three days. The legal team should travel down to KZN 
to be with him and deal with the affidavit and to finalise 
what has to be done in relation to that, and that would - 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 25 of 104 
 
and I know Chairperson, I should not be saying it this way 
but eventually it is what it is.  That would still then be 
within the 14-days which in terms of the regulations is a 
standard fair period of that procedure. 
 
So what we propose.  It is not an indefinite.  The 
aspect of the postponement.  It is just that we need to be – 
at least within those two days. 
 
And out of the reasons supporting that, is that 
absent - a specific indication at least from the legal team 
to say the 14-days allowed period should be truncated.   
10 
 
We submit that those 14-days should be allowed 
and that we should be able to be back... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, what did you say about the fact 
that the email at page 25 appears on the face of it who 
have sent you the affidavit to the attorney? 
ADV MANALA:   Yes.  With that we say the following.  
One, it was around early morning hours.  Now a lot of 
things would happen with emails at that stage but we are 
not stating that as a fact.   
 
What we rely upon is this.  If you look at the letter 
20 
of the 28 t h, that letter was re-emphasised again on the 
15 t h  of September.  We are demonstrating that we do not 
have. 
 
Now for somebody that knows that he had already 
sent that affidavit, one would have expected one, to say:  
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 26 of 104 
 
No, I have sent you that...  Then I have done so on this 
thing.  But for what it is worth, have it again.  Then the 
matter would have been put to rest there. 
 
Now what you also see is that the subsequent 
notice which we say either Friday or Monday, comes with 
this annexure and he knows for one to say but if it is was 
sent all along, why send it again and why send it now 
because you would have easily said here is the notice, you 
all have all of those documents.   
 
So we say even if indeed these document it does 
10 
appear that it was sent as at least here.  We say our 
subsequent of estimate ought to have enabled one to come 
to a conclusion that maybe had something had happened to 
that 
email. 
 
Emails 
at 
this 
hour 
of 
night 
easily 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   And you say that the situation could 
have been avoided by – if the Legal Team had responded 
to not one letter but two letters that were sent. 
ADV MANALA:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, one can – if I can hear what 
20 
they have to say about that.  Then when they did not 
respond, also from your side, then there was silence over 
quite a number of months, right? 
ADV MANALA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 27 of 104 
 
ADV MANALA:   So Chairperson that aspect is not 
sufficiently canvassed ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MANALA:   ...as to what further steps ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   From your side, why if there was no 
response did you just leave it like that for so long? 
ADV MANALA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MANALA:   The best ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   From the Legal Team, if indeed the 
10 
position that they did not respond, they should have 
responded. 
ADV MANALA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MANALA:   That is the indeed so, yes.  And Chair, 
one would think – just in closing – one would think that the 
Legal Team decides which witnesses to bring and so on.  
Based on the developments, we also have had when they 
said it has now not become necessary for – I believe 
Captain Zuma not to testify because his evidence was 
20 
overtaken by that.   
 
So you would also apply logic from what you say.  
If the Commission is not responding on that, he may be 
entitled to assume that he is no longer needed as witness 
at that point.   He would then have no reason to take other 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 28 of 104 
 
proceeding steps beyond the two letters. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Of course, if I give you a postponement 
then we would continue with the evidence of Mr Joubert.  
And then have your – have Mr Mhlongo’s evidence but 
soon. 
ADV MANALA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We could be looking at an evening 
session.  Maybe if you were to file Ms Mhlongo’s response 
to the merits, as it were, because I think you make the 
point that previously he was contempt to simply rely on 
10 
Mr Joubert’s second affidavit. 
 
Now after being aware of the third affidavit of 
Mr Joubert, he appreciates that he needs to deal with the 
merits of the alleged conversation.  So that is the affidavit 
that you are looking at filing? 
ADV MANALA:   Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV MANALA:   That is the affidavit we are looking at 
filing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
ADV MANALA:   And ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I do not want you to break Covid 
regulations.  [laughs]  Not about – it must. 
ADV MANALA:   Oh, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I did not hear you correctly but when you 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 29 of 104 
 
were talk about 14-days in consultation, I was not sure 
whether you were talking about consulting within 14-days 
or but the isolation is 10-days now, is it not? 
ADV MANALA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   In the isolation.  Is he not on isolation. 
ADV MANALA:   Chairperson, what seems to be the 
position from the medical ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, you are talking about the Rule 3.3. 
Notice? 
ADV MANALA:   Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MANALA:   So we say if you compute from, say the 
Monday, which we are contending to be a further date, 
would still be within the 14-days if we everything by the 
end of next week and file those affidavits. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you see.  You will only be entitled 
to 14-days if you show that you did not receive the affidavit 
in July last year. 
ADV MANALA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And as I understand your argument.  You 
20 
are not asserting that it was not received.  What you are 
asserting is, it may or may not have been received but your 
instructing attorney was unaware of it having been sent to 
him or his email and that is why he wrote the letters that 
he wrote. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 30 of 104 
 
ADV MANALA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now, if I approach the matter on the 
basis, not necessarily that it was not sent in July.  Then if I 
do not approach it on the basis that it was not sent, we 
cannot use the 14-days.  The 14-days would have to be 
used if I find as a fact that it was not sent in July.  You 
see? 
ADV MANALA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So my understanding of your argument 
is that you are not going to that far to say it was not sent.  
10 
You are saying, at least you were – he was not aware 
otherwise he would not have asked. 
ADV MANALA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You know.  So if we then proceed on that 
basis then the 14-days does not apply. 
ADV MANALA:   Yes.  So I made an illustration of 14-days 
Chairperson to say.  Even if you accept that it may have 
been sent as it appears from 25.   
 
There is a standing rule that you will find in the 
regulation that says third procedure would entitle a person 
20 
affected to a number of 14-days. 
 
Now 
what we 
are 
dealing 
with, it is not a 
mechanical 
application 
or 
that, 
but 
an 
objective 
assessment of that facts. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are not relying on the rules.  You 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 31 of 104 
 
are simply saying we know what the basis on which you are 
asking to make a decision. 
ADV MANALA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We are not saying find as a fact that the 
affidavit was not sent in July last year but we are saying 
this is what has happened.  For whatever reason, we did 
not become aware of it or maybe we have not checked 
whether or not technologically it was received. 
ADV MANALA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But the fact that we wrote these letters 
10 
indicate that we were not aware that I had been sent. 
ADV MANALA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the fact that Legal Team did not 
respond to the letters – if they had responded, it was sent, 
then we would not have been in this situation. 
ADV MANALA:   That is the position. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But all you have to say in that regard is.  
You are asking to be given a fair opportunity to respond. 
ADV MANALA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Without the 14-days.  [laughs] 
20 
ADV MANALA:   Yes.  No, we are not even insisting on the 
14-days because if one looks at it, as you indicate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, h’m. 
ADV MANALA:   We could have dealt with it even from the 
Monday.  That was it.   
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 32 of 104 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV MANALA:   But for reasons that we set out today. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV MANALA:   We are also still even unable to deal with 
aside.  So as part of the solution, we are suggesting that 
we should make ourselves available to travel in the first 
two, three days of the following week.  
CHAIRPERSON:   If I grant the postponement, would you 
and your team and Mr Mhlongo move mountains to make 
sure we can proceed before the end of next week with his 
10 
evidence? 
ADV MANALA:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   In other words, would you be able to file 
his response to the affidavit at some stage in the course of 
next week and could we look at an evening session when 
he can give evidence? 
ADV MANALA:   Yes.  Filing the affidavit, we can manage 
to do it in the next week.  And the hearing, I know we have 
just one day, the Thursday which is which is also out of 
our...   [Speaker ’s voice drops at end of sentence – 
20 
unclear.] 
 
If it is something that is around Friday late or 
Saturday afternoon or thereabout], then we can able to 
send our stuff(?). 
[Speaker ’s voice drops at end of sentence – unclear.] 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 33 of 104 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, let us see.  Okay let me hear what 
Mr Hulley has to say.   
ADV MANALA:   Thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV MANALA:   That will be our side. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you.  He will sanitise first. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, 
can I commence by saying firstly in relation to the affidavit 
of Mr Joubert and that it will refer to the first, second and 
third affidavit. 
10 
 
The third affidavit is the one which is the bone of 
contention in these proceedings and particularly whether 
they perceived that affidavit. 
 
Well, my learned friend has referred you to one 
email which he says may or may not have come to their 
attention, from what I understand from the debate that has 
taken place here but with respect it is not confined to that. 
 
In fact, we have sent it to them on two occasions, 
not just one.  So if I can refer you to the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay I am sorry.  The affidavit of 
20 
Mr Joubert that starts at page 26, is that the third 
affidavit?  Is that what I referred to as the third affidavit?  
That is the one that was sent ...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:   Correct, this is the one that starts on 
page 26. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 34 of 104 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And this particular affidavit that is 
been referred to over here is the one which is attached to 
the email that has been prepared by Mr Nicholson, one of 
the... 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   One of the evidence leaders. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Later on – if I can take you further 
down along the same bundle which is page 44 of the same 
10 
bundle.  And you will see there that this is from Boyd Eloy 
E Batshikana Attorneys(?) [00:14:06]  And it is addressed, 
once 
again, 
to 
Mr Maringa 
who 
is 
the 
attorney 
for 
Colonel Mhlongo. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And it says:   
“Please 
find 
the 
attached 
letter 
for 
your 
attention and kindly acknowledge receipt.” 
 
The letter that he is referring to is that which is on 
page 45.   
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   The letter is the one at 45? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now, and there were additional 
attachments 
to 
this 
particular 
email 
and 
I 
will 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 35 of 104 
 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   This is three days before the hearing? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   It is three days before the hearing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And it says at page 45 at paragraph...  
Sorry, it is dated the 27 t h of July of 2020 and at paragraph 
2 it says: 
“As you are aware, Advocate Mxolisi Sandile 
Oliver Nxasana testified on the 12 t h  of June of 
2019 and upon further representation of his 
10 
evidence 
before 
the 
Commission 
on 
the 
19 t h of August, 
an 
audio 
recording 
of 
the 
conversation 
between 
your 
client 
and 
Mr Terrence Joubert which had been dealt with 
by Nxasana during the previous testimony was 
played. 
We enclose a copy of this recording.” 
 
So we have given them the recording itself. 
“...together with the transcript already sent to 
your client together with his Rule 3.3. Notice 
20 
in respect of the evidence for your client’s 
consideration.” 
 
Then 3: 
“The 
transcript 
of 
Advocate 
Nxasana’s 
evidence – testimony on the 12 t h of June 2019 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 36 of 104 
 
and 
19 
August 
2019 
with 
regard 
to 
the 
recordings 
available 
on 
the 
Commission’s 
website. 
Your client should expect questions from the 
evidence leaders concerning this audio.” 
 
On the following page, at paragraph – page 46, 
paragraph 4 ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  What is the point – what is 
your point about the letters at page 45? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So what has transpired, as far as this 
10 
is concerned, is that we have given them a copy of the 
actual recording itself.  That is the recording which the 
subject matter of this dispute.  That is the – so that 
recording is given to them. 
 
Then the attached to the email is also – and 
unfortunately you cannot see over it here on the actual 
email itself, but I will refer you to an earlier email where 
we deal with this. 
 
Attached to this email is also the affidavit of 
Mr Joubert.  It is attached to this email. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   The third affidavit? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   The third affidavit.  So it has not been 
sent 
to 
them 
only 
once, 
it 
actually 
has 
been 
sent 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   But the letter does not say anything 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 37 of 104 
 
about that, hey? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The letter/email at page 46 and – pages 
45 and 46 does not say anything about Mr Joubert’s third 
affidavit being attached, is it not?  Because that is what I 
was looking for when I was reading. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes.  So what we do is then – because 
like I say you cannot see it over here on the email itself 
because it is obviously an embedded document. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:   It is not referred to in the letter but it 
is an embedded document which is attached to this email. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So it forms part of the email.  The 
email, unfortunately, only refers to the actual letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But somebody needs to say that.  
[laughs] 
ADV HULLEY SC:   But what I am – what – which is what I 
am going to take you to now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   If I can take you page 30.  Sorry, 20.  
Pardon me Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Page? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Page 20. 
CHAIRPERSON:   20.   
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 38 of 104 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   This is a letter that was written today 
which was been sent off by the Commission’s Secretariat. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And if I can just refer you to...  If you 
will bear with me.  To page – on page 21.  At the foot of 
that page, paragraph 9. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Paragraph 9: 
“On the 27 t h of July 2020, two days before the 
previous hearing, the following was sent to 
10 
you: 
a)  
Mr Joubert’s affidavit of 24 July 2020 
and 
we 
attached, 
marked 
A, 
a 
copy 
of 
Advocate Nicholson’s email and confirmation.” 
 
I have taken you, Mr Chair, to that email already. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And: 
“In the letter dated the 27 t h of July 2020 on the 
then Secretary, Ms Shabala and be attached a 
copy of that letter marked B. 
20 
In the letter, Ms Shabala confirms that we 
enclosed of the copy of the recording together 
with the transcript.” 
 
That I have already read to you.  And then C: 
“A copy of the recording of the conversation 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 39 of 104 
 
between Mr Joubert and Mr Mhlongo and a 
copy 
of 
the 
transcript 
of 
the 
aforesaid 
recording.” 
 
So what is being attached...  Oh, sorry and if I can 
just correct myself.  I can say that there was the affidavit 
which was attached as the embedded document.   
 
It seems from reading of this here that is in fact 
incorrect.  I must just correct that.  In fact, what has been 
attached was the recording and a copy of the transcript.  A 
copy of the affidavit of Mr Joubert was actually attached 
10 
only to Mr Nicholson’s email.  I should just correct that.  
My apologies. 
 
So the point is.  That neither of these documents 
were necessarily been challenged per se.  On the face of 
it, the documents have gone through – the email appears 
to have gone through, on the face of it.  There is no 
challenge to that. 
 
What subsequently happens, which is what my 
learned friend places, is the fact that on the 28 t h of August 
what is written is a letter from Mr Maringa in which at page 
20 
13 he says the following at paragraph 4.5. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What page is the letter? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Page...  It starts off at page 12. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   But the relevant passage appears from 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 40 of 104 
 
page 13. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   He says: 
“To this end, Colonel Mhlongo proposes that 
the 
Commission 
should 
avail 
to 
him 
the 
evidence of Terrence Joubert.” 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry where are you reading from 
page 13? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Pardon me.  Page 13 at paragraph 4.5. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay? 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:   It says: 
“To this end, Colonel Mhlongo proposes that 
the 
Commission 
should 
avail 
to 
him 
the 
evidence of Joubert and that he will respond 
thereto within the scheme of the rules of the 
Commission.” 
 
But it is not entirely clear what is being referred to 
over here but it seems when he talks about the evidence of 
Mr Joubert and ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   The transcript. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   He may be referring to the actual 
transcript of the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Of the recording. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   ...of the recording, which has in no 
ways been given to him.  He may be referring to the 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 41 of 104 
 
affidavit.  He may also be referring to the possibility of 
Mr Joubert’s evidence that what had been given on the 
very – that had been given on the day of the 30 t h of July. 
 
It is not entirely clear and it is true that there is no 
responses specifically to that paragraph but what there is a 
response to is the balance of the letter. 
 
But let me just be clear about what is contained in 
this.  This letter is concerned, if I may point out, it is 
concerned with the evidence of Mr Terrence Joubert and 
we have already dealt with that.  That appears under 
10 
paragraphs 4.1 to 4.5. 
 
It 
also 
deals 
with 
the 
evidence 
of 
Colonel Padayachee and that is dealt with at paragraphs 
4.7 and 4.9.   
 
So it is not correct when my learned friend says, 
as he does, but that Annexure B is a second oar for what is 
contained in that letter because that letter is globular 
letter.  So there is a response to an issue relating to 
Colonel Padayachee.   
 
And in fact, there is an offer too.  The issue that 
20 
had arisen was whether Colonel Mhlongo would listen to 
the evidence or rather listen to the recording of – that 
Colonel Padayachee had created in KwaZulu-Natal or 
whether he could listen to it in Gauteng. 
 
Colonel Padayachee had adopted the stance that 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 42 of 104 
 
he would only provide it to him if he listened to over here.  
He was not prepared to make – and in fact, we transmitted 
that to you on the last occasion as well. 
 
Colonel Padayachee was not prepared to make it 
available over the recording and he said that they had to 
come over here.  He would provide all the instrumentation 
to make it available. 
 
So the issue that was the bone of contention at 
that 
stage 
was 
in 
relation 
to 
Colonel Padayachee’s 
recordings.  That, and what was being asked for on the 
10 
4 t h  of September, as we understood it, was the question of 
whether he could have the hearing of those recordings take 
place in Johannesburg or whether it could be done in 
KwaZulu-Natal. 
 
On 
Colonel 
Mhlongo’s 
version 
or 
on 
Colonel 
Mhlongo’s request, he wanted it to be played in KwaZulu-
Natal.  Colonel Padayachee was insisting that it be played 
here in Johannesburg.  Ultimately, Colonel Padayachee to 
exceed to the request and a convenient place was made 
available in KwaZulu-Natal for them to listen to the 
20 
recordings. 
 
After that, which took place in October of last year, 
after that this issue went silent.  We were in those 
circumstances.  There was no further correspondence of it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, if he says – his counsel says you 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 43 of 104 
 
did not – the Legal Team respond to two letters they sent. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   But that is my point M’Lord, is that we 
did respond. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   A response was by exceeding to the 
request.  So the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay sorry, let us get that right.  Where 
do you say the response is? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   What – if we could look – turn – if you 
could turn with me? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it the letter at page 45? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Page...  Sorry ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   That was July last year.  Where is the 
response? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   The – what I am saying is this.  There 
was a response.  There was no letter that was written but 
we responded to the request.  The request was whether we 
could have this being dealt with in KwaZulu-Natal or here.  
I am not saying there that there was a ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, the correspondence that counsel for 
20 
Mr Mhlongo referred to is correspondence that was saying:  
Please let us have Mr Joubert’s third affidavit. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Pardon me.  Pardon me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Counsel for Mr Mhlongo, Mr Manala, his 
point was subsequent to the date that was meant for 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 44 of 104 
 
hearing last year, subsequent to those days.  That means 
in the second half of last year.  
 
He said Mr Mhlongo’s attorney wrote two letters to 
the Commission saying:  Please let us have Mr Joubert’s 
affidavit.  And he says the Legal Team did not respond to 
both of those letters. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So what he is saying this, if I 
understand.  He is saying that there was no letter that 
responded to him.  Now that is not entirely true because 
there was a letter that responded to certain aspects, an 
10 
email.  In fact, an email from myself which is attached to 
the papers. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Was the letter talking about the affidavit 
or something else?  Because he – the point he is making 
...[intervenes]  
ADV HULLEY SC:   It dealt with something else. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is the thing.  The point he is 
making is.  Two times we wrote to the Legal Team of the 
Commission and said:  Please, let us have Mr Joubert’s 
affidavit. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he says:  We never received a 
response to that, to those two letters.  Obviously, if you 
write to them about other matters, that is not a response to 
those letters which says:  Let us have Mr Joubert’s 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 45 of 104 
 
affidavit. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So the point I am making is that 
insofar as the request or insofar as he speaks about 
paragraph 4.5. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, at this stage I just want to talk about 
his contention that:  
Although we cannot dispute that Mr Joubert’s 
affidavit 
was 
sent 
to 
Colonel 
Mhlongo’s 
attorney in July.  We were not aware that it 
was sent.  Assuming that it was sent.  And that 
10 
is why we sent not one letter but two letters to 
the Legal Team.  And there was no response to 
those letters.  And in those letters will say 
please let us have Mr Joubert’s affidavit. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   My response to that.  I am agreeing 
that there is no letter to the response.  I am not agreeing 
that there was no response.  So what I am saying is that 
there is a response but those responses were dealt with 
telephonic and SMS exchanges.  So it was not dealt with 
by way of a formal letter or a formal email responding to 
20 
that but it was ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Was there a response by way of an SMS 
or Whatsapp message that said – that responded to the 
issue of the affidavit of those letters? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   No, there was not a response that 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 46 of 104 
 
dealt with ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is what I am looking for at the 
moment. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   But this subject to this if I can just say.  
Insofar as they asked for as we – insofar as we speak 
about the affidavit.  I just want to be cautious and say that 
the letter does not ask for the affidavit.  It asks for the 
evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us just go to the letters.  Let me see 
the two letters he was talking about because I did not read 
10 
the letters. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So the first one is at page 13 Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   One, three? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   That is correct.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And we in this, Colonel Mhlongo 
repulses that the Commission should avail to him the 
evidence of Mr Joubert. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   What – so – and then he goes on to 
20 
say and that he will proceed – he will respond thereto 
within the scheme of the rules of the Commission.  What I 
am saying is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that the first of the two letters? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   That is the first of the two letters. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 47 of 104 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is 28 August. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   The second letter is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   So it is – it is not specific that he is 
talking about the affidavit. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   An affidavit.  That is my point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And I am not making anything more 
than that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It could mean the recording of the 
conversation. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So that is the only point I will make as 
far as that is concerned. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay.   
ADV HULLEY SC:   And for present purposes.  Obviously, 
we will get into the debate at a later stage of what is the 
implications of that and whether they can be relied upon, 
the fact that we had in fact sent it to them at an earlier 
stage. 
20 
 
But for present purposes, I am only making the 
point that he talks about the evidence, he does not talk 
about an affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.   
ADV HULLEY SC:   So in the ...[intervenes]  
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 48 of 104 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the second letter? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Is at page 16 of the same bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes?    
ADV HULLEY SC:   And he says: 
“We refer to our letter dated the 28 August 2020 in 
response to your correspondence of the 26 August 
of 
2020 
regarding 
the 
above 
matter. 
 
Your 
undertaking to the effect that a formal response will 
be 
furnished 
to 
us 
in 
due 
course 
is 
much 
appreciated.  We request herewith to be updated 
10 
with developments in response to our letter referred 
to in paragraph 1 above.” 
In other words, to their letter of the 28 August.  Now - so 
neither one …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   So part of the point you are making is 
that those letters do not make it clear that …[intervenes] 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And I am not talking …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   …they are talking about the affidavit. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Sorry.  And I am not putting it any 
higher. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I am just making the point that they do 
not speak specifically. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  So in the context of that I am making 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 49 of 104 
 
now a third point in relation to the earlier letters so that 
you can understand how it is that – or when I say that we 
have responded, you can understand then, Mr Chair, how it 
is that I say we have responded.  
 
So what I am saying is that if you consider the 
earlier letter of the 28 August, the earlier letter is not 
confined to considerations relating to Mr Joubert alone, it 
also – it concerns considerations relating to Mayatu(?)   
So the issue that was – then became the focal point 
of the interaction between the party, Mr Moringa and the 
10 
Commission and in relation to Colonel Mhlongo was 
specifically the issue of whether Colonel Mhlongo could 
listen to the recording either in Johannesburg or in Durban.   
So there was ongoing interaction between the 
parties in relation to that issue.  So – and where do I get 
that from, the papers which are before us.  If I can take 
you to – and I have referred you already, Mr Chair, to page 
20, which is the letter that was sent off today by the 
secretariat. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said you want me to go what page? 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Pardon me, it is page 20, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I just want to take you to the passages 
in this where we referred to the letter to what transpired 
subsequent to September.  
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 50 of 104 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   If you would just bear with me, Mr 
Chair, [indistinct – dropping voice].   Unfortunately this 
was just made available to me before the hearing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I want to wrap this up, we have reached 
…[intervenes] 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Pardon me, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   …An hour mark dealing with the 
postponement application. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   If I could take you to the bottom, the 
10 
foot of page 23. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   We stress that the letter relied upon by 
you dated the 4 September had nothing whatsoever to do 
with Mr Joubert’s evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:    
“This 
related 
to 
your 
request 
that 
Colonel 
Padayachee’s recording get played back to him in 
Kwazulu-Natal as opposed to in Gauteng.” 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:    
“These recordings were subsequently played to your 
client in your presence in October of 2020 and the 
transcripts 
thereof 
were 
provided 
very 
shortly 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 51 of 104 
 
thereafter.” 
Now what we are saying is insofar as that is 
concerned, is that the issue that appeared to remain in 
contention related to whether we could play it in Kwazulu-
Natal or in Gauteng.  Ultimately it was played in Kwazulu-
Natal.  The transcripts were made available to him.   
So in the context of that, the true issue that – or 
this issue relating to the evidence, whether it includes the 
actual affidavit or something less, that issue never arose 
again after that.  It only arose then for the first time when 
10 
we had the hearing [indistinct – dropping voice].  What we 
are saying is that on the evidence as it stands… 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Or on the documentation as it stands it 
seems that there are – there is at least one email that was 
then to sent on obtaining that affidavit, there is other 
correspondence which referred not to the affidavit but 
attached as copies of actual recording and the transcript.   
 
We would submit that, with respect, the parties 
…[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  No, that is fine.  Let me hear what 
Mr Manala has in reply. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The one thing which seemed to count in 
his favour was the idea that they asked for – they asked 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 52 of 104 
 
the legal team to furnish them with affidavit by way of two 
letters to which the legal team to respond but you make the 
point that when you look at those letters it is not clear that 
that is what they are talking about.  So let me hear Mr 
Manala, I want to finalise this, I do not want us to waste a 
lot of time that we do not have. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So Mr Manala, as you come forward, that 
is the one issue which was counting in your favour but I 
think the vagueness of the letter or letters is not helping 
10 
you and as we speak I am more inclined subject to what 
you will now say in reply, I am more inclined to dismiss the 
application and give you a chance to consult with your 
clients and while we go on with Mr Joubert.  But you are 
still going to reply, I am just giving you the benefit of what 
I am thinking. 
MR MANALA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MANALA:   Chairperson and I will limit my submissions 
just for that issue.  Now there is an assertion that 4.5 is 
20 
there, the first …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want to remove your mask 
again? 
MR MANALA:   Oh, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I can hear your points clearly. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 53 of 104 
 
MR MANALA:   Yes.  Pardon me, Chairperson.  Well, 
Chairperson, the first assertion that you get from my 
learned friends, the legal team of the Commission, is that 
4.5 is there and that we did not find(?) exactly to the 
aspect of affidavit.  Our submission there is that you do not 
even read 4.5 the way it should be read.  That is, you read 
it to accept – I mean, to get out of it its actual meaning.  
What is being said there is that: 
“I propose to this end …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is it again that letter? 
10 
MR MANALA:   We are at page 13. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, 13? 
MR MANALA:   13. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  Ja? 
MR MANALA:   It says there: 
“To this end…” 
This is in summation of what is there above and this is 
after the date you will see. 
“Colonel Mhlongo proposes that the Commission 
should avail to him the evidence of Joubert and that 
20 
he would respond thereto within the scheme of the 
rules of the Commission.” 
Now how does the Commission avail evidence of a person?  
We have seen throughout that it does so by way of an 
affidavit and it gives annexures to that affidavit to the 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 54 of 104 
 
extent that they are fact.  How do you respond thereto in 
the scheme of the rules, depose to an affidavit and you 
deal with that evidence. 
 
So 
we 
submit, 
Chairperson, 
that 
before 
this 
Commission it cannot be contended that when evidence 
here comes in one or other form, we have seen throughout, 
evidence from here comes in the form of an affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But what you were talking about, as I 
understood the position, was you were saying somebody, 
such as your client, Mr Mhlongo, would be entitled to a 3.3 
10 
notice whenever there is affidavit of a witness who 
implicates him.  Now you – I understood you to be saying 
this was not – initially this was not done but I think after I 
have given you a chance to continue you clarify it, if I 
understood correctly, but you are not saying it was not 
served in July but you are saying we asked for it two times 
and there was no response.   
Now with regard to a 3.3 notice most of the time 
you would simply say give me the statement of affidavit as 
opposed to, you know, the evidence which would be a 
20 
transcript, which could, of course, also include an affidavit 
or which would include the recording and so on. 
So if your – if the letter had made it quite clear you 
are talking about the affidavit, my inclination would be to 
try and accommodate you.  So I think I would accept the 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 55 of 104 
 
point that says when you say evidence you include an 
affidavit, okay?  That I would accept.  But I am simply 
saying your client’s position, your instructing attorney’s 
position, as I understand it, was we have not been served 
with a Rule 3.3. notice in regard to that affidavit, that is 
what we were asked for, please give us the bad affidavit 
but the letter seems to be quite wide and not so specific. 
MR MANALA:   Chair, let me deal with one or two things 
just arriving from that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
MR MANALA:   The first is this, your context.  Remember 
all along Colonel Mhlongo takes the position, to the extent 
that people are relying on that affidavit I am merely going 
to put up this affidavit with which he says that affidavit, the 
first affidavit is a fabrication, it was not deposed to by me 
and that is the end of it. 
 
Now come the 30 t h, that is post to the 30 t h, we now 
know there is a change in tune to say in fact that affidavit 
was correct.  Now what you are going to ask for after that 
day, you are going to ask for the change to – because you 
20 
have the old affidavit and that is the context within which 
we submit you would look at 4.5. 
 
But the second aspect to that is this, if we 
exchange extensively for an hour, thereabout, in order to 
try decipher what this 4.5 actually meant or actually 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 56 of 104 
 
excluded, it means there is some reasonableness in the 
misreading, one, from their side and secondly, from my 
side.  We should have perhaps written a better letter on 
straightforward terms.  But that as it may be, one way or 
the other, we submit that Colonel should be given the 
benefit of the confusion that is here, that he should be 
afforded space to prepare an adequate to come before the 
Commission.  And those would be our submissions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, you see, that point would have 
some merits if it was a letter written by the legal team, 
10 
which is vague. 
MR MANALA:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   But since you were the author, not 
talking about you, you were the author of the vague letter, 
you cannot benefit from your own vagueness. 
MR MANALA:   Well, that doctrine I seem to recall says 
something about construction against the [indistinct] 13.32. 
Now if we take it to its bare essentials, it appears to have 
been written by attorney. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR MANALA:   And therefore we are speaking on a case of 
Colonel Mhlongo, so …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   You are not adding without the benefit of 
counsel. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 57 of 104 
 
MR MANALA:   But, Chairperson, if we accept that 
[indistinct] 13.55 Mhlongo it becomes an issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MANALA:   That there is some – and as we have 
indicated earlier on, we are committed to make quick 
turnaround. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MANALA:   And we would ask that you favourably 
consider his application. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
10 
MR MANALA:   Thank you, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, that is fine. I am going to 
dismiss the application, I am not going to give reasons.  If 
you people insist on reasons you can write and ask for 
them but you will get a chance to consult with him while Mr 
Joubert gives evidence.   
If Mr Joubert takes longer than I expect him to take 
you might just be lucky that we have to adjourn before 
Colonel Mhlongo has to be called in which case then we 
can arrange another date.  But for now, the application is 
20 
dismissed. 
MR MANALA:   As you please, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  Thank you. 
MR MANALA:   Thank you. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 58 of 104 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chair.  Mr Chair, I would 
ask to call Mr Terence Joubert. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay.  Mr Joubert, can you hear us? 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good afternoon. 
MR JOUBERT:   Good afternoon, sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, we are waiting for you to appear.  
Yes.   
MR JOUBERT:   Yes, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, I am just waiting for your picture to 
10 
be stable.  Yes, okay, you can see both the evidence 
leader and me? 
MR JOUBERT:   No, I cannot see you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You cannot see me? 
MR JOUBERT:   Oh.  Ja, now it switches between yourself 
and the evidence leader.  Now I can see you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It should not do that, you should be able 
to see both of us.  Or you should see – I do not know if you 
– I thought you should see us at the same time but maybe 
you should see us as we speak.  So if I speak you see me, 
20 
if the evidence leader speaks, you see him.  So if you can 
see me now maybe that is fine, when the evidence leader 
speaks then you will see him.  Alright? 
MR JOUBERT:   Okay, Chair. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 59 of 104 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you for availing yourself to come 
and assist the Commission, Mr Joubert.  The registrar will 
administer the oath or affirmation to you. 
MR JOUBERT:   Okay. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record? 
MR JOUBERT:   Terence John Joubert. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR JOUBERT:   No. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
10 
conscience? 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth the whole truth and nothing 
else but the truth.  If so, please raise your right hand and 
say so help me God. 
TERENCE JOHN JOUBERT:  So help me God. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Joubert. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Thank you, then you can continue, Mr 
Hulley. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   My recollection is that his evidence 
apart from the fact that you will have to be asked about the 
second affidavit otherwise his evidence, questions is 
reasonably short. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 60 of 104 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I believe it will be fairly circumscribed, 
Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay, alright. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Mr Joubert, just formally if you could 
open up a bundle which ought to be in front of you which is 
marked EXHIBIT Y11. 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just to recap, Mr Hulley, we are using 
bundle LEAN, nè? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Pardon me, Mr Chair, that is correct. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now if you could turn with me, Mr 
Joubert, to page – and in future I will refer you to a 
pagination system and it will be in the top left hand corner 
of the bundle of documents that has been placed before 
you.  So if you turn with me to page LEAN-211.  It is in the 
top left hand corner and it is in black font. 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   You will see that in the top right hand 
corner there is a numbering system which is in red.  I want 
20 
you to ignore that, the portion that is read.  Do you 
understand? 
MR JOUBERT:   Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now if you can look at the document 
which is at page 211 and if you could go all the way to 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 61 of 104 
 
page 228. 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Could you identify what this document 
is? 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes, I do. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And is this an affidavit that has been 
deposed to by you on the – it looks like the 24 July of 
2020. 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And if you turn to page 227 is that your 
10 
signature? 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Right.  If you would turn with me to 
page 1 of that bundle of documents – sorry, page 211, 
pardon me. 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is the page number? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Page 211. 
CHAIRPERSON:   211? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   That is correct, Mr Chair, it is LEAN10-
20 
211 in the top left hand corner.  Now that is the 
commencement of the affidavit that has been deposed to 
for the benefit of your testimony before this Commission, is 
that correct? 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 62 of 104 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now, just by – if I can refer you to 
another document then at page LEAN-230.  Do you have 
that document? 
MR JOUBERT:   Just repeat that please?   
ADV HULLEY SC:   It is page 230 of the same bundle, top 
left hand corner 230. 
MR JOUBERT:   230.  That is correct, I have got it. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And then if you go to page 232. 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Is a signature on that page, at the foot 
10 
of the page, and it is dated the 25 November 2013.  Whose 
signature is that? 
MR JOUBERT:   It is my signature. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And if you would turn with me to page 
LEA 306 in the same bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did you say 206? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   306, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   306. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Pardon me. 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And if you turn with me to the 
following, to page 308, there is a signature over there, 
roughly in the middle of the page and it seems to be an 
affidavit dated …[intervenes] 
MR JOUBERT:   308 you said? 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 63 of 104 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   That is correct. 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And that purports to be an affidavit 
dated 1 February 2016.  Whose signature appears on that 
page above the words or the name Terence J Joubert.  
Whose signature is that? 
MR JOUBERT:   Ja, I presume that is my signature. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I asked whose signature is it? 
MR JOUBERT:   My signature, Chair. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now would it be fair to say that these 
10 
are three separate affidavits that have all been deposed to 
by you?  The three documents that I put to you? 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct, Chair. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now I want us to deal …[intervenes] 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Before I take you through to the 
content of the affidavit, or any of the affidavits, I want you 
to first deal with the circumstances.  All three affidavits 
seem to deal, and you will correct me, of course, if I am 
wrong but they deal with …[intervenes] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Hulley, do you not want to request me 
to admit each one of them? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   My sincere apologies, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, yes, confirmed. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Since apologies, if you would admit the 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 64 of 104 
 
affidavit together with all the annexures of Mr Joubert, 
Chair, as EXHIBIT Y10.  Sorry, Y11. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, take affidavit at a time and make 
the request and then tell me what exhibit number it should 
be and then I will do that, then we do each one of them 
separately. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chair.  So this is 
EXHIBIT Y11, the main affidavit which is at page 211. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is this the first affidavit? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   That is the first affidavit, it runs to 
10 
page 228. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It should be exhibit...? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Y11. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Y11.  The affidavit of Mr Terence John 
Joubert starting at page 211 is admitted together with its 
annexures and …[intervenes] 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And it has …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Pardon me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And it is to be marked as EXHIBIT Y11. 
20 
TERENCE 
JOHN 
JOUBERT’S 
AFFIDAVIT 
PLUS 
ANNEXURES PAGES 211 TO 228 HANDED IN AS EXHIBIT 
Y11 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  That affidavit has 
attached to it the annexures to which – amongst which I 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 65 of 104 
 
have just referred to, so they are all annexures to the 
EXHIBIT Y. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As long as they are annexures I would 
have said …[intervenes] 
ADV HULLEY SC:   It is one exhibit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Together with all the annexures. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, so they are annexures to the 
affidavit. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   They are all annexures to that 
10 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chair.  So just to 
confirm before we get into the actual content, Mr Joubert 
…[intervenes]3 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, are you not going to the 
second affidavit and the third affidavit or each one of them 
to be admitted as an exhibit on its own or are they 
annexures to the main affidavit? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   The other two affidavits that I have 
20 
referred to the one which is dated 25 November 2013. 
CHAIRPERSON:   The second and the third? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And the third affidavit.  Those are 
annexures …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   To the main affidavit? 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 66 of 104 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Sorry, the first and the second affidavit 
– okay, pardon me, the first affidavit that I have referred to 
now is the one which is dated July of 2020 and attached to 
that are two other affidavits as part of the various 
annexures which are attached.  So they are actually 
annexures to the main affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, they are not standalone. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   They are not standalone affidavits. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so – alright then, go ahead. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chair.  Now the – if you 
10 
would turn with me to page 235. 
MR JOUBERT:   200 and…? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   35.  235. 
MR JOUBERT:   35? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Correct. 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now this purports to be …[intervenes] 
MR JOUBERT:   Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   It purports to be an email that is from 
you which appears to be dated the 25 November 2013 and 
20 
it is addressed Mxolisin@TelkomSA.net. 
CHAIRPERSON:   That is Nxasana. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chair, Mr Nxasana.  
Well, firstly let me ask you this …[intervenes] 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 67 of 104 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Who is that email addressed to? 
MR JOUBERT:   That email is addressed to Mr Nxasana as 
well as cc’d to Mr Duma. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What page is the email? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Page LEA10-235, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   235? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   It is annexure TJJ2 to the main 
affidavit. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  What does the email say? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Could you just read the email into the 
record for us please Mr Joubert. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well he might not need to read it if it is 
long, 
I 
have 
not 
reached 
it, 
maybe 
just 
say 
what 
...[intervenes]     
ADV HULLEY SC:   But then it says Dear ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...it was saying. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you Mr Chair, it says: 
“Dear NBPP, 
20 
Attached please find a copy of my affidavit. 
Regards, 
Terence” 
Is that correct Mr Joubert? 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct Chair. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 68 of 104 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And the affidavit that you were - that is 
purportedly attached to that document.  Is that which 
appears at page 230 of the same bundle to 233, is that 
correct? 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the Terence referred to in the email 
at page 235.  Is that you? 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes, Chair that is me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright and the NDPP that you 
sent the email to was Mr Nxasana, is that right? 
10 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, continue Mr Hulley. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chair.   Can you just 
very briefly give us a background to the circumstances in 
which you prepared this email and sent it to Mr Nxasana? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, shall I assume that you will let 
him start with, when you say circumstances, let him start 
with the conversation and then…[intervene] 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  So if you can go 
back to the circumstances in which you - why is it that you 
compiled this affidavit, what did the affidavit deal with? 
MR JOUBERT:   Okay, I am on the…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well maybe  
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 69 of 104 
 
MR JOUBERT:   …the 18 t h…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry Mr Joubert, I may have 
missed this Mr Hulley.  Did we cover the question of who 
he works for or he worked for at the time, what position he 
held? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay let me just understand where are 
you currently employed and where were you employed in 
2013? 
MR JOUBERT:   Currently, I am employed with the National 
Prosecuting Authorities working at the asset forfeiture unit 
10 
and in 2013 I was the acting regional manager at - for risk 
management also for the NPA.  
CHAIRPERSON:   What is your current position? 
MR JOUBERT:   My current position I am a senior financial 
investigator. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, at the NPA? 
MR JOUBERT:   At the NPA, that is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, based in Durban? 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct based in Durban. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And in 2013, were you also based in 
20 
Durban? 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct Chair, I was based in 
Durban. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright continue Mr Hulley. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you Mr Chair.  Now in 2013 were 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 70 of 104 
 
you familiar with Colonel Mhlongo? 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct, Chair.  I knew Colonel 
Mhlongo we were sharing the same office space on the 
same floor where I was sitting. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now, is it correct that in 2013, you had 
a conversation with Colonel Mhlongo which led to a 
recording that you did? 
MR JOUBERT:   Ja, I would like to start off by saying the 
reason why I had Colonel Mhlongo in my office to start off 
with.  I got a call from Advocate Mollele about - a request 
10 
that was made by this Colonel Mhlongo to him via 
telephone, where he requested Advocate Mollele to assist 
in either getting rid or assist Bobby Motahul[?] for some 
stadiums that he was involved in and this did not sit well 
with Advocate Mollele.  He reported the matter to me as 
the person in charge of risk I – this Colonel Mhlongo at the 
time was seconded to the Exhumation Unit, I forgot what 
they were called at the time.  So they were housed at the 
NPA building and so I - after listening to the complaint by 
Advocate Mollele I then called…[intervene] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on one second Mr Joubert.  Who 
was Colonel Mhlongo employed by at the time, was he 
also…[intervene] 
MR JOUBERT:   He was employed but…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry? 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 71 of 104 
 
MR JOUBERT:   No, by the Police, he was suspended.  He 
was employed by the Police but he was seconded to this 
task team this Examination Group, ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  So he was…[intervene] 
MR JOUBERT:   Ja, I think were called ERP[?]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so you were working for the NPA. 
He was working for the Hawks but seconded to the NPA or 
what, is that right? 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes, he was working for the Police.  I do 
not know which unit he was from but working for the Police 
10 
and he was seconded to the NPA.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, the…[intervene] 
MR JOUBERT:   So after listening…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on, Advocate Mollele that you 
talking about you say he gave you a call, he phoned, is 
that right? 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes, yes sir he called me, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And he had a complaint to convey to 
you, what was the complaints about or what was he 
complaining about?  Or is that - you do not need to go into 
20 
what the complaint related to certain people.  Certain 
people that he had, he had a certain complaint but that 
complaint is not of importance to the particular matter we 
are dealing with, is that right?  
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 72 of 104 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   As a result of that complaint you called 
Colonel Mhlongo? 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes, I called Colonel Mhlongo.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright continue from there. 
MR JOUBERT:   To speak to him about it.  I then called the 
Colonel Mhlongo, we then spoke about the complaint and I 
told him that obviously this is not allowed here and it could 
get you into trouble or actually to be removed from the 
NPA. Fine, he apologised and that – while we were 
together he got a phone call. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR JOUBERT:   I do not know what the first phone call, I 
do not know what he was saying to that person but the 
second phone call was when I realised that I need to 
record this guy. We just spoke and I reprimanded him, not 
reprimanded per say but I spoke to him as a friend because 
we were friends rather than enemies.  So I spoke to him 
while still in my office you now talk about dealing with 
Nxasana etcetera, etcetera murder investigation.  So that 
is when I started recording this guy. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Just pause if I may Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Just give us a context because you say 
he starts talking about Nxasana, about murder and so 
forth.  Let us just break it up.  What happens in the 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 73 of 104 
 
conversation and what exactly is he referring to, when you 
say he talks about Nxasana?  Now we know that Nxasana 
is the National Director of Public Prosecutions but just to 
place that in context, when was Mr Nxasana appointed as 
far as you recall, as the National Director of Public 
Prosecutions? 
MR JOUBERT:   To be honest with you, it is actually during 
that time that Nxasana was appointed.  I cannot tell you for 
the life of me, the exact date that he was appointed but it 
was during that time that he was going around to be 
10 
introduced to the rest of the NPA that this thing happened. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh so when you had this discussion with 
Colonel Mhlongo it had not been a long time after Mr 
Nxasana had started his duty as the NDPP. 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct, Chair that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was still busy visiting various NPA 
offices to introduce himself. 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright Mr Hulley. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Chair.  Now, you say that 
20 
he started speaking about Mr Nxasana, just tell us about 
the content of what he was saying in relation to Mr 
Nxasana? 
MR JOUBERT:   I remembered that he mentioned that 
there was supposed to be a murder investigation in Umlazi 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 74 of 104 
 
somewhere that has to do with where Nxasana was the 
suspect and he was referring to this individual that he was 
talking to about that.  He also mentioned the fact that 
Nxasana’s wife was working for RAF and how they can try 
and get enough information from RAF.  
This is him still on the phone not talking to me as 
yet and it so happened that during that time he mentioned 
that they can deal with Nxasana as they dealt with 
Gumede.  I do not know who Gumede is I have never - but I 
just that was in a nutshell what he was conversing with on 
10 
his phone, in my office.  
Now based on that, oh ja, ja the statement he made 
is that he said, Jiba is the best person for the job, this guy 
with all these criminal things that he has, he should not 
have been appointed. That is when I started recording the 
conversation.  The conversation is still there it is obviously 
on record and I think we – ja, it was made available to all I 
do not know whether you want me to go into that.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Hulley will lead you. 
MR JOUBERT:   Okay. 
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Well we will get there in a moment.  So 
if I can ask you turn to page 242 of the same bundle.  
MR JOUBERT:   Two, four, two, yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And that goes up to page 250. 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct, Chair. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 75 of 104 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Could you identify this document? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Just one sec Mr Hulley. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Joubert. 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When you were telling me what you 
heard in terms of the conversation between Colonel 
Mhlongo in the second call with whoever he was speaking 
to and your evidence was a little disjointed.  I would like 
you to try and just give me in point form to say, what I 
10 
picked up from that conversation was the following one, 
two, three.  Are you able to do that? 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes, Chair I could.  Yes, what I picked up 
from his conversation on the second telephone call he had 
was that one, they were busy with an investigation against 
Nxasana.  Two, they were trying to find something on 
Nxasana at RAF.  Three, the fact that Jiba was not 
appointed was a problem, that is the problem.  That is what 
I picked up, personally. 
CHAIRPERSON:   You said something about Gumede 
20 
earlier on?  
MR JOUBERT:   Yes.  He mentioned that they could do the 
same as Gumede.  Now as I said earlier on I do not know 
who Gumede is, I do not know how he fits into this picture 
but he mentioned Gumede during that conversation of his.  
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 76 of 104 
 
Those are the four things that I picked up. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, did you not say earlier on there 
was mention of murder and there was mention of, ja 
murder? 
MR JOUBERT:   Ja, I did say that and I did count it in, 
murder investigation RAF. The appointment of Jiba and 
those Gumede thing, Gumede that I do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay alright continue Mr Hulley. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you Chair.  Now, at what stage 
did you commence recording the conversation? 
10 
MR JOUBERT:   As soon as I heard all these, I obviously 
had to wait until an opportune time where he was turned 
away from me in order for me to take out my recorder from 
the drawer that I have it in and stick it under the 
newspaper that was on my desk and record.  So obviously, 
I could not record immediately, I had to wait for an 
opportune time to do so. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   In other words, you have to wait until 
he was distracted in order for you to start recording. 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I am not sure whether he had to 
wait until he was distracted.  It may mean that he simply 
had to wait until he could put the device without Colonel 
Mhlongo seeing him there, is that correct?  
MR JOUBERT:   No. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 77 of 104 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you, Mr Joubert.  Now, the 
document that I have just referred to you at page 242 of 
the bundle, you have seen that document before have you?  
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And can you identify what that 
document is? 
MR JOUBERT:   These are the transcripts of the recording. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now, and we will get into the 
transcripts in a moment.  In relation to the discussion that 
10 
you had with Colonel Mhlongo, what did he convey to you 
insofar as these issues are concerned i.e. the murder 
issue, the RAF, the Gumede and so forth.  Did he convey 
anything to you directly as opposed to a person on the 
other end of that telephone conversation? 
MR JOUBERT:   Ja, after he dropped the call he then 
turned to me and what he asked me was to arrange, if I 
knew anybody at RAF that I could link him up with and then 
he elaborated that he needed somebody there that could 
get records of what Nxasana got from RAF, meaning work 
20 
that that was given to him.  He also then mentioned that 
Nxasana’s wife works for RAF. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I will ask you to turn to page 35 of the 
bundle.  Sorry, page 245 pardon me Mr Chair.  
MR JOUBERT:   Yes.  
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 78 of 104 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And if you would just read for the 
benefit of the Chairperson and of course for the record, if 
you could read from line 11 onwards sorry line 16 onwards 
pardon me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on one second, sorry, Mr Joubert I 
may have missed this.  
MR JOUBERT:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is the document starting at page two 
four two the transcript of a conversation that happened 
between you and Colonel Mhlongo after he had finished on 
10 
his telephone conversation that you are talking about? 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes.   
CHAIRPERSON:   What is it, that noise I hear it for the 
second time.   
MR JOUBERT:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Hang on one second, Mr Joubert do not 
forget your answer.  What is that? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I have no idea.  I am not sure if it is in 
the room as opposed to their room, I am not sure if it is 
coming from here. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Where is Reverend Stimella?  Maybe the 
technicians will know whether it is connected with. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   There certainly was a sound. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, it is the second time it is 
happening. Okay, let us continue hopefully somebody will 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 79 of 104 
 
tell is what is happening. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, so my question was whether the 
document that starts at page 242 is a transcript of a 
conversation that you and Colonel Mhlongo had after he 
had finished on his second call? 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright proceed. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thanks Mr Chair and have you had an 
opportunity to read through this transcript and to verify 
10 
whether it is in accord with your recollection or with your 
recording? 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes, Chair I have. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And does it in fact accord with your 
recording or is there anything that you think ought to be 
changed? 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes, it definitely highlights the recording, 
most of the recording I would say there was a there was 
merely a few errors that was made by the person that 
transcribed this but it is very minimal.  
20 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Okay, so if we can start and I would 
like to get to a specific passage but before we do so, if we 
can start at page 
243 that is where the recording 
commences.  Have you got that? 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes.  
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 80 of 104 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that noise happens again, is it - 
where is it? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I think it is somewhere in the room that 
is occupied by Mr Joubert. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is the noise coming from the room where 
you are Mr Joubert? 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh is it supposed to happen or it is not 
supposed to happen in terms of the setup? 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes, it is from this room.  We are in a 
10 
boardroom here at the NPA offices. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh is it somebody working, it is like 
somebody is working…[intervene] 
MR JOUBERT:   I should I think so. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Is it something that you can prevent. 
MR JOUBERT:   I should think so. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or is it something that can be avoided or 
you do not know you would need to check that? 
MR JOUBERT:   The walls are very thin here sir. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no that is fine.  Let us continue if 
20 
it happens again, then maybe we could take a short 
adjournment and you can see if you can talk to somebody.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you Mr Chair. 
MR JOUBERT:   Okay, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 81 of 104 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now the first part of the recording or 
the transcript of the transcription commences with Colonel 
Welcome Mhlongo right at the top of the page, you see 
that? 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes, Chair. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now, at that stage is he conversing 
with you or is he still conversing with the person on the 
other end of the phone? 
MR JOUBERT:   No, at that time Chair he was still 
conversing with somebody on the telephone and not with 
10 
me.  
ADV HULLEY SC:   Now…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   So what portions of this document 
reflects or what portion of this document reflects the 
conversation Colonel Mhlongo was having with the person 
on the phone or from where does it start to reflect the 
conversation between you and Colonel Mhlongo? 
MR JOUBERT:   It is only the first section up until line 
number nine that he is not conversing with me. The first 
portion of it, the rest of it his having a conversation with 
20 
me. CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Mr Joubert I have been asked to 
request that when you answer that you try to remain as still 
as possible that you not move from side to side otherwise 
your picture is not captured, that you could just remain still 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 82 of 104 
 
while you respond.  That is if that is in order with you. 
MR JOUBERT:   It is in order noted. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   So from page 243, from line 10 on that 
page onwards that is a conversation that is taking place 
between you and Colonel Mhlongo, is that correct? 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Did Colonel Mhlongo report to you at 
that time as somebody who - for the duration of his 
secondment to the NPA at that time? 
MR JOUBERT:   No, Chair he was reporting to - no he was 
10 
merely just using an office space that I had on the floor 
that I was occupying but he was reporting to the Deborah's 
of this world downstairs. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Thank you Mr Chair.  I would like you 
to move onto LEA10-245. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Why do you change Mr Hulley?  Why do 
you change from using the last three digits to mention the 
page? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   I just forget from time to time, Mr 
20 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   But it should be 245. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Especially because I take it this is the 
only bundle you are using. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 83 of 104 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   This is the only bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright. 
ADV HULLEY SC:    Pardon me Mr Chair.  If you could - 
from line 15 onwards just take us through what is being 
said over there, first read into the record and if there is 
any portions of that that you believe ought to be changed. 
MR JOUBERT:   Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   You can remain…[intervene] 
MR JOUBERT:   No, I mean…[intervene] 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Sorry Mr Joubert once again you are 
10 
out of picture again.  Is it – I am not sure how you being 
recorded, is it on a laptop that you are being recorded? 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, maybe let us do it this way from 
paragraph 15 on page 243 Mr Joubert. 
MR JOUBERT:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It reflects that Colonel Mhlongo said 
this: 
“There are indistinct to do justice.  So now they are 
complaining that us we do things here we do their 
20 
things and we said to them and our job is to 
investigate and exhume and transport remains this 
function things.” 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Sorry Mr Chair, if I may interrupt you, I 
am sorry I was actually referring to page 245. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 84 of 104 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh is that so. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   My apologies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, I am sorry.  Okay, maybe it is 
going to be faster if you read it for him. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Yes, thank you Mr Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   And maybe ask him to say what that 
particular part is about. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   According to the transcription, it says 
that from line 15 on it says: 
“No, I mean the whole our whole point here is one 
10 
collection.  No, no I would think here what the boss, 
these guys from RAF tomorrow morning, all I am 
going to do I will link you up with them so that you 
can get all the documentation.  The thing that I do 
not want is not - I am just bringing A to B.” 
And then Colonel Welcome Mhlongo says: 
“Yes.” 
And then you say at line 20: 
“These people of yours I do not think I do not want 
to know them.  I do not want to know them, you see.  
20 
I go to you, I say to you WS go and see so and so 
that is because if it comes back and this woman, 
okay, she gets the post back.” 
Then it is indistinct and then it continues: 
“Through these guys.” 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 85 of 104 
 
Now just that portions, what is being discussed over there 
and is there any portion of that which you wish to change? 
In other words, where the transcription is inaccurate.  
MR JOUBERT:   Yes, Chair.  What is happening here is our 
discussion.  Hello. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Continue. 
MR JOUBERT:   Ja, what is happening here is remember 
earlier on I made mention of the fact that there was a 
discussion between - about RAF, him wanting assistance, 
guys that would be able to get information for him at RAF 
10 
and this is my response to him in stating that yes, I can - 
can you guys hear me? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   We can hear you. 
MR JOUBERT:   What I did here is basically just 
confirming with him that I would source the guys from RAF, 
I do not know anybody at RAF by the way.  Just to let you 
know that, I made him believe that I would bring A to B, 
him and his team of investigators that are investigating this 
RAF matter or want information on the RAF matter to the 
guys that I am supposedly supposed to arrange.  That was 
20 
the first section. The second section of my answer is I 
made mentioned that I do not want to see his guys.  He 
had two guys, two cops I do not know them, they were in 
plainclothes. They were apparently from Umlazi that were 
working with him on this.  
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 86 of 104 
 
So what I mentioned in the second stint is I do not 
want to meet his guys.  I just want him – A to B and then 
they do not even have to know that I gave, I hooked them 
up with the guys from RAF.  So that is - the lady, what I 
want to add in here we are specifically referring to Jiba in 
this instance.  My conversation with Mhlongo here which is 
indistinct it made mention of Jiba. 
I do not know the person that did this, that 
transcribed this might have missed that part and it is 
actually on there, after listening to the to the recording it is 
10 
actually there. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Let me just understand you saying that 
you actually listened to the recording in addition to reading 
this transcript, you have actually listened to the recording? 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct Chair, that is correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And you say that is a portion of the 
recording that is not captured in the transcript, is that 
correct? 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct Chair. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And where should that portion go in on 
20 
the transcript as it stands, could you tell us where? 
MR JOUBERT:   There just before indistinct, that indistinct 
gap that is where it should go. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Very well. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Is that at 245? 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 87 of 104 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:   At page 245 at line 23 Mr Chair.  
CHAIRPERSON:   225? 
ADV HULLEY SC:   That is correct sorry 245 pardon me Mr 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Two, four, five my apologies. 
CHAIRPERSON:   245 ja, that is where I was the only 
indistinct I can see here is at line six.  From indistinct 
wanted to do that. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   It is at line 23 that the witness is 
10 
referring to Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, 23 okay so Mr Joubert from line 20 
at page 245 you are reflected as having said to Colonel 
Mhlongo: 
“These people of yours I do not want to know them; 
I do not want to know them you see.  I got say to 
you WS go and see so and so that is it because if it 
comes back and this woman is okay.  She gets the 
post back, indistinct through these guys.” 
That is what it says.  So you are saying where it says 
20 
indistinct, what has been left out includes Ms Jiba’s name. 
MR JOUBERT:   That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay what was the point about Ms Jiba 
that was being made by yourself here?  
MR JOUBERT:   The point of if she gets her post back?  
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 88 of 104 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  
MR JOUBERT:   I am referring to Jiba.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR JOUBERT:   It is part and parcel of that recording.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:   And just to place that in context.  
When you speak about Advocate Jiba getting her post 
back, you are referring to the fact that you had prior to the 
appointment of Mr Nxasana. 
MR JOUBERT:   You will have to excuse me there was just 
10 
a noise here that I could not hear. Please repeat that 
question, sir? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no we are going to adjourn for a few 
minutes to enable you, to give you a chance to talk to 
somebody maybe they can…[intervene] 
ADV HULLEY SC:   Assist. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Do whatever later or some other time 
when we are done.  So just make the request, is that 
alright? 
MR JOUBERT:   Okay, I will do it Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I guess it will be five minutes.  
MR JOUBERT:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, we adjourn for five minutes.  
MR JOUBERT:   Okay.  
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 89 of 104 
 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay let us continue. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair. Mr Joubert if we 
could just before the brief adjournment just to sum up the – 
you were talking about page 245 of the bundle at lines 15 to 
20.  Were you com – were you finished with your explanation 
about what you were discussing over there? 
MR JOUBERT:  That is correct. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you.  Now there is a reference 
here if I just ask you about two things.  If you go back to line 
10 
16 it says: 
“Our thing here with the boss.” 
Who is the re – who is the boss that is being referred to? 
MR JOUBERT:  The boss that is being referred to here is 
actually Nxasana. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And then further down at line 20, 21, 22 
you say: 
“That is because if it comes back and this woman 00:01:21 
she gets the post back something in inverted – sorry 
indistinct which you say includes Jiba through these guys.” 
20 
Who is the reference to this woman? 
MR JOUBERT:  The woman that I am referring to here is 
Jiba. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And just to place in context you just 
before 
the 
adjournment 
I 
was 
asking 
you 
about 
the 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 90 of 104 
 
circumstances in which Jiba – because you talked about 
getting her post back.  Now this is 2013 specifically in 
November of 2013.  At the time Mr – you testified earlier on 
that Mr Nxasana had only just taken over as the National 
Director of Public Prosecutions and he was still going around 
to introduce himself to people.   
Who was the National Director of Public Prosecutions 
or the acting National Director of Public Prosecutions prior to 
that? 
MR JOUBERT:  Ms Jiba was acting Director of Public 
10 
Prosecutions before Nxasana was appointed. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And when you talk about getting her job 
back precisely or more or less what are you – what is it that 
you – the two of you are referring to?  Obviously I 
understand that the job that was…. 
MR JOUBERT:   Getting the NDPP – 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Sorry I understand that the job that you 
are referring to that she will get back is that of a National 
Director of Public Prosecutions but what I am asking you is 
why are you – what are you – what point are the two of you 
20 
making that she will get her job back?  Why would she get 
her job back? 
CHAIRPERSON:  In other words what was the context … 
MR JOUBERT:  Remember she –  
CHAIRPERSON:  In other words what was the context of this 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 91 of 104 
 
statement about her getting her post back? 
MR JOUBERT:  The context under which this thing was said 
is as follows.  She would get her job back if these guys can 
get all these things that we spoke about RAF, the murder 
docket etcetera, etcetera against Nxasana in order for him to 
be lift out of his – out of his chair she would then be given 
back.  That is the context that we are discussing here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In order for him to what – to do what? 
MR JOUBERT:  In order for – for Jiba to get her job back 
this guy William – I mean Welcome Mhlongo and his team 
10 
ought to go and gather as much as he can in order for them 
to – to make a case against Nxasana in order for him to be 
taken off that NDPP post that he was – that he was  
ADV HULLEY SC:  Occupying? 
MR JOUBERT:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay let us try and get this clear.  You talk 
about – do you talk about here bringing A to B who – what 
were you talking about when you referred to you were just 
bringing A to B what were you talking about? 
MR JOUBERT:  What I was referring to there Chair is A was 
20 
Mhlongo and his team; B was the gentlemen from – from 
RAF that would supposedly assist them in getting the 
information they are looking for.  That is what I meant there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Who was going to ensure that A and B get 
– got together? 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 92 of 104 
 
MR JOUBERT:  Me – I was going to get Mhlongo to these 
RAF guys to get the information that he is looking for. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Had he asked you to assist him to 
get information from RAF for him and his team? 
MR JOUBERT:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What information did he say he was 
looking for that he wanted you to get for him? 
MR JOUBERT:  The information he was looking for was what 
work did Nxasana get from RAF because of the fact that his 
wife was working there or is working there he was under the 
10 
impression that Nxasana got a lot of work from RAF. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And did he want to see how good Nxasana 
was as a lawyer in RAF work?  Why – why – what was the 
significance of this information? 
MR JOUBERT:  I – I think he wanted to know whether 
Nxasana did not embezzle some funds – some funds from 
RAF.  That is – that was my understanding. 
CHAIRPERSON:  What did he say he wanted this information 
to use it for? 
MR JOUBERT:  He said to me that let me paraphrase.  He 
20 
asked me do you know anybody at RAF that could assist us 
with information.  We want to see whether Nxasana got work 
from RAF because his wife works there and see whether he 
did not embezzle RAF monies.  That was it in a nutshell. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So he was looking for information that 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 93 of 104 
 
could reveal that Mr Nxasana may have been involved in 
some wrongdoing? 
MR JOUBERT:  That is correct Chair that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So – and did you then offer to assist 
him that is Colonel Mhlongo to meet with people that you 
knew at RAF? 
MR JOUBERT:  Yes I offered that – I offered him that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JOUBERT:  But I do not know anybody at RAF. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh why did you … 
10 
MR JOUBERT:  I made him believe that I – I made him 
believe that I will assist him. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes and why did you make him believe that 
you could assist him when you did not know anybody there?  
What was the – what did you want to achieve for yourself? 
MR JOUBERT:  I needed to understand what was this guy up 
to that was – that was it. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR JOUBERT:  It was not to assist him per se. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So – so you did not mean to – to 
20 
carry out to honour this promise? 
MR JOUBERT:  That is correct Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay alright.  So after you had made 
this 
promise 
to 
him 
what 
happened 
then 
in 
your 
conversation?  Mr Hulley you can take it from there? 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 94 of 104 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair.  If we can just move 
forward to the following page that is at page 246 Mr Joubert.   
CHAIRPERSON:  Well maybe before you do that. Did your 
conversation continue – you and Colonel Mhlongo after you 
had undertaken to facilitate a meeting between him and his 
team on the one hand and some people from RAF on the 
other? 
MR JOUBERT:  Yes Chair.  Our conversation continued. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Mr Hulley take it from there. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair.  Now if you look at 
10 
page 246 at approximately line 10 this is you speaking again 
– you say: 
“Another thing we had…” 
MR JOUBERT:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC: 
“Like this murder case of yours now the 
uncle and all that.  Guys we must not sleep 
on top of information we must get whatever 
we can get our hands on.  Rather we must 
hurry up because tomorrow as you say this 
20 
woman is in a hurry even us we want to know 
where are we going because we do not want 
to stay here then it is indistinct followed by 
and then – and then there is an invention and 
he 
says 
Colonel 
Mhlongo 
says 
I 
am 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 95 of 104 
 
struggling to eat from the drug addicts and 
backwards it says Amapara.” 
Now this portion over here another thing we have like this 
murder case of your now.  What are you referring to? 
MR JOUBERT:  I am referring to the information that he 
gave me that they are investigating him and his team are 
investigating a murder case in the Umlazi area against 
Nxasana.  And this is just me telling him that he must no 
sleep on the information he must hurry up but I basically 
wanted to get this part of the murder case that he is 
10 
investigating into our conversation. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now that part of the conversation 
because this is you raising it.  That part of the conversation 
when you say you wanted to get it into the conversation 
where did it- where did the idea or the understanding of that 
murder case come from – where did you get it from? 
MR JOUBERT:  I got it from him but it came way before the 
recordings started there was a conversation that we had that 
is how I got to know of the murder case that he is 
investigating.  Remember I mentioned the four things that – 
20 
that he made mention the murder case, the RAF, Jiba and 
this Gumede guy.  That is where it came up. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now when you say over here – when you 
said earlier on that you were trying to get this info the 
conversation just explain what you mean by that? 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 96 of 104 
 
MR JOUBERT:  Remember there were – there are things that 
he said before I started recording and because of that as you 
would see that like for argument sake Gumede is nowhere to 
be mentioned in – in this recording but I know about Gumede 
because of the conversation we had prior.  
So the murder – so too the murder case I did not 
know that Nxasana had a murder case against him I heard it 
from him.  So in – I knew what I was doing now recording 
this guy and I wanted him to mention this murder case in the 
recording now. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Very well.  In other words what you say is 
that you – you wanted the recording to capture the 
conversation that had taken place prior to you commencing 
or prior to you to switching on the recording device? 
MR JOUBERT:  That is correct Sir. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And you wanted that captured on the 
actual recording itself? 
MR JOUBERT:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now you say over here this murder case 
of yours why do you refer to it as a murder case of yours of 
20 
him? 
MR JOUBERT:  I merely wanted to say the murder case that 
you mentioned that should have been the correct line you 
know against Nxasana.  So that is why I said the murder 
case of his.  But that is what I meant with it. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 97 of 104 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Right.  And there you go two lines down. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Hulley. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Pardon me Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Where is that part that you are on with Mr 
Joubert?  I was at 246 and moved to 247. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  It is line 11 Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of which page? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Of 246. 
CHAIRPERSON:  246? 
ADV HULLEY SC:  We still on page 246. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.   Okay you may continue. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We – I think if – we will continue for about 
five minutes and adjourn.  Ja. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you.  You go onto to say: 
“Brother we must…” 
CHAIRPERSON:  So I suspect Mr Manala and his team are 
happy. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  They are saying silent prayers now Mr 
Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair.  You go on to say: 
“Brother we must hurry up because tomorrow 
as you say this woman is in a hurry.” 
Who is the reference to this woman is in a hurry? 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 98 of 104 
 
MR JOUBERT:  This woman I am referring to Jiba when I 
refer to this woman in this context. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Okay.  And when you say that she is in a 
hurry where did you get that from the fact that she is in a 
hurry and what is it that she is in a hurry for? 
MR JOUBERT:  Ja.  I got that from Colonel Mhlongo that this 
woman is in a hurry for the information for us to get or for 
them to get the information. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And then he goes on to say at line 15 he 
says: 
10 
“I am struggling to eat from the drug addicts 
(Amapara).” 
Do you know what he is referring to? 
MR JOUBERT:  I have got no idea Chair.  I have got 
absolutely no idea what he meant by that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well I think in certain parts of the country 
they will know what you are talking about if you talk about an 
Amapara.  You know that Mr Joubert or not? 
MR JOUBERT:  I know – I know what he was referring to I 
am talking about the context in which he made the statement 
20 
I do not know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh okay.  Now I see (talking over one 
another). 
MR JOUBERT:  You know but I know what a para is? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.  Alright. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 99 of 104 
 
MR JOUBERT:  Amapara I know. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair.  Then if we could 
continue on page 247. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry Mr Hulley I may have missed 
this.  Mr Joubert we – 
MR JOUBERT:  Yes – yes Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We are into the conversation between you 
and Mr Mhlongo now but at a certain stage prior to maybe 
not prior to the -  you recording maybe when he had finished 
10 
his call and started talking to you did he explain to you how 
he came to be involved in this “assignment” in quotes?  
Maybe you have explained it and I missed it.  Did he explain 
to you how he came to be involved in this investigation to 
find something – some information about Mr Nxasana? 
MR JOUBERT:  Chair the only thing he mentioned was the 
fact that he told me he is investigating a murder case 
against Nxasana.  He also told me that Nxasana was not the 
correct person for the job and he is trying to assist Jiba in 
getting her seat back.  So could I… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  In getting? 
MR JOUBERT:  Could I assist him – getting her seat back. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh the position? 
MR JOUBERT:  So can I – yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The position of Chief – she was acting 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 100 of 104 
 
NDPP before Mr Nxasana was appointed. When Mr Nxasana 
was appointed… 
MR JOUBERT:  That is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   As NDPP she ceased to be acting NDPP 
and you are saying that Colonel Mhlongo said he was 
assisting her to get that position back.  Is that what you are 
saying? 
MR JOUBERT:  That is what I am saying Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay alright.   
ADV HULLEY SC:  Well to take that one step further.  Was 
10 
there any indication of who had given him this assignment, 
this instruction, this – ask him to conduct this investigation? 
MR JOUBERT:  To be honest with you I do not know.  I am in 
no position to say who gave him the instruction.  The only 
thing that I am saying is what I heard from him.  Whether he 
got it from Jiba I would not be in a position to say yay 
whether it actually happened or not.  But that was what I got 
from him. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  But the question I am asking you is 
irrespective of where as a fact he got the instruction or the 
20 
mandate from I am asking you did he tell you where he got 
the instruction or the mandate from? 
MR JOUBERT:  Yes. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  And? 
MR JOUBERT:  He got it from Jiba. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 101 of 104 
 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Now if you… 
CHAIRPERSON:  So – so was the point you are making a 
minute ago that you – you have no personal knowledge as to 
where he got the instructions from but the point you are 
making now is that he told you that he got the instructions 
from Ms Jiba, is that what you are saying?  I just want to 
understand exactly what you are saying. 
MR JOUBERT:  That – that is exactly what I am saying 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay. 
10 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you.   
CHAIRPERSON:  And did he tell you what exactly Ms Jiba 
said he should do or he and his team should do for her? 
MR JOUBERT:  As I said earlier on there were four things 
that he wanted me to do that I mentioned already in my – 
here previously and he said it was to collect whatever I can 
of whatever he can for the investigation against Nxasana. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm okay alright.  I think we need to stop 
here. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Mr Joubert we are going to adjourn 
today we unfortunately did not make as much progress as 
one had hoped but I think that is because of Mr Manala’s 
plans – postponement application but it needed to be dealt 
with before we could proceed.  We are going to have to 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 102 of 104 
 
adjourn.   
Mr Hulley I am having in mind that attempts should 
be made for us to continue with Mr Joubert’s evidence 
sometime next week. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  I am in your hands Mr Chair.  I will make 
myself available. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  I am thinking of Thursday if we make 
it an evening session and the advantage of an evening 
session Mr Manala and your team is that in case during the 
day you were in court in the evening you would not be in 
10 
court ordinarily and you might be available – it might be easy 
to be available in the evening and to the extent that you 
would like to be there when to be here when Mr Joubert 
continues with his evidence.   
I – that is what I am having in mind.  That is maybe 
starting at four – but we could start at five if that would make 
a difference in your availability.   
But also I would like that when he does finish with his 
evidence Mr Mhlongo be ready and I am quite happy to allow 
that Mr Mhlongo gives his evidence via video link as he was 
20 
going to do today and Mr Joubert may also do so.  And if you 
as Colonel Mhlongo’s counsel wish to appear virtually also 
on that occasion I grant you that leave. 
 
How does that sound to you? 
ADV MANALA:  Chairperson based on the permission for 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 103 of 104 
 
us as well to appear through a virtual link it removes the 
obstacles that may have thought those that would have 
been there so we should be able to attend. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay alright.   
ADV MANALA:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Mr Joubert would you be 
available on Thursday next week maybe about four or five 
o’clock to continue with your evidence remotely? 
MR JOUBERT:  Yes – yes Chair I will avail myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay alright.  Mr Manala do you 
10 
think it is fine if we say four o’clock or would you prefer 
five o’clock? 
ADV MANALA:  Chair as I had earlier indicated we are 
going to be in Mafikeng. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV MANALA:  And we are assuming we might finish early 
but I ...[indistinct] find a way but if the latest is five that is 
available we will try work our best around – we are two 
counsel as I come along he might still be there. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay I am not sure if I think because of 
20 
the mask I am not hearing everything. 
ADV MANALA:  Pardon me Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV MANALA:  We appearing as two counsel. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
12 FEBRUARY 2021 – DAY 343 
 
Page 104 of 104 
 
ADV MANALA:  For Mr Mhlongo so in the event that I join 
and that I join later. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh the other counsel would be available 
from four. 
ADV MANALA:  Would be available yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay no that is fine.  That is fine. 
ADV MANALA:  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright we – we are going to 
adjourn for the day and we will adjourn Mr Joubert’s 
evidence to Thursday next week at four o’clock.  And as I 
10 
have said he will continue to give his evidence remotely 
and counsel for Mr Mhlongo if it suits them to appear 
virtually they may do so as well.  Okay. 
ADV HULLEY SC:  Thank you Mr Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
MR JOUBERT:  Thank you Chair. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 15 FEBRUARY 2021    
