 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
HELD AT 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
03 MAY 2021 
 
 
DAY 387 
 
 
22 Woodlands Drive 
Irene Woods, Centurion  
TEL: 012 941 0587 FAX: 086 742 7088 
MOBILE: 066 513 1757  
info@gautengtranscribers.co.za 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 178 
 
CERTIFICATE OF VERACITY 
 
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that, in as far as it is audible, the aforegoing is a 
VERBATIM transcription from the soundtrack of proceedings, as was ordered to be 
transcribed by Gauteng Transcribers and which had been recorded by the client 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO STATE CAPTURE 
 
HELD AT 
 
CITY OF JOHANNESBURG OLD COUNCIL CHAMBER 
 
158 CIVIC BOULEVARD, BRAAMFONTEIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF HEARING: 
03 MAY 2021 
 
TRANSCRIBERS: 
B KLINE; Y KLIEM; V FAASEN; D STANIFORTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 3 of 178 
 
PROCEEDINGS RESUME ON 03 MAY 2021 
CHAIRPERSON:   Good morning Mr Soni, good morning 
everybody. 
ADV SONI SC:  Morning Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Good morning Mr Montana.  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Chairperson may I apologise we are 
starting about half an hour late it seems there was a bit of 
a miscommunication Mr Montana knew he was coming 
toady but thought he was on standby and did not realise it 
would be the normal time ten o’clock.  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  That seems to be a misunderstanding. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay no that is fine.  The one thing 
which works in your favour Mr Montana is that since you 
started testifying you have been very cooperative with the 
commission so your track record speaks for you. 
MR MONTANA:  Thank you – thank you Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  They always say it is good to create a 
good record for yourself because it speaks for you even 
when you cannot speak for yourself.  Okay alright but 
20 
thank you for – for availing yourself and I know that it was 
short notice but we appreciate that you were able to avail 
yourself. Okay alright.  I think let us do the oath.  Ja. 
REGISTRAR:  Please state your full names for the record. 
MR MONTANA:  Tshepo Lucky Montana. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 4 of 178 
 
REGISTRAR:  Do you have any objection to taking the 
prescribed oath? 
MR MONTANA:  Not at all. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you consider the oath binding on your 
conscience? 
MR MONTANA:  I d. 
REGISTRAR:  Do you solemnly swear that the evidence 
you will give will be the truth; the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth; if so please raise your right hand and say, so 
help me God. 
10 
MR MONTANA:  So help me God. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.  Yes Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Montana you will recall that on the 
previous occasion you were here we were dealing with the 
affidavit of Ms Ngoye you have recalled and we had dealt 
with the allegations she makes in paragraph 19.  You recall 
that? 
MR MONTANA:  I recall Chair.  May I – May I through you 
20 
Chair just raise one thing?  Go back to 15.13. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  15? 
MR MONTANA:  15.13. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  And 15.13 and 15.14 I think it is just one 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 5 of 178 
 
thing Mr Soni I did raise it the last time and requested the 
commission to find the copy of the letter of suspending Mr 
Martin Chauke and I think I said look I wanted to – to 
remind myself and Chair I have since come across – it is 
not the same letter but a draft letter by – and I will forward 
that to you – between the letter it is because it is 
apparently signed by the late Ms Hope Zinde and it had 
nothing to do I think the commission will see that it is has 
got nothing to do with (talking over one another). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh I have not seen it. 
10 
MR MONTANA:  Yes, no I will forward that Chair the… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  The letter speaks about other things about 
… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh that are not. 
MR MONTANA:  (Inaudible). 
CHAIRPERSON: Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  So I wanted to just remind myself. 
CHAIRPERSON:  To put that to rest ja. 
MR MONTANA:  And – but I think a signed copy that 
20 
hopefully 
that 
Mr 
Chauke 
will 
provide 
that 
to 
the 
commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  Because I have got the draft but I still 
forward that. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 6 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MONTANA:  00:01:03 Chair thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Thank you. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Montana I am grateful you pointed that 
out what I thought we would do is all the matters that are 
sought of so in dispute and where you have raised 
concerns we will deal with them at the end of our – Ms 
Ngoye’s and Mr Oellermann’s reports.  Then – you know 
then we know that we have dealt with – we have dealt with 
all the matters you have been called for and those will be 
10 
the 00:04:41 of that affidavit.  But – but we intend coming 
to it. 
MR MONTANA:  Thank you.  Thank you Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now you would recall that in paragraph 19 
we dealt with the MM2 which was the letter that was sent 
to Mr Dingiswayo as well.  Do you recall that Mr Montana? 
MR MONTANA:  We dealt with it Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  I spoke at length on the matter yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Alright.  Now I just want to go then to 
20 
paragraph 20 the – and this issue too we dealt with when 
we considered Mr Dingiswayo’s affidavit that you dismissed 
Mr Dingiswayo and we have been through that.  And then 
we know that Ms Ngoye called you and there was a 
conversation between you and her that did happen right? 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 7 of 178 
 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  And one of the things she says if you turn 
to page 289 is she said to you that the dismissal of Mr 
Dingiswayo was similar to the matter relating to Mr 
Chauke.  Did she tell you that on the 18 t h?  If you look at 
the fourth line she says: 
“I told Mr Montana that I am dealing with a 
repeat of how he had dealt with Mr Chauke 
when I was in inter – I was at Intersite and 
it was not acceptable.” 
10 
Did she tell you that? 
MR MONTANA:  Well Chair not in those exact – in those 
exact terms not mentioning Mr Chauke as it were but she 
was – she was unruly – she was unruly Chair – she was 
insubordinate.  Her conduct was very bad. 
ADV SONI SC:  Okay.  But she did not tell you that? 
MR MONTANA:  Not those specific words no Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  Okay.  Did she mention Chauke? 
MR MONTANA:  No not at all Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  And… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  But she – would you say she may have 
said in essence in different terms what she puts in this 
tense here? 
MR MONTANA:  Well I think Chair I think (inaudible). 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 8 of 178 
 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please Chairperson I am grateful 
for that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay. 
ADV SONI SC:  Now Then she says that she said she – 
you should have engaged with her and that she had 
approved of all Mr Dingiswayo’s decisions.  Did she tell 
you that? 
MR MONTANA:  No, no Chair she did not say that.  Chair 
you see we did not even discuss at length because I had 
another scheduled meeting and I did indicate to Ms Ngoye 
10 
that I am having a meeting will discuss the matter once I 
am done in the meeting or tomorrow and that is when she 
refused and she became unruly.   
And – and effectively and I think I deal with that at 
length in my affidavit.  She then was daring me to fire her 
– you are firing me – you fired my general manager.  Well I 
reminded her the general manager appointed by the Group 
CEO and fired the Group CEO.   
But I then invited her to say look come let us the 
following day and invited her to all the issues she was 
20 
raising in passing in end I ask her put them in black and 
white I want to see them because I was hearing some of 
those things for the first time.   
So I think the Dingiswayo dismissal it seems to 
have unleashed something else Chair.  I said put that in 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 9 of 178 
 
black and white show us some cooperating and she kept on 
saying well I think you just fire me.  And I said well you – 
that is what you are asking for that is what you will get and 
then I invited her to come and see me tomorrow and said 
look I will take action.   
I have asked you to put the things in black and 
white you have still to do that. Kept on having a – she was 
screaming Chair she was completely disorder but this was 
someone who you could see that she – when someone is 
daring you in that way she – and I knew at that time 
10 
consistent with my emails and Mr Soni the emails that I 
had written about. So there was all that background. 
CHAIRPERSON:  About the campaign. 
MR MONTANA:  So you – about the campaign that there 
were all these things and here is the person who is daring 
her immediate boss – I even said put them in black and 
white let us discuss that the following day.  She still defies 
that. If I denied her an opportunity I would understand that 
if she says I tried to raise the issues with Mr Montana he 
did not want even to hear me.   
20 
I said to her and again that detail I provide in my 
affidavit – I said to her put it in black and white let us 
discuss those.  And she was no she was on a warpath and 
her consistent thing you see in the letter that she 00:09:58 
she then kept on saying then fire me then because you – it 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 10 of 178 
 
is quite clear that you do not want me. And for the first 
time she says well this is – this is quite clear that I am 
being punished from my days at Intersite which are not – 
which are not even related Chair that 00:12:27 her 
movement from I think I have explained that move from 
Intersite to the PRASA Corporate Office as it were.   
So Chair she was – she was completely – she was 
unruly, un-cooperating and she dared me to fire her and I 
accepted her invitation Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  Alright so can I just understand when you 
10 
talked to her on the phone on the 18 t h you had told her you 
are going to fire her.  You had told her that she must come 
on the following day because you are firing her in that 
phone call. 
MR MONTANA:  Yes no, no that evening I did tell her that 
she – well she is asking for it.  She did not say it once, she 
did not say it twice – every time she just kept on saying 
then fire me and I took a decision that here is a person 
who – here is an executive who – who conducts herself in 
that way and I think Chair in my – in one of my documents 
20 
I am not sure if I have attached it inside I write a letter to 
the chair of the – of the Remuneration and HR Committee 
of the board to explain the circumstances around her, Mr 
Dingiswayo and someone else.   
So I dealt with it in that way but she – because at 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 11 of 178 
 
that time I could not just fire her but she gave me a reason 
to fire her.  She said fire me because she was – she was 
defiant, she was disorderly and it was someone who says 
look I am not going to actually respect your authority as 
CEO and she was putting me to the test.   
For me she was making a clear statement I am no 
longer prepared to work with you.  I am no longer going to 
respect your position.  So Chair I took action on that basis. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now before that discussion between the 
two of you was the position that – in other words before 
10 
she started daring you saying fire me was the position that 
you were going to fire her in any event because you saw 
her as part of that campaign – it was just a matter of time 
but when she said fire me and repeated that then you 
decided I’ll do it now then?  Or was the – or what was the 
position? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair probably in my mind and I want to 
reflect to the Chair and the commission my honest – the 
way – my state of mind at that point in time I had taken a 
firm view about some of the team members who were no 
20 
longer focussing on what we had agreed upon as an 
organisation and they were running behind the campaign 
and the selecting certain contracts and leaving others and 
doing a whole range of other things.  So my mind was – 
was mind was fact was made Chair but I would not say 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 12 of 178 
 
because you know when you run an organisation especially 
an organisation as big as PRASA you are managing 
different interests.   
I will tell you Chair that there are many instances 
where I get angry with people and I take a view that they 
should be fired.  Some of them would run behind my back 
and run to the chairman and at that time Mr Buthelezi – Mr 
Buthelezi will then invite me and say come let us have 
dinner.  We will have dinner we talk and we talk about 
other things and he will say there is this situation.   
10 
And then he will say to me – and give me cogent 
reasons and say look I think maybe chair you are over-
reacting you are not dealing with the issue and will counsel 
me and say I think you should deal with it differently.  So – 
so sometimes I do take a view but it does not mean that 
view would be realised because an organisation you have 
one on one meetings – people do present and tell you I did 
this because I thought 123.   
But this one was involved in wrongdoing and I – and 
I invited her to sit with me as an executive and she defies 
20 
me and she asked me to fire her.  So yes I had made up 
my mind that she can see the tone in my email but whether 
ultimately she was going to be fired or not Chair I would 
not say with certainty because I think that a lot of things 
had transpired.   
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 13 of 178 
 
So I would put – I think that will – that would have 
been -  you are managing different interests sometimes you 
want to unite the organisation, you want to unite the teams 
that the executive is leaving and therefore – and therefore 
you consider all of those factors.   
Is it ultimately in the interest of the organisation but 
we were facing a state of paralysis because of the 
campaign and Chair I had resolved in my head if I stayed 
in PRASA beyond that period probably most of these 
people some of them will come here said a whole range of 
10 
things at the commission.  Some of them in fact have even 
done worst things that what Ms Ngoye has done. Some of 
them are Chair instead of firing I called the person on one 
on one meeting and I said PRASA 00:15:43 does not 
belong to me does not belong to my father and if had it – it 
was my father ’s company I would probably would have 
thrown you out of the company yesterday.   
Mr Holele came here Chair he did wrong things but 
– but I had the one on one meeting I said you cannot be a 
head – you cannot be a head of strategy located in my 
20 
office if you are doing 123 and not – and you are not 
showing even that level of loyalty but despite that Chair I 
said instead of firing – throwing you into the street I think 
we need to find a different role for you in the business.  So 
you still working for this company, you serve it with loyalty 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 14 of 178 
 
but you cannot be the strategy officer who lies to me or 
you know I will deal with this matter and detail when we 
deal with the Public Protector matter Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  Because I those issues come in that 
context. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MONTANA:  But I did not fire her. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  So it was not this thing that you have this 
10 
guy who was firing everybody, who was so senseless.  I 
follow – I listen to reason Chair and in some instances 
these people had access to the board and they will tell – 
they will lobby board members and board members would 
ask me and sometimes they will say to me we think you 
must reverse that decision or we think you must not go that 
route.  Because the board is there is counsel you.   
So Chair I was not this all powerful person who was 
pushing everybody out of the way as presented in this 
affidavit.  No it is not correct.  So I will say in a nutshell 
20 
Chair my mind was made but whether she was going to 
leave PRASA or not… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  I think it was still dependent on a whole 
range of other factors. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 15 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Okay.  Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please Chair.  Now in the next 
paragraph, paragraph 21 Ms Nyoge says: 
“We met on the 19 t h the meeting started at 
18:00 by 18:05 Mr Montana told me he was 
dismissing me with immediate effect.” 
Is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:  Chair that was correct.  As I said I told her 
yes – the reason I invited her was to fire her.  I told her 
that.  She knew when she was coming to me that – she 
10 
refused the opportunity to meet and discuss with me.  And 
I said you must come tomorrow I will give you facts that – I 
could not have called immediately but I had another 
meeting.  She was actually disruptive I had to go out of a 
meeting to be able to try and even calm her down. She was 
defiant Chair and I have recorded that in my affidavit. 
ADV SONI SC:  Okay I just want to point this out to you Mr 
Montana the one essential difference between your and Ms 
Nyoge is you are saying you told her on the 18 t h that she 
was fired she is saying she only found out at six o’clock on 
20 
the evening of the 19 t h.  That is the difference between the 
two of you right? 
MR MONTANA:  But I will respect the difference Chair.  Let 
us agree to disagree with Ms Ngoye on this one I will not 
dispute that.  I will put my view – she will put her view and 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 16 of 178 
 
ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  No, no but Mr Montana I want to 
emphasise this that is an essential difference because to 
an outsider it makes a little sense that an employee is told 
you are fired and comes back to receive the letter 
dismissing her.  So I am saying it is – it is not an 
inconsequential difference between the two of you and I 
would like you to reflect – did you tell her on the 18 t h or 
only on the 19 t h? 
MR MONTANA:  No, no Chair I told her on the 18 t h but 
10 
because I was in a meeting there was no way I would even  
- because the meeting was in the evening as well the 
previous night. 
ADV SONI SC:  Okay so we – we … 
MR MONTANA:  I would not know… 
ADV SONI SC:  So we know now you told her on the 19 t h? 
MR MONTANA:  It was on the 18 t h. 
ADV SONI SC:  I am sorry on the 18 t h. 
MR MONTANA:  On the 18 t h Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  Alright and then you gave her the letter of 
20 
dismissal that … 
CHAIRPERSON:  I am sorry – I am sorry Mr Soni. I think 
he was still saying something that might substantiate his 
version. 
ADV SONI SC:  Of course sorry. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 17 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Because you see there are now two 
versions and he is sticking to his version that it is the 18 t h.  
I think he was still substantiating.  You were saying Mr 
Montana you were in a meeting there is no way something, 
something? 
MR MONTANA:  No, no Chair I was trying to say that there 
was no way in which because we did not plan to fire her.  
That is the issue.  I think it links to the – to my explanation 
earlier on to you Chair that there was no plan to fire her.  
There was no letter – with Dingiswayo as the team 
10 
prepared the letter.  I want to meet the – I want to meet the 
– I want to meet Dingiswayo – I want to indicate.  So we 
knew there was a – there was a process leading up to that.  
Ms Ngoye’s decision was made on the events of the 18 t h I 
made that decision and I invited her the following – the 
following day. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright. 
MR MONTANA:  So I am just saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  I would not have prepared a letter on that 
20 
day when she was not there – we are not meeting I was 
meeting with other people Chair.  But then we had a 
discussion over the phone. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  Thank you.  Then let us look at MM3 this is 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 18 of 178 
 
the letter of immediate termination that appears at page 
319 Mr Montana.   
MR MONTANA:  319? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  Have you got it? 
MR MONTANA:  I have got it Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  Alright.  You – in your letter – alright firstly 
this letter on 320 is signed and it appears to be signs by 
yourself, that is correct is it not? 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct it is my letter Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  Alright.  Now you – you start off at page 
10 
319 in the first paragraph referring to the phone call and 
the fact that the – the matter concerned the dismissal of Mr 
Dingiswayo and you then set out the objection that Ms 
Ngoye raised and you say here that you told her you were 
engaged in the – in another meeting just as you have told 
us this morning.  Is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:  It is correct Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  Then you say she began to raise her voice 
and demanded your objection be – her objection be heard 
and you say that that amounted to an act of gross 
20 
insubordination which may attract a drastic sanction such 
as dismissal.  That is what your letter says, is that right? 
MR MONTANA:  It is correct Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  And you say: 
“Be that as if may in light of your daring me 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 19 of 178 
 
to request you to fire – request you to fire 
her in my capacity as the Group CEO in 
view of your daring as an act of repudiation 
of your contract which I elect to accept.” 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  That is correct? 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  Then on the next page you say: 
“Ms Ngoye proceeded to make numerous 
allegations against you in unrelated matters 
10 
including an assertion that the decision to 
remove her as the Chief – her as the CEO 
of Intersite is malicious.” 
She raised that with you as well. 
MR MONTANA:  She did Chair – she did that is correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  Alright.   
“I reminded you that this had no bearing 
whatsoever to the issues which you called 
me about.  I view – I with a view to address 
your concerns requested you put these 
20 
grievances and allegations in writing.  You 
refused to do so.  Your refusal and defiance 
to act on my instructions again amounted to 
gross insubordination.” 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 20 of 178 
 
ADV SONI SC:   
“Now during this conversation it became 
clear to me..”  
And you obviously talking about the conversation on the 
18 t h – that is the telephonic conversation? 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:   
“It became clear to me that you as an 
executive at PRASA intentionally failed to 
accept my authority as the Group CEO and 
10 
you 
addressed 
me 
with 
a 
level 
of 
resistance, defiance and great disrespect to 
which I cautioned you against.” 
That too did happen? 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  Alright.  Then you say: 
“The level of insolence which you presented 
towards me is unacceptable and not in the 
best 
interest 
of 
PRASA. 
 
You 
have 
repeatedly reminded me to terminate your 
20 
employment which you repeated in our brief 
meeting this evening.” 
You see that? 
MR MONTANA:  Correct. 
ADV SONI SC:  And that – so you say that happened even 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 21 of 178 
 
in that meeting? 
MR MONTANA:  Yes Chair I am referring to the 18 t h. Chair 
I cannot recall whether on that 18 t h I am referring to the 
telephonic conversation or we – we actually – I do not 
think we met but I am open – but I think we spoke but this 
– this letter correctly put on record what I said Chair. 
ADV SONI SC:  Then you go on to say: 
“I am therefore exceeding to your demand 
to terminate your employment forthwith.” 
MR MONTANA:  That is correct Chair. 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  You see Mr Montana this would suggest 
that the decision was only made on the 19 t h not on the 
18 t h.  I am only saying to you that when one reads the 
letter that is what appears. 
MR MONTANA:  No, no Chair you remember the letter is 
giving effect to my decision which I had conveyed to her.  I 
think – I think that the – the – I do not know how 
significant – how material it is.  I am saying in my 
testimony I am saying to the commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
20 
MR MONTANA:  On the 18 t h I have made that decision.  I 
have conveyed to her and then I put it in black and white 
this letter correctly captures that.  I do not know whether if 
I had given … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Well – well I was under the – well I see 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 22 of 178 
 
that you signed it on the 20 t h if you look at the – now at the 
end of the letter if you signed it on the 20 t h if you signed 
the letter the following morning or the following day after 
the discussion on the phone with Ms Ngoye then that would 
tend to support the idea that the version that – the 
discussion on the phone would have been on the 19 – 
evening of the 19 t h.  Unless – unless it is not a situation 
that the letter came the day after the conversation. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair I think probably that is what 
happened. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  But I am saying that we did not have this 
matter over a three day period. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  So the previous night and the next day. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes okay. 
MR MONTANA:  So either the – the date may not be 
correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  Or visa versa so I… 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  So I accept that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no, that is fine. I think that probably 
resolves it.  If in terms of when the conversation was if you 
say the letter was signed the day after the telephone 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 23 of 178 
 
conversation then it would have to be the 19 t h. 
MR MONTANA:  Yes Chair because I think in her own 
affidavit Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  She starts on the 18 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  And then she says we indeed met on 19 – 
the 19 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  And I cannot recall why the date is the 
10 
20 t h Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. 
MR MONTANA:  So I think – ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. I do not know Mr Soni? 
ADV SONI SC:  Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Your memory is fresher. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  On these things than mine. 
ADV SONI SC:  So – yes – the point is Chairperson what is 
clear from Ms Ngoye’s affidavit hers they had a telephone 
20 
conversation 
on 
the 
18 t h. 
 
The 
– 
it 
was 
unhappy 
conversation.  Mr Montana says it was an aggressive 
conversation.  We can accept both versions it does not 
matter.  But Ms Ngoye says she was only told on the 19 t h 
that she was being dismissed when she met Mr Montana 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 24 of 178 
 
face to face.  And Mr Montana’s version is he told her on 
the 18 t h.  So that is the difference between them and I am 
saying Chairperson that the letter which indicates that 
there is a reference to the face to face meeting on the 19 t h 
would suggest that Ms Ngoye’s version is correct that she 
was only told on the 19 t h not on the 18 t h. 
CHAIRPERSON:  But in the end I think you made some 
point earlier I just want you to remind me whether it would 
make any difference whether she was told on the 18 t h or 
19 t h? 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson what – what would happen or 
what – what - who is this?  And I accept in the final 
analyses not much will depend on but it would show that 
Ms Ngoye’s version is the more probable when one has all 
the evidence in hand. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja-no, what I was interested in is 
whether it makes any difference whether she was told on 
the 18 t h or the 19 t h because it is accepted that she was 
dismissed. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is a question of whether she was told 
on the 18 t h or the 19 t h .    On the face of it, it should not 
matter but I maybe missing something.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, but Chairperson I was merely 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 25 of 178 
 
highlighting the manner in which the dismissal took place. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That Mr Montana, you will recall, and 
I just ask you to respond to this Mr Montana, and the 
Chairperson asked this earlier, you had already made up 
your mind at the time when you dismissing Mr Dingiswayo 
because you said so on the last occasion, that you also 
were going to dismiss Ngoye.  That is what you said on the 
last occasion. 
MR MONTANA:   That is correct, Chair. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Okay. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I was merely saying, Chairperson, 
that would emerge then is that what is contained in the 
letter is in fact an expo facto reflection on why Ms Ngoye 
was being dismissed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Because the decision had been made 
even before the 18 t h ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   ...at the time Mr Dingiswayo was 
dismissed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja.  Well, I am not sure why – I am 
still not sure why it makes any difference, whether it was 
on the 18 t h or 19 t h because Mr Montana says:  We had a 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 26 of 178 
 
conversation. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I fired her because she was insolent, 
she was insubordinate, she get me to fire her, and I fire 
her.  He says:  Well, because I viewed her as part of that 
campaign, I had made up my mind to fire certain people 
including her.  But whether it was going to happen, I am 
not sure because sometimes I would take a decision and 
then I would persuaded, you know.  So I am saying, I am 
not sure. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Maybe that he does not ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Maybe ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, I accept that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja.  Okay alright. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, can I say?  No, I think the first 
point.  Chair, the point I have made that this, for me it is 
not a big issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja, ja. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   I feel like I have been consistent in terms 
of what was...   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR 
MONTANA: 
 
 And 
I 
think 
my 
earlier 
response 
...[intervenes]  
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 27 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m.  In terms of what was in your 
mind. 
MR MONTANA:   What was in my mind and what would 
ultimately happen. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   But this letter is specific.  And Chair, just 
to help Mr Soni.  I am saying in the last paragraph.  You 
see, because – and let me – and I am addressing the 
second part, Mr Soni, of what you are saying. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   Mr Soni – you will recall, Chair, and why I 
am not – I do not want to leave this issue hanging the way 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   ...Mr Soni has summarised it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Ms Ngoye was saying she was been 
targeted and even when she was here at the Commission 
she said:  I am being fired or being suspended – even now 
because I am the corruption pastor(?).  I am being 
20 
victimised and everything.  I mean, she mentioned a lot of 
things.  Chair, I – something that I do not accept but if you 
look at the last paragraph on the first page it(?) say and I 
am describing what happened on the 18 t h.   
 
He – that is – it may – in light of you daring me 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 28 of 178 
 
to request you to fire me, I in my capacity as the Group 
CEO.  Now that sentence continues.  It captures what 
happened on the 18 t h, not on the 19 t h but again, Chair, for 
me is not a big issue.  The principle is one where she is 
fired and I indicate the reason why.  So this would have 
been – if we use a different word, it will be the – what do 
you call – the last straw, probably.  I think let us just use 
that word.   
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
Well, 
actually, 
I 
was 
thinking 
...[intervenes]  
10 
MR MONTANA:   That was the last straw but if, let us say, 
she sat(?) with me, she did not then.  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   She did not even then knew at that 
particular day. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   Would she have been fired? 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR MONTANA:   I think Chair that is still a question. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   You cannot – unfortunately, you cannot 
speculate about it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I will offer you something and you must 
give me your comment.  In the light of how strongly you felt 
against people whom you viewed as being part of the 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 29 of 178 
 
campaign that you talked about in your email and in the 
light of the fact that you viewed her as part of that 
campaign and in the light of the fact that in your own mind 
you had made it – up your mind to fire such people.  The 
probabilities that she was going to be fired what happened 
may just have brought forward what was going to happen in 
all probability.  We are not saying certainly.  
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   On...  Would you think that is fair? 
MR MONTANA:   No, it is fair.  It was the probability 
10 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   ...it was very high ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   It was very high, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   That she be fired, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
MR 
MONTANA:   I think my mind was very clear 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   ...on that issue, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Okay.  I think ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That resolves ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 30 of 178 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Then, Mr Montana, at paragraph 21, 
she continues and if I can just summarise it.  We do not 
need to deal with it in detail because I think it is agreed 
that 
they 
approach 
the 
chairperson 
this 
time, 
not 
Mr Buthelezi but Mr Molefe.  He asked you to reconsider.  
You – the determinations were ended but they were then 
put on suspension.  That is correct?  Both she and 
Mr Dingiswayo. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair.  It is correct but I think the 
– she was not there.  Let me just share with the 
10 
Commission, Chair.  We had a scheduled board meeting.  It 
was meant to start at ten.  When we arrived, of course, 
they did not raise the issue with the board.  They lobbied 
Mr Molefe.   
 
So they raised – they took those letters to 
Mr Molefe and say:  We have been fired and everything.  
From myself and Mr Molefe – Mr Popo Molefe.  We then 
had a discussion before the board.  In fact, we delayed the 
board meeting for about two hours.  This was a big fight 
between myself and Mr Molefe and I ask him:  Why are you 
20 
a shop steward of these employees?   
 
Employees were being suspended for being 
disciplined in this company.  You do not speak for them.  
Why – then we had and we were holding the board meeting 
for a long time.  We then reached a compromise.  And I 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 31 of 178 
 
said no it is fine.  I am going to bring these people back 
but I am going to then discipline them.  So I then asked our 
legal department – our ER team to prepare letters.   
 
The one was for me to sign the dismissal.  The 
other one was then to give them letters suspending them 
pending a disciplinary action.  So we did that Chair.  So it 
was not a meeting where the chair came and – we had a 
big fight for two hours.  And part of the issue that I was 
conveying to Mr Molefe that you see these employees – 
she is very mean(?).  Precisely because you are standing 
10 
behind her.   
 
So all these wrong things are now that we have 
a talk but as long as I am CEO, rest assured, I am going to 
act against these people.  If they do not follow lawful 
instructions from me as their immediate boss I am going to 
act...  So the compromise was that it is fine.  I said to him 
there is no way that I can take them back without them 
then facing the charges, as it were, Chair.   
 
And that is what I did and by the time I left 
PRASA these people were in fact still under suspension 
20 
and Ms Ngoye more specifically she had charges brought 
against her including this one of insubordination, including 
many other charges, including the Siyagena matter.  So 
they were all under – if I remember well, for example, a 
disciplinary case was set, the date was set, and I think that 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 32 of 178 
 
the council... 
 
I think if I remember well, the name was – the 
name came and ran away from me again.  Now a date was 
set Chair – PRASA.  And what happened Chair after I have 
left is ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Could she have been legally represented 
at such a disciplinary hearing? 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, is that so? 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay. 
MR MONTANA:   And I would not be – I would put – unless 
if a legal representative would say:  We want the Group 
CEO.  There are instances where, for example, whether in 
the disciplinary case or at the CCMA, I have been called.  
There is Kasim.  The senior counsel, Kasim. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, Advocate Naseer Kasim. 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair.  It was the person who was 
going to preside over that particular matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, to preside as chairperson? 
20 
MR MONTANA:   As chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, I thought that you were saying that 
Ms Ngoye was going to be legally represented. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no she was entitled to have that, 
Chair. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 33 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, she was entitled to have that? 
MR MONTANA:   She was entitled. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It was not arbitration or was it a CCMA 
thing? 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair.  No, no it was still – you will 
recall Chair I withdrew the letters. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Internally? 
MR 
MONTANA: 
 
 
It 
was 
an 
internal 
disciplinary 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   Now what happened Chair is that after I 
have left ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MONTANA:   ...and you remember the R 57 million, it is 
a big to – R58 million to Siyagena matter.  I speak about it 
during my ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   It is a big issue, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   Now after I have left, what happened, I 
20 
think that PRASA brought in Norton Rose, the law firm. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MONTANA:   And they declared everyone including 
people that were suspended in the organisation – some of 
them for serious transgressions, Chair. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 34 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   Some of them even about money.  People 
have stolen money in the company. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   Now everyone was on this bandwagon 
that no they were fired by Montana and people that have 
got nothing to do with me who do not report to me 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MONTANA:   ...show(?) them who are rear seats(?) 
10 
who are charged because they have been caught with their 
hands in the cookie jar, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   And they would return(?) all of them on a 
must stay ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   ...came back.  So, and then those that 
remained were in fact suspended Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   So you can see that in an organisation 
20 
where there is a battle in the leadership ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   ...particularly between the chair and the 
CEO ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 35 of 178 
 
MR MONTANA:   ...you have that kind of a thing where the 
organisation is split in between.  And what is the result?  
The result is that the operations of the business, the moral 
of staff, the discipline collapses.  And that is what 
happened in PRASA, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes.  Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Just on that point Chairperson and 
this is just for the record, not to place a dispute.  In the 
last sentence of paragraph 21 Mr Ngoye says that: 
“After the suspension was lifted, the acting 
10 
Group 
CEO, 
Mr 
Nathi 
Khena, 
found 
no 
evidence of misconduct...” 
 
Now I am just placing that on record.  I am not – 
I – it is just in relation to the point you made Chairperson 
about whether there was an inquiry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I want to put on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MONTANA:   There was no an inquiry. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
20 
MR MONTANA:   And if somebody is charged for irregular 
approval of R 58 million and many other transgressions – 
one of the charges related to – because when she acted in 
my position in that December when I was on leave, it was 
not only the SA Fence & Gate matter that she approved.  
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 36 of 178 
 
There are a whole range of other matters, Chair, that were 
irregularly approved by her.  It was part of the charge 
sheet. 
 
Now you cannot say because Mr Montana is 
gone.  The board has got an obligation to make sure that 
they verify and check and say we think that this one is – it 
stands, this one does not stand, Chair.  And I think that if 
you look at the report of the Public Protector, you will 
actually 
see, 
Chair, 
that 
the 
people 
who 
were 
not 
disciplined at PRASA, I – the heart of what the Public 
10 
Protector raised.   
 
I do not agree with the Public Protector ’s report 
but if you look at what has happened, Chair, because the 
report came after I have left.  So they – matters in the 
Public Protector ’s report to dismiss and a whole range of 
other 
employees 
and 
then 
those 
that 
are 
actually 
mentioned in the report – I mean, let us take one good 
example.  I am not going – just to mention it.   
 
The matter we discussed about the Primedia 
issue.  Who was central to it?  It is Mr Holele.  And that 
20 
matter is raised in the Public Protector ’s report.  Who – 
there 
is 
the 
matter 
of 
the 
brand 
leadership. 
 
The 
appointment of brand leadership.  Who is central to it?  It 
is Mr Holele.  It is in the Public Protector ’s report.  He is 
not being disciplined. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 37 of 178 
 
 
If 
you 
look 
at 
the 
Werksmans’ 
report, 
it 
mentioned the people who were part of the adjudication.  It 
mentioned Mr Oliver and Mr Holele and Ms Ngoye, all of 
them in that order.  Chair, those are the people who 
remained at PRASA.  So yes she makes that statement but 
knowing and following up on all the details, Chair, it never 
happened.  It was basically what you call – I used 
interview shop stewards, what they call no they used the 
word buti-buti-scheme.   
 
So it was basically one of their own who is being 
10 
brought in but to justify bringing her in and other people, 
they brought in a whole range of other people, some of the 
faces serious transgressions.  They never faced, Chair.  If 
this Commission were to review, for example Chair, the 
charges for some of the people, you will literally be 
shocked that they were brought back. 
 
So we – the board says we want to fight 
corruption.  The board says we want to fight improper 
conduct.  But fifty percent of the people that they regard as 
their own people are not subjected to these kinds of things, 
20 
Chair.  And I think it is a separate issue.  I agree with 
Mr Soni.  Let us ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   ...but there was not a proper inquiry that 
you say ...[intervenes]  
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 38 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR 
MONTANA: 
 
 
We 
brought(?) 
exercises 
fiduciary 
responsibilities in the – matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  No, no that is fine.  No, those 
matters, one would go into them but nevertheless it might 
be good to just have a look, for example, at the charge 
sheet against Mr Ngoye in the light of what you say 
Mr Montana.  But also it would also just be helpful to see 
whether Mr Khena in 
concluding that there was no 
evidence of misconduct on the part of Ms Ngoye, whether 
10 
he prepared any document that showed that he had applied 
his mind to what was there.   
 
And whether he had been furnished - he secured 
for example, statements from people who may have had 
information relation to the charges because if – obviously, 
if it was something that went along the lines:  Oh, they 
were charged by Montana, so there cannot be a case.  That 
would not be acceptable.  But if there was a proper 
application of mind to look at what evidence there – what 
witnesses have to say, were witnesses interviewed.   
20 
 
And one would also have thought it would have 
been important to get Mr Montana’s version because he is 
the one who made the decision to dismiss.  To say, before 
finally saying but there is no basis for charges these 
people, to say:  What do you have to say?  And what about 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 39 of 178 
 
this?  What about that?  That kind of thing. 
 
I mean, from what Mr Montana has said, it seems 
like he was not asked for anything.  Is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, I was no never asked. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  So ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   But Chair, just for the record.  The... 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MONTANA:   Part of my annexures I deal with those 
charges ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Those charges, yes. 
10 
MR 
MONTANA: 
 
 
...for 
the 
Commission 
to 
see 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   ...to show how serious those charges 
were. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that is fine.  So it would be good 
to see what Mr Khena had or what he prepared which led 
him to the conclusion because if what Mr Montana is 
20 
saying, it may be that PRASA, up to a certain level, had 
become factionalised, as it were. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Say, there are those who are Montana’s 
ones and then there are those who are the chairperson’s 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 40 of 178 
 
people.  But we do not know but that – he gives that 
impression that it may have been that situation.  Okay 
alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, I see it is twenty past 
eleven. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh.  Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   We could go on for another ten 
minutes and then break for tea because we have started 
late. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Should we – we can go – we can take 
10 
the break now or we can take it at half-past eleven.  It 
depends on whether from your side ...[intervenes]  
ADV 
VAS 
SONI 
SC: 
 
 
Yes, 
I 
just 
want 
to 
finish 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...the matters ...[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   ...this part of the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Finish it, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   And then we will ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, that is fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Montana, and then at paragraphs 
20 
22, 23 and 24, Ms Ngoye raises different questions which 
have come about Prodigy and Swifambo and so on.  We 
have dealt with most.   
MR MONTANA:   Yes, Chair.  Except that I still want to put 
on record, especially in relation to 23.  In relation to 23 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 41 of 178 
 
because I think you will recall, we closed on the basis of 
me discussing Swifambo, Werksmans, and other issues.  
And I think you will recall my point.  I just want to put it on 
record. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes? 
MR MONTANA:   Because here Ms Ngoye says – she 
describes the court, the high court and the supreme court 
of appeal on Swifambo.  And in my affidavit, Chair, and 
other papers, you will recall, I said I want those members 
of the Bid Adjudication Committee to be summonsed to 
10 
explain their roles because that is where – the Bid 
Evaluation Committee and the Bid Adjudication Committee.  
Those are the people who gives cause, Chair.   
 
They must each one explain under oath:  I gave 
Swifambo five.  I gave another company ten.  Okay?  
Because it is easy to say it happened during the tenure.  
You know one thing I hear Chair so often?  I read the 
Werksmans report.  We hear it happened under the tenure 
of Mr Montana.  I do not want that Chair.  I want to hear 
somebody say I gave company X a score of ten at the 
20 
instruction of Mr Montana.  But they cannot say that in the 
tenure of Mr Montana.   
 
I mean, it is a – you are not – you are basically 
throwing my name but they are not linking me to the crime 
scene.  So I must have this thing hanging over my head as 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 42 of 178 
 
a cloud that it happened under mister...  So you can see 
here Chair that all those three things that are being 
mentioned, the support one thing.   
 
The conclusion is there under 24 because the 
issue is to show that Mr Moodley who was involved – I 
argued and showed for example that when we dealt with 
Strawberry Worx that Ms Ngoye signed the actual contract.  
It is part of my annexures Chair. 
 
I 
show 
also 
about 
twelve 
emails 
between 
Mr Chauke under Ms Ngoye and Strawberry Worx.  Now the 
10 
big question Chair.  Why if there was such a cooperation 
between Ms Ngoye and the team with Strawberry, okay?  
They did not know Mr Moodley at that time.  They only 
knew him – they only knew about Mr Moodley when 
Mr Molefe joined PRASA. 
 
So you can see Chair that we have to ask 
difficult question or else people will then go home with 
murder just making accusations that board members – do I 
– Chair can read 22 and go into details but I do not think it 
will help this particular process because in my affidavit, in 
20 
my Public Protector review application I deal with it, in 
fact, with each of those details there. 
 
But I do not think this is the time.  I am just 
simply saying, I just want to put on my record that 22, 23, 
24 I reject as they stand Chair. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 43 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, it is just a pity that the challenges 
which happened in regard to affidavit happened because I 
would have preferred a situation where if you are dealing 
with paragraphs 22, 23, 24 you deal with them fully 
including whatever documents you have so that when one 
looks at certain things at the evidence at your response to 
Ms Ngoye’s evidence and allegations one gets the full 
picture but I accept that we are where we are. 
 
In the end what may happen is that one will read 
what you have to say about paragraph 22 to 24 somewhere 
10 
and then somewhere else finds something else that 
belongs here as well but I think that is fine.  We are just 
doing the best we can in the circumstances. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, can I say for the record? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
MR MONTANA:   That those issues are in fairness not a 
response in detail. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   I dealt with in my affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   I have interacted with the team Chair for 
information last week. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   We have discussed my affidavit.  We had 
agreed that even sent on Friday a revised affidavit on 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 44 of 178 
 
some of those issues.  We were meant to meet on Friday to 
then sort out the annexures in relation to each. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   We have agreed tomorrow I think Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   So that what we will do.  So I think Chair, 
they are not being lost. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   I am just putting on record ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   ...my position so that we can deal with 
them and the supporting evidence on each of these 
matters. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that is fine.  I am tempted to say 
something now.  I am going to say it.  Mr Montana, you 
have a right to say nothing if you do not want to say 
anything.  You have a right to say something.  There was – 
I was speaking with the legal team of somebody who was 
reluctant to testify in the absence of his counsel in the 
Commission and I used you as an example.  
20 
 
I said:  Well, Mr Montana comes here.  He does 
not bring any lawyers.  He has had concerns with the 
Commission.  He has articulated his concerns but he 
decided to take part in the proceedings.  And I said he is 
telling his side of the story and I doubt that if he was 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 45 of 178 
 
asked he would say he is not heard fairly.  I think he would 
probably concede he has been heard fairly.  [laughs] 
MR MONTANA:   No, indeed Chair.  Chair, I am quite – 
there are still issues that I will still raise in the process. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   And I think Chair when the I got the 
summons from the Commission I reflected deeply(?).  What 
is the role of the Commission?  What do you want to 
achieve?   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   And I have used strong words Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   I think that if the Commission, for 
example, on the media side on the thing.  You know, I have 
criticised. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR MONTANA:   And Chair, I still have some of those on 
record in my affidavit but I have made a decision.  I will 
respect the Commission, I respect the Chair and I will go 
there without fear or favour.  I have put forward my views 
20 
on these issues.  And Chair, I do – I prefer to write my own 
affidavits.   
 
And then I there I do consult with some of the 
best legal minds and they will tell me do not say this, do 
not say that.  And there are times when I go rouge and I 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 46 of 178 
 
say no I am not going to follow what they have said Chair.  
So I do seek legal advice Chair.  But I think the story of 
PRASA is my story Chair.  There was no PRASA.   
 
I was given a mandate by government to form 
PRASA and it was one of the – and one of the things – it 
was not just forming PRASA.  They said:  Look, our 
railways are falling apart.  Let us have an intervention.  Let 
us have an investment programme.  Let us modernise so 
that our rail can match with railways all over the world.   
 
Now that story Chair, I had to go through 
10 
difficulties.  You know that Cabinet made its decision in 
December 2004.  We only formed PRASA five years down 
the line but the decision to restructure the railways was 
made by government in 2000.  So it took an entire ten 
years Chair even before to this process.  So I was a 
central person into this.  And Chair I will be honest.  It 
saddens me when I look at the PRASA I left in 2015 and 
the PRASA I see today. 
 
I am not saying it was a perfect organisation.  
The railways were still facing a lot of challenges but as I 
20 
say in my affidavit.  We are on a transition towards 
creating and delivering a modern train system for the 
country and I do not think anyone can tell that story than 
me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 47 of 178 
 
MR MONTANA:   And that is why Chair I wrote to you on 
July 2019. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   Because I said I want to tell the story 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I must just say because you have said 
that before and I have never said this.  I do not have a 
recollection of having seen that letter but it has been two 
years.  Maybe I did and I have forgotten but I do not know 
whether you got any response.  I think you never got a 
10 
response. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair.  In fact, I wrote on the 
twenty – I think it was on the 26 t h.  On the 2 n d of August, 
the Commission responded.  We had a meeting at the 
Commission’s offices.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR MONTANA:   And then at the end of August, I gave you 
a first draft ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   ...of my affidavit. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   2019, you say? 
MR MONTANA:   2019, Chair.  That is why ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, I thought you said 2020. 
MR MONTANA:   That is why Chair I said in my statement I 
have been trying to come to your Commission.  It has taken 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 48 of 178 
 
me two years. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   But because we then on the journey had a 
big fight Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   ...about what I should say in my affidavit, 
what I should not say. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR MONTANA:   But the principle of it, Chair.  I have made 
a decision. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   I have consulted with my family. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   And said look – and some of the leaders 
have 
said: 
 
Look, 
we 
think 
you 
should 
go 
to 
the 
Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
MR MONTANA:   And I said no I believe the Commission is 
pursuing a predetermined agenda and all of those things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, h’m. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   But they said we think go there.  And I 
said Chair if the Commission treats me bad, if they – if 
Mr Soni treats me badly and everything I will just carry my 
bags and say:  Chair, I know I have been summonsed but I 
am – yes I do not think my story is being heard.  So far 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 49 of 178 
 
this is my fourth day, I think, Chair, the Commission has 
been very open, I must comment that, you have given quite 
a lot of assurances on the issues that we need to discuss 
and the big issue for me, Chair, was the acceptance of my 
affidavit because at some stage I got a letter from the 
Commission saying you can come and speak without the 
affidavit and I said that is unheard of, I will never, even if 
you put me into prison, I never testified without my story.  
Chair, this affidavit …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, no …[intervenes] 
10 
MR MONTANA:   It is my own response and I am saying, 
Chair …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Your story. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes and I am saying, Chair – and you will 
see when it read it, Chair, and this will be my point.  I am 
saying at the beginning of my affidavit because, for me, 
when I asked why should I go after the ANC said all of us 
must go before the Commission, I then said, Chair, that 
this would by my report-back.   
The nation gave us a mandate about these railways 
20 
and, Chair, it is big, not because for any other reason, 
because I said I will use this Commission to give a report-
back to the nation on the important work.   
And I come here walking tall, Chair, for me I heard 
people talking about correspondence and all of those 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 50 of 178 
 
things and maybe, Chair, I listed to the President last 
week, I said when I come here I am going to make a joke 
and say Chair, can we put all of these accusations against 
me behind us because that is what the President says.  But 
I am here, Chair, I am here. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   I want to be held accountable in this 
forum, that is also one important thing. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   But I think the story of South African 
10 
Railways and the transformation that it embarked on, not 
everything about correspondence, where I have made 
mistakes, Chair, let them be pointed out. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   But to project this thing that there was 
this grand corruption and all of those things, it is so false, 
I do not share that view, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, no, no, that is fine, I thought I 
would just say that because I was tempted to say so but let 
me say it and give you the freedom not to say anything or 
20 
to say something.   
But, look, Mr Montana, as we Commission, we – I 
think we try our best, we take our work seriously, we are 
acting in good faith.   
We might be I misunderstood sometimes but we are 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 51 of 178 
 
doing the best we can and we accept that people will have 
different views about our work in the Commission and we 
hold no grudges, we say it is fine, you know, it is a public 
process and we just keep on trying to do our best.  That is 
all and …[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   Thank you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I am happy that you made the 
decision to participate and as I said when we started this 
morning, you have – since you started appearing you have 
been very cooperative, you have been availing yourself 
10 
even at short notice to appear, so we appreciate that 
cooperation. 
MR MONTANA:   I am generally uncooperative, Chair, but 
respecting the Chair, I think, Chair, that – ja. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   But you are a getting a true reflection of 
who I am, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   When I read the newspapers, the way I 
am described, I always ask is this me they are talking 
20 
about?  I do not think my mom or my dad, when they read 
about what is being said about me, by some of these 
publications, Chair.  They said all sorts of terrible things, 
but we have got to rise above all of those and I hope that 
in future or the media in particular, will understand that 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 52 of 178 
 
their job is not only the so-called speaking truth to power, 
they also have got the duty to inform, to enable citizens to 
be 
able 
to 
make 
informed 
decisions 
and 
participate 
effectively.   
Now if the media mislead them, project others and 
take sides, then we are going to have actually in their 
minds democracy, Chair, we want the media that first and 
foremost must understand even before they speak truth to 
power they have a duty to inform and educate. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   That is an integral part of the thing.  So 
this notion where you paid what the late Edward cite, the 
Palestinian intellectual when he delivered the – read 
lectures about speaking truth to power, you know, the 
media is very excellent in doing that, Chair, where you 
select …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And I want to stop you now. 
MR MONTANA:   The ramification, so speak truth to power 
that informs and educates. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   And I think that is important for me, 
Chair.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine.  Let us take the – 
or were you done or were you not done, Mr... 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I just need to ask two questions. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 53 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV 
VAS 
SONI 
SC: 
 And 
I know 
we 
are 
past 
it 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, that is fine, that fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But I am just hoping that will hasten 
things. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Just in regard to Swifambo, Mr 
Montana, because you know all the allegations that have 
been made.  I want to ask you, Mr Makhensa Mabunda, you 
10 
have dealt with him before in your evidence.  He was a 
transactional adviser on the Swifambo contract? 
MR MONTANA:   No, not …[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  He was not to PRASA? 
MR MONTANA:   No. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Definitely, not. 
MR MONTANA:   Not, Chair, no. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay.  May I then ask you to please 
look at bundle C1, SS4, page 214.133? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I did not know you were going to 
20 
refer us to another bundle, maybe we should take the 
adjournment. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Oh, absolutely, Chair, yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja, let us take the adjournment.  I 
thought it was just going to be quick-quick. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 54 of 178 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, no, it is just two passages from 
that bundle. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, no, let us take the tea break, 
it is twenty five to twelve, let us resume at ten to twelve. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   We adjourn. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  As you please, Chair.  Mr Montana, 
10 
can I refer you to the Swifambo contract.   
Now you know that there has been a finding by the 
High Court and the Supreme Court of Appeal that the 
contract was at least irregular, in certain respects corrupt.  
I just want to refer you to what Mr Auswell Mashaba was 
the Chairperson of the Swifambo Consortium.   
Now 
Swifambo 
Rail 
has 
been 
placed 
under 
liquidation, you know that, provincially liquidation and if 
you look a page – sorry, let me start that the reference is 
correct, bundle C1, SS4, page 2141.33 and what is said in 
20 
respect of note 25 that I am going to read and just going to 
ask your comment on it.   
Now let me just explain what this is.  In support of 
his 
application, 
a 
more 
recent 
application 
for 
why 
Swifambo had to be placed under liquidation, Mr Mashaba 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 55 of 178 
 
filed an affidavit and this is part of the affidavit and he 
says in note 25.1: 
“Shortly after Swifambo Rail Leasing was awarded 
the 
locomotive 
tender 
by 
PRASA 
Mr 
Auswell 
Mashaba and Mr Makhensa Mabunda be approach 
by two individuals who held themselves out to be 
fundraisers with the African National Congress.  
The two persons were Maria Gomez and attorney 
George Sibelo.” 
Do you know Mrs Gomez?  I think you talked about her on 
10 
some occasion. 
MR MONTANA:   I know Ms Gomez and I know Mr George 
Sibelo. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  You know him as well. 
MR MONTANA:   I know both of them, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay.  Now this is what Mr Mashaba 
continues to say.  Says: 
“Under pressure from MG...” 
That is Mr Sibelo – oh sorry, Ms Gomez and GS, that is Mr 
Sibelo. 
20 
“...Mr Mashaba, on behalf of Leasing agreed to 
arrange for a donation to the ANC of an amount of 
R88 million and which would be dealt with as 
follows, he would receive a handling fee of about 
R8 million.” 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 56 of 178 
 
Now I just want to, before continuing, ask you, are you 
aware of this allegation by Mr Mashaba? 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, I became aware of the 80 
million – not even 88, 80 million that was mentioned in the 
media.  This came from the affidavit of Mr Popo Molefe, in 
the Swifambo matter. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   That is when I first heard of it but 
previously I was aware that Mr Mashaba was talking to the 
ANC, from what he told me but not to this level of detail, 
10 
Chair, no. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  When did Mr Mashaba indicate to you 
that he had been talking to the ANC? 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, I think it was around that time.  
I would assume that this was – this should have been in 
2014, Chair, if my memory serves me well. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Okay, so this now you became aware 
– was this while you – certainly you were at PRASA at that 
time? 
MR MONTANA:   No, sorry, Chair, sorry, Chair.  I am two 
20 
things, I am saying that – I am saying two things in one, let 
me correct so that we can understand.  I am saying when I 
heard this 80 million story, the affidavit of Mr Popo Molefe 
on the Swifambo matter, it happened in 2016, but left – so 
that was a year later, after I have left PRASA.  What I am 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 57 of 178 
 
saying, that the discussion that Mr – and I am assuming, I 
do not – I am assuming this – you are saying it comes from 
the affidavit of …[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  It is Mr Mashaba. 
MR MONTANA:   Mr Mashaba.  So I am saying that at the 
time when he was busy with this interaction I was aware of 
them and that was in – that should have been 2013, 2014, 
Chair.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  This is while you were still at PRASA 
in 2014. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   Ja, no, Chair, but not 80 million, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, no, no, I understand but you were 
aware …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, so what you are saying is to 
your recollection around 2013/2014, while you were still at 
PRASA you were aware of  - based on what Mr Mashaba 
told you, you were aware that – or he said he was talking 
to the ANC, is that right? 
MR MONTANA:   Ja, that he was approached by the ANC. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes about the donation or something. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   For him to make a donation. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh okay, alright.  And you say in 2016 
…[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   Not 2016.  But, Chair, we did not discuss, 
I did not know the details. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 58 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no, I accept that you say you did 
not know the details but I am now going to Mr Molefe’s 
affidavit. 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   When that was in the media you became 
aware of that. 
MR MONTANA:   I became aware, Chair, and then I also 
obtained the affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   When after I have read the affidavit I was 
10 
actually shocked with the things he was saying, that is 
when I applied to be a friend of the court. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   But I will deal with that, Chair, when it is 
the right time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  So this is what I want to ask you.  
When you heard that - this is in 2014, when you heard that 
the ANC had approached Mr Mashaba and that, I take it, 
was linked to the Swifambo contract? 
20 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, no.  You know, Chair, can I – I 
do not know, can I take – can I ask Mr Soni that I perhaps 
answer this question now but in a much greater detail, 
Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 59 of 178 
 
MR MONTANA:   Just to have the …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes, no, no… 
MR MONTANA:   Is it fine, Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay, do that, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Because I address the issue in two ways, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   Let me start with the ANC fundraising 
issue. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   And because, Chair, I mention in my 
affidavit, I was drawn to ANC fundraising activities and in 
my affidavit I deal with that at great length, Chair.   
And let me be honest, Chair, I listened to the 
testimony last week of the ANC President, Mr Ramaphosa, 
that contrasts very strongly with what I say, Chair.   
The ANC worked in a particular way and as a result 
the ANC ended being defrauded because a lot of people 
would come and say we want to raise money in the name of 
20 
the movement and they will say the movement, the ANC, 
referring to themselves.  And most of them, that money 
does not even end up in the ANC.   
When I saw this statement, Chair, I tried to meet 
with the Treasurer-General of the ANC, at that time Dr 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 60 of 178 
 
Zweli Mkhize, whom I have met.   
I have worked with him in fact very closely and I 
described that in the affidavit and I have met with Dr Zweli 
Mkhize at the home of Maria Gomez.  We discussed ANC 
finances and all of those things there.   
Money, Chair, Ms Gomez is a businesswoman, 
involved not – Ms Gomez was never involved with PRASA, 
was never involved with Swifambo, was never involved in 
the locomotive tender, she was a businesswoman.  I knew 
her and her husband very well, Chair, through our ANC 
10 
activities. 
 
So, Chair, I would be involved in many ANC 
activities and the unfortunate thing, I hear the leadership 
of the ANC will come and say you know, this is the work of 
some people.   
No, it is a way of life in the ANC, Chair, there is not 
a single state owned enterprise that the ANC has not 
approached, Chair.  Because I was a CEO …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry, just repeat that? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I want to repeat it and maybe it will 
20 
get on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It is just that I did not hear it properly. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I am saying the African National 
Congress approached state owned enterprises, it had its 
own conferences, it had a special section, deployed cadres 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 61 of 178 
 
including those that – the President was correct when he 
said not each and every person appointed in government or 
SOEs was appointed because he was a deployed cadre but 
one they are there, Chair, you will see they will be 
regarded as deployed cadres and there is a table there in 
the ANC conference.   
They are approached by the ANC either as an 
organisation or by individual leaders of the ANC or by 
people 
who 
came 
that 
were 
raising 
money 
for 
the 
movement.  Half of that money probably does not go to the 
10 
– and I will explain why I am taking you through this, Chair 
– half of that money does not even make – get through to 
ANC. 
 
Now the Swifambo contract, Chair, was never a 
corrupt contract, it will never be a corrupt contract and, Mr 
Soni, I will deal with the issue as well about the – you had 
the liquidators here and I watched when the Commission 
interviewed the liquidators.   
Chair, I was in stitches including when one of the – 
Mr Sacks, who was in – who interviewed this thing, he says 
20 
and it is there also in the transcript, where he acknowledge 
that I know nothing about this tender or this transaction.  
So the ANC approached these people.   
The ANC would approach the CEOs of these state 
owned 
enterprises, 
public 
entities, 
asking 
for 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 62 of 178 
 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   And most of them, even if not maybe all 
of them, most of them would have been recommended by 
its deployment committee, I would suspect. 
MR MONTANA:   Who the…? 
CHAIRPERSON: 
 
 
The 
CEOs 
of 
the 
state 
owned 
…[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   No, not, Chair.  I think not all of them, 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, I am saying most, maybe most. 
10 
MR 
MONTANA: 
 
 
Probably, 
no, 
Chair, 
because 
…[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Not even that, ja.  Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I think – I think, in fact, you know, 
when – I was listening to the President very carefully. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   And I think that – I think that – and I went 
as part of my review and I wrote about it on social media.  
The ANC leadership wants to assist this Commission.   
They should not try and put blame on people.  They 
20 
must come and say we want to say to the country there is a 
certain way in which we did things.  These things happened 
before the – even the law on funding for political parties, 
the way we funded our conferences, the way in which in 
which we – prior to major conferences of the ANC, there 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 63 of 178 
 
are tables being sold and all of those things.  CEOs of 
companies, they are either buying these tables, Chair, or 
that they will get suppliers to that business to come and 
buy tables.   
People who come, Chair, are all leaders, even for 
their own businesses and I described that at great length 
in my affidavit.   
So I think – and I am a member of the ANC, Chair, I 
have been a member of the ANC – I joined when I was a 
student at Mamelodi High School.  I remain a member of 
10 
the ANC, I have served that organisation with loyalty and 
probably will die as a member of the African National 
Congress.   
But, Chair, this thing of trying to talk about state 
capture, these things belongs to Zuma, it is false.  The 
ANC is a way of life and if – and I thought we lost an 
opportunity when the President was here.   
The ANC should have said there are certain things 
we used to do as a party, as an organisation, and we thing, 
with hindsight, when we reflect on where are country is 
20 
going, we are looking at the culture that is developing, the 
culture of corruption, we think that because we are the 
leading – the governing party, because of the issue of 
incumbency.   
Yes, you will find that people who get involved in 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 64 of 178 
 
this in one way or the member are members of the ANC.  
But not all of them, some of them, Chair, when they got 
positions, they become even very close to the ANC.  
 People who know nothing about the ANC, who has 
never worked for the ANC who most of them, some of them 
– I mean, I see people that I regard as sell-outs, in my own 
language, Chair.  I think you see where I stand in the 
political terrain, Chair.   
So these are people who become – either they get 
appointed to positions, some of them buy their own 
10 
positions, they sell even some of these things.   
Now if you go back to Polokwane Conference of the 
ANC, the President made a joke, Chair, that you seem to 
know more about the ANC issues that are there.  I want to 
link – I am coming to link it to Swifambo, Chair, but I want 
to deal with the bigger context because for me this issue – 
when I saw Popo Molefe’s affidavit and say 80 million was 
given to the ANC, I then had a big struggle.   
I was outside of PRASA, I have worked with the 
ANC, I have worked with the Treasurer-General, I then had 
20 
to -  I wanted to find out this 80 million, what was it all 
about, where is coming from because I did not know, Chair, 
it was not like we paid Swifambo 80 million to pay to the 
ANC, there was never such a thing.   
Auswell was approached and he asked me, Chair, 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 65 of 178 
 
and say hey, do you think it is a good idea, Auswell is 
involved in many other businesses, Chair, he is an 
engineer.  He says …[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I am sorry Mr – just for the record, 
when you talk about Auswell, you are talking about Mr 
Mashaba. 
MR MONTANA:   Mashaba.  Mashaba, ja.  Sorry, Mr Soni.  
And he says …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But also I must just say, I know that you 
said you would link what you were saying with this issue 
10 
but I am not sure whether you stopped on the way.  I have 
a feeling that you …[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   No, I have not stopped, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I have a feeling that you were telling a 
certain story and then …[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, I want to deal with the ANC. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR MONTANA:   Linked to Swifambo and everything. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR MONTANA:   But I want to deal with the – start at a 
20 
broader level and narrow it down. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR 
MONTANA: 
 
 
Because 
last 
week 
you 
had 
the 
presentation, I think the President of the ANC, I am not 
talking about the President, the ANC was here last week.  
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 66 of 178 
 
And I want to say, Chair, without any fear, that what the 
ANC told the Commission can never be true, Chair.   
Those of us who were in the public service before 
we were even CEOs, we know the ANC has a particular – 
had a particular way of doing things.   
The ANC has come to a correct determination and 
this thing does not start in 2007, Chair, because Jacob 
Zuma is the President.  If you look at the conference of the 
ANC, the President spoke about a diagnostic that was done 
at NASREC.   
10 
No, Chair.  Former President Kgalema Motlanthe 
when he was the Secretary General of the ANC, he actually 
gave – he dealt with this issue at length in Polokwane, he 
gave a detailed report and this report, he was actually 
warning us against these things and say we are beginning 
to see a disturbing trend. 
CHAIRPERSON:   I actually seem to think – remember from 
the media at the time that the reports of the media of the 
report he had made in Polokwane was said to have been – 
well, I am not using the words that was used but the 
20 
impression I got was that he had been brutally honest to 
the organisation about challenges and so on. 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I agree with that, I was at 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 67 of 178 
 
Polokwane, the deployed cadre, I was not representing a 
branch. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This information is information I get from 
the media. 
MR MONTANA:   Well, Chair, if it is not …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Any knowledge I have is just based on 
what I get from the public, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, it is in – sorry, Chair, it is in my 
affidavit and I say in my affidavit, the ANC is such a 
massive organisation, it has got nothing to fear, it is an 
10 
organisation 
of 
the 
people 
and 
it 
can 
say 
to 
this 
Commission and assist our country, we think may have 
created, in the way we did things, we may have created 
conditions for corruption, we may have created conditions 
for some of the things that are there.   
It does not make the ANC accused number one, it is 
basically that it is reflecting honestly.  Today you have 
leaders of the ANC who come because some of them, they 
are not in government but they will take advantage of the 
standing of the ANC in society, even in SOEs, they will 
20 
come and approach us and try to bid and push for the 
interest of businesses where they involved in, this in the 
name of the ANC, to get money, Chair.  And always the 
movement, the movement, the movement.   
So I think that when the ANC was here last week, 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 68 of 178 
 
they must tell us each other, Chair.  You said at some 
stage there will be a time when we have to face each other 
and tell each other the truth and I think the time has 
arrived, Chair, that the ANC hopefully it will still come back 
here and I think when we deal with my affidavit, Chair, I 
deal with what I believe the way the ANC operated.  Chair, 
the ANC, I worked with it, they will give me a list of 
suppliers that the ANC owed and say we think you must 
assist us in this way.   
They were not asking because I am Lucky from 
10 
Mamelodi, they were doing that because they say hey, you 
have got networks, you have got influence, use it to help 
us.  And, Chair, no one – I heard again the President says 
– and Popo Molefe said the same thing before you, Chair, 
said we do not want public funds to be used for party 
political activities.  Chair, it is not true. 
You know, when I listen, Chair, and I just walk up 
and down in my room when I listen to these type of things.  
When the ANC organises events in January 8 statement, 
the leadership of the ANC said to Minister Dipuo Peters, 
20 
we do not have a transport plan, we want Lucky to come 
and help us, PRASA to help us organise this thing.  Who 
pays for these things?  And she is not told by one person 
in a corner, she is told by the leadership of the ANC when 
they make preparations, Chair. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 69 of 178 
 
So I think the organisation, the ANC, can take a 
bold step – currently they want to project it that it is those 
who are corrupt and those who are not corrupt and, Chair, 
when we go deeper into it – and I want to assist the 
Commission – because every – at least once a month, I will 
go to the ANC HQ at Luthuli House, if they do not burn 
those papers there, every time you go there you sign.  If 
you say bring them and see the people who go there, you 
will see that CEOs would go there, Chair.   
My own colleagues.  I will not mention them, I do 
10 
not want to speak for them, but they will tell you, Chair, 
that  – they will even ask you, hey, we are under pressure 
on this thing, how do we deal with it?  Because we speak 
amongst ourselves as CEO.   
So the ANC leadership to come here and pretend 
that 
no, 
we 
have 
supported 
this 
Commission 
and 
everything but do not assist this Commission to solve the 
fundamental problems facing our society.  I think it is not 
correct, Chair, and I am saying this not because I want to 
attack anyone, I want to – I said I want to come and assist 
20 
the Commission.   
Chair, the ANC has had lots of events, the ANC has 
had – some of the debt the ANC had when Dr Zweli Mkhize 
was Treasurer-General were sorted out by me, I had to 
speak to these companies and say can we deal with the 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 70 of 178 
 
ANC debt differently because some of were taking the – 
actually one of the days some – the sheriff of the court was 
on his way to attach furniture at the ANC headquarters and 
I was told I had to speak to a CEO of a large transport 
company that I knew very well and say but you do work for 
the country, for the government, you have this – you have 
got a tender and everything, can you really take furniture 
from the ANC headquarters for 2 000 – or rather R2 
million? 
Chair, me and Dr Zweli Mkhize, and I know that he 
10 
has sent an affidavit denying all of that, but I tried to track 
Mrs Gomez because I wanted her to file an affidavit before 
this Commission, is if she is not in the country, to tell – 
she will say, Chair, that we were meeting all the time to 
look at the monies for the ANC inside the country and 
outside. 
Now when the 80 million came in – so I am dealing 
with the big part …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   That the big part I am saying in this 
20 
Commission …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, before you go to the narrower part, 
you did refer to the fact that I said if we do not want things 
that according to the evidence that the Commission has 
heard to have happened in the past to happen again, it is 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 71 of 178 
 
critical that we be – we reflect very honestly on what it is 
that made those things – that made it possible for those 
things to happen. 
MR MONTANA:   Absolutely, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because if we do not know what made it 
possible for those things to happen we cannot put in place 
correct measures to prevent them from recurring in the 
future and so I repeat that we, as a country,  and we as 
individuals, we as different groups have to look honestly at 
what it is that brought us here and it probably is not a 
10 
single thing, it probably a number of things.  
Let us look at those and then when we know what it 
is that made it possible for those things to happen, we can 
look at what it is that we should put in place, make sure 
those things do not happen again. 
 
So to the extent that you really do have information 
that can assist in that regard we would appreciate it.  So I 
just wanted to reaffirm that.  But you were into the R80 
million thing, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Deputy Chair – Chair, I wanted to read, 
20 
Judge, for the record on my section on the ANC. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   One of the conclusions there, I just want 
to read them into record. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 72 of 178 
 
MR MONTANA:   They are part of my affidavit, I deal with 
them, I say: 
“Having dealt with, looking at the 52 n d National 
Conference and the report of Secretary General 
Kgalema Motlanthe…” 
And I said to this Commission, I said the ANC should open 
about the last 25 years, should be very open, and I said 
the: 
“ANC is not on trial and should not be afraid of this 
challenge, it should draw strength as the party of 
10 
the overall majority of the people of South Africa 
and indeed the change it wishes to see in our own 
society.  The ANC has in a way a special role in our 
society and should fulfil its mission, it is only 
through this that the ANC will remain a heritage of 
all the people of South Africa.” 
Chair, I was disappointed when I listened to what the ANC 
told you in this Commission.   
Our President was here and I thought that the 
leadership of the country will take a great leap and reflect 
20 
honestly on what has happened over the past few years.  
We missed a big opportunity precisely because wanted to 
be here to say the ANC was courageous, it deal with the 
issue of state capture.   
And if you put it in that way, you are actually 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 73 of 178 
 
starting at a particular period, you want to ignore what 
Kgalema Motlanthe says about the dangers of incumbency, 
what it does to our own society and most – some of these 
things, Chair, may not be criminal but you could that it 
start to erode.   
He was there, nothing about things that I have 
heard, Chair, and I said on Twitter last week as the 
President was testifying, I said if I was DCJ Zondo, I would 
rise to each and every CEO of a state owned enterprise 
and public entity and say answer two questions, have you 
10 
ever made a contribution or been approached by the ANC? 
 
Secondly, have you been approached by leaders of 
the ANC for their own personal businesses, Chair?    
And you also then put a provision that you do not – 
if you were found to have told a lie, you will be prosecuted.  
Okay, Chair – or even if they do under – Chair, but it has 
been a way of life and, you see, for me, I do not like lies, I 
believe in the truth and I came to this Commission to tell 
the truth.   
It does not make me less committed, less of a 
20 
member of the ANC.  But the ANC says we must all come 
here and testify before you and I thought they would raise 
the bar, Chair, and I want to say, Chair, without any fear or 
favour, we missed a big opportunity to tell the country what 
is happening and what we need to correct. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 74 of 178 
 
 
And I think that once the Commission has heard my 
– I thought we spoke about – the Commission asked the 
President what Dr Zweli Mkhize …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Said. 
MR MONTANA:   He confirmed but the ANC are asked, did 
the ANC get the 80 million from Swifambo, the ANC had 
issued a statement and said no.  And you know what I said 
to Dr Mkhize in a text message?  If the ANC did not get the 
80 million – it was not coming from us, it was not coming 
from PRASA, it was not a corrupt deal and I cannot accuse 
10 
Dr Mkhize of being corrupt because when this deal 
happened he was not even Treasurer-General of the ANC, 
he became Treasurer-General of the ANC later but, Chair, I 
was 
there 
with 
him 
at 
Maria 
Gomez’s 
house 
in 
Hawthorne(?) and you would come – would sit there, I 
would be there to discuss ANC monies and Dr – Maria 
Gomez, when the TG has made some of the requests and 
requirements, sometimes she will be given even accounts 
who to pay and I sit here, I listened to the President last 
week and the ANC washes its hands.   
20 
I think, Chair, the leadership of the ANC’s meeting to date 
must reflect honestly on it and say when we say we want to 
cooperate with the Commission, when we say we want to 
assist this Commission, and last week Chair it was not one 
of those.    
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 75 of 178 
 
I felt ashamed as a member of the ANC that we are 
not telling the majority of our people the true story, and I 
have recorded Chair, I have got a big section on the ANC 
here, including tenders that people in the ANC got and 
used their own positions, including some approaches 
Chair, and I am not saying that because I want to prove 
some anyone's wrong.  
But I think that we should learn from it and say now 
that we have got the President that signed into law, this 
legislation governing the way parties should be, but for the 
10 
ANC to pretend Chair that there - its own conferences and 
events are not funded from public funds, it is not true 
Chair. I want to put it actually, let me put it as bluntly as it 
is not true and this Commission, maybe should not hear 
from only the ANC, it must extend its time – I am now 
urging that let us extend our time, till the end of the year, 
apply for that.  
Get the CEO’s to tell us what is their relationship, I 
am telling my party, you probably having scary things Chair 
from this process.  So who must said - who must provide 
20 
leadership on decision, who must assist this Commission, 
the ANC is supposed to be the first, it's got nothing to do 
with winning or losing an election, it must set the basis so 
that when this Commission puts the recommendation, they 
assist our country so that some of the things - and Chair 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 76 of 178 
 
they 
must 
abandon 
we 
started 
Kgalema 
Motlanthe 
reflecting at the time before Jacob Zuma was President of 
the Republic, but he was one of us.  
Maybe, 
maybe 
he 
wants 
to 
come 
and 
the 
Commission want to invite Kgalema Motlanthe former 
President and say, what were you thinking, what was in 
your mind, what was the ANC thinking on this issue, Chair?  
But now we are colour coding…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But his report, whether he comes or not 
his report may be important, ja. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   May be important for the Commission 
Chair and you will be able to assess it.  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, he will be able to say what were the 
challenges that he talked about in his reports in 2007.  
That maybe have been based on things that had happened 
before 2007 and then look at the SG’s report in the 
Mangaung Conference and maybe look at the SD’s reports 
in 2017 NASREC Conference and see - because I have a 
suspicion that some of the things are the same that keep 
on being mentioned. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, hear from a deployed cadre, I did 
not apply for a job a Luthuli House but the ANC gave me a 
lot of duties as one of their trusted people and it is a way 
of life chain in the ANC that when you are in that position, 
you also have to find a way whether directly or indirectly, 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 77 of 178 
 
to assist the ANC.   
It is a culture that is there and it is a culture that 
members of the ANC and its leaders and I am not – I am 
talking at the general level, I am not really – they do 
approach Chair, to even for their own businesses Chair and 
say hey man Montana, can you help us we are working with 
this people, they are making contribution to the movement 
and everything and some of it has got nothing to do with 
the movement.   
It is people, cadre’s enriching themselves Chair and 
10 
I thought the ANC would reflect honestly on this issue, 
Chair but enough of that Chair, for now. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no you are right enough we will 
move on further but I just want to also say this.  When you 
say as you have just said a few seconds ago, they would 
come to somebody who is a CEO of an SOE and say here 
are these people we were working with this people, would 
that be in the context of saying, when there are tenders 
remember them or what? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, let me give two specific examples. 
20 
When we did – we are dealing with SA Fence and Gate, 
there was a tender and I know that my leader gets angry 
when I mentioned it, but it is true.  Enoch Godongwana for 
example, lobbied us that - for the tender to be awarded to 
a particular company.  He denies it, it is fine, Chair, but it 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 78 of 178 
 
happened and that company was Sondolo and this Sondolo 
I.T and Sondolo I.T is a subsidiary of BOSASA, okay.  
Chair 
I 
knew 
Gavin 
Woods 
very 
well 
and 
sometimes…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Gavin Watson. 
MR MONTANA:   Sorry, Gavin Watson, his name is Gavin 
Watson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   I knew Gavin Watson and you know when 
I looked and I listened to how he was being treated, 
10 
criminal and all of those things.  When someone was very 
close to the ANC, who has done a lot of things for the ANC 
and I knew him a lot of comrades knew him and Gavin was 
a good man, a good ANC person and now people are afraid 
to come here and say Chair, because they want to project 
the particular picture.  
And I was proud when I saw Jacob Zuma former 
President, he came and the way he spoke at Gavin 
Watson's funeral.  So we want people of courage, that 
when it is difficult, we do not wash our hands.  The ANC 
20 
was refusing to even to meet me Chair because they 
believed that there was his massive corruption at PRASA 
and for me I just stood firm.  
Okay, I said you can have it, you can show it in the 
media is not true.  An opportunity will arise when I tell the 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 79 of 178 
 
country the truth.  Yes, you cannot hide, you cannot have 
distance forever.  Chair it is a way of life in the ANC and 
you will not say we are renewing the ANC without looking 
at these things but the ANC, the transformation of the ANC 
it is a much bigger issue, it has to do with changes in our 
own society.  
It is not just a simple question about people who 
steal and people who do not steal, we can spend 100 years 
Chair, accusing each other of who stole what, who stole 
what, some of these things are not true. Our society is 
10 
changing, the ANC calls itself a leader of society and when 
the President was here last week I wanted to hear how we 
are being led, I am not referring to the President, but by 
the party.  
It failed the biggest test of accountability and 
leadership last week the ANC.  My own party Chair, okay 
so currently the model it has, is to have veterans who 
speaks because we respect them, we love them because of 
the enormous sacrifices they have made.  The wisdom they 
bring into the thing, they form themselves that they have 
20 
now become a - what is it called, a blog that targets other 
people.  
I hear people who know me very well who are part 
of the veterans who talk about PRASA’s 
corruption, 
because I do not reply to some of them because they are 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 80 of 178 
 
so senior, I respect them.  Some of them have been there 
since the 60’s and I sent a note to them, can I please come 
visit you at home and have tea because I want to show 
them quietly that what we are repeating such and so forth, 
there is no basis for it.  
So Chair, I am saying that I am hoping that before 
you round up this Commission the ANC will then have the 
courage to come back and say we think we stand - I do not 
think ANC is accused number one but I think that a lot of 
things has happened in the country. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   As I understand it, and you must just 
confirm if my understanding is correct.  What you are 
saying is when the Commission has to look at how the 
levels of corruption arose, the way they arose, and how 
various things happened, which are associated with State 
Capture, how those things happened.  
You say there is a certain way of doing things within 
the ANC, which is part of their culture that has been there 
for a long time.   
MR MONTANA:   Yes, Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Which in your view, must have created 
or contribute to the environment that made the corruption 
to rise the way it has arisen for State Capture to happen 
and if the ANC wants to assist the Commission and if the 
ANC wants to say going forward, these things must never 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 81 of 178 
 
happen again it must start by acknowledging that culture 
and an assist the Commission.  
MR MONTANA:   Chair I think more than that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   I agree fully Chair but I say more than 
that. I was as you speaking Chair, I was trying to put out - 
pull out two paragraphs that speaks to this issue for me.  I 
say in my affidavit Chair, that ANC leaders in and outside 
of government that used their powerful positions, the huge 
influence or standing of the ANC in society to even 
10 
advance their own personal interest.  
Leaders who put pressure on many CEO’s of SOE’s 
and public entities to assist the ANC or entities in which 
ANC leaders or members can belong to the movement.  We 
know many of this had nothing to do with the ANC but 
comrades making money for themselves.  The name of the 
ANC was used in vain.  
But Chair, I am also going and I say the modus 
operandi is that the leader of the ANC would secure 
meetings for businesses, and they are sometimes paid for 
20 
their effort.  They are paid facilitation fees and more on 
delivery of projects.  These have been happening since the 
1990’s and not limited to the period under Jacob Zuma, 
okay. 
Now Chair, then there were issues of monies going 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 82 of 178 
 
into the ANC, okay, or accounts being presented, the Maria 
Gomes story Chair, when I heard Papu say R80million went 
to the ANC I did not know that, I was a CEO of PRASA I 
was already out of PRASA.  Chair, I travelled I even went 
to see Maria on my way to Berlin, in 2016.  I passed 
through London, and I met Ms Gomes in London and I 
asked her where is the money because I am now being told 
that you have got a corrupt deal because the money went 
to ANC. 
She said two things Chair, she confirmed that she 
10 
has given many monies to the ANC treasurer and that I 
know because I was there Chair when the accounts are 
provided to show transparency, that is the one thing Chair, 
particularly in the period leading to the 2014 election.  
Chair, 
there 
were 
even 
other 
monies 
being 
organised from outside where the ANC would send people, 
even Maria Gomes travelled- Maria Gomes, I think with her 
husband.  I cannot recall it f Dr Mkhize travelled to one of 
the African countries there, so that we can get money for 
the ANC 2014 election and when I look at the statement of 
20 
the ANC, they denounced Maria Gomes they do not know 
her yet the Treasurer General of the ANC were sitting with 
them, were either having lunch or dinner at their house and 
were discussing monies that were going the ANC.  
Maria then also mentioned – so she did not deny 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 83 of 178 
 
that she put money into the ANC.  She said this money was 
for the ANC and she did that through a Treasurer General.  
But the ANC issued a statement saying this money did not 
come to the ANC.  Now I ask in my affidavit whose account 
had been provided to Maria Gomes to make a contribution, 
that is one issue there and I think that – so I am just 
saying that there is a lot of stuff that we can talk about 
which I thought the ANC would reflect upon them.  
Now they may say Lucky maybe he is bitter, he is 
angry I am not an angry man Chair, you can see I am here 
10 
but that is part of the reason why I fight with many leaders 
in the ANC because when they wanted - when the Gupta’s 
came to PRASA I fought with them but they wanted to do 
exactly what the Gupta’s were doing and I said no to them, 
I became enemy number one.  
So it was fine when I fought with the Gupta’s but 
when I say no, no, is the same thing.  Whether it is in this 
bottle or in that bottle it is the same water, it cannot be 
done.  So Chair, the R80million story it is not the product 
of corruption.  If that is corruption, Chair, you are going to 
20 
find a lot of organisation who for one reason or the other 
have won tenders in this country, and they have made 
contributions to the ANC.  
They were not – they never influenced Dr Mkhize 
and I must defend him and in this particular instance, he 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 84 of 178 
 
was not there when we did the PRASA Chair.  He came 
there with – or rather the Swifambo transit, he came there 
– he was elected in December 2012 when we awarded the 
contract to Swifambo, he started coming to that space late 
in 2013/ 2014 Chair and if indeed Maria Gomes gave 
money to the ANC we have to check whether it comes from 
other businesses or it comes from Swifambo, Chair, I do 
not believe it came from Swifambo that is one thing that is 
there, but we know that that has been used as a basis to 
suggest corruption.  
10 
I looked at the report of the liquidators and the 
investigators Chair, let me say Chair they did not even 
know what they are talking about.  Look at the transcript 
the guy says I do not know the transaction yet his able to 
say - in fact what the reports of the investigators to this 
Commission, or rather the liquidators and the investigators 
-  what they are saying to this Commission, they are saying 
two things Chair.   
They are saying PRASA did not pay R3.5billion in 
landing the contract, they only paid R2.6billion, trains were 
20 
delivered 
Chair. 
 
I 
thought 
that 
R2.6billion 
about 
R2.2/2.3billion went to places.  One, it went to Vossloh the 
company that built the train which the manual says to buy 
components and other things.  Now we are satisfied that 
actually, when I read that report, I was satisfied that the 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 85 of 178 
 
bulk of the money we paid went towards building these 
trains, that is the first issue. 
And then again, the money went to SARS and that 
we had about R280million that went to the directors of 
Swifambo.  Now, when you listen to the newspapers 
R3.5billion has been stolen, we never paid 3.5 we paid we 
paid R2.6billion, R2.3billion went to the company that 
builds the trains and money went to SARS and effectively, 
the issue under discussion is whether Swifambo was 
entitled to the R280million and whether it should pay and 
10 
what kind of corruption is that?  
Finally, Chair, the report of the liquidators. I wanted 
for me when I read it, I was not interested in what I just 
said, I wanted to see the money flows, they said follow the 
money. I wanted to see who at PRASA had been paid, not 
even a single person has been paid. The liquidators and 
the forensic experts, they never found a single one.  Now 
what kind of corrupt deals is that Chair?   
It can never be; the issue is that we are now 
thinking how the Swifambo directors used that 280.  I 
20 
ended up with somebody buying a house or whatever and 
then I can say it is proof of corruption.  It is not false 
Chair, and I think that as a Commission we need to deal 
with that and all the PRASA hearings that were happening.  
I followed them with interest Chair because for me, I am 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 86 of 178 
 
vested in the truth. 
So the money was paid, Maria has confirmed paying 
some money.  It is not money – she said no, no, Lucky I am 
involved in oil and I am involved in other things, I put 
money into the ANC and as an Angolan me and my 
husband we are the friends of the ANC, we put money.  The 
ANC knows that I met Maria Gomes, through leaders of the 
ANC, not in some corners because of the PRASA deal, 
when we did the deal she was not there I never knew her 
Chair. 
10 
Finally, Chair, let me say on this one.  I tried to see 
Dr Mkhize, it is in my affidavit.  Chair, you know what I put 
in my affidavit and people will come and say, it is true we 
want to be cross examined, I am ready Chair.  But let me 
say this, I wanted to see Dr Mkhize someone that I was 
working with very closely.  I was at Luthuli House or in 
some instances, and I think also we started working 
together when he was – because when he was elected he 
was still also Treasurer General, so he was still a Premier 
and I think that is when the province was still a working 
20 
mechanism.  
So he was doing – so sometimes I meet him at the 
airport before he would fly to KZN, so he was doing all of 
those things.   So I am not talking about things I do not 
know I am talking about things that I was directly involved 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 87 of 178 
 
in.  When I left PRASA Chair, because Dr Mkhize at some 
stage also wanted other deals for the movement, which I 
rejected and I became a big enemy. 
When I tried to discuss the R80million Chair, did the 
ANC get this money, what happened? I struggled Chair, I 
could not see Dr Mkhize.  You know I met him at the hotel, 
I dropped him an SMS, a text message and I said and I was 
being sarcastic Chair and I think Vodacom will give us this 
SMS’s we must ask Chair that we get that SMS’s.  I said to 
Dr Mkhize, I greeted him TG, this is a text message.   
10 
My name is Lucky Montana, you may not remember 
me, I am the former Group CEO of PRAS and I wanted to 
discuss with you the statement issued by the ANC that they 
know nothing about the moneys, the R80million and I said 
if the statement of the ANC and I used the word if Chair 
guardedly. 
If the ANC did not receive this money and I said it 
tells me two things, also I believe that he made payments 
to the ANC and the ANC did not receive money.  And I said 
both the ANC and Swifambo, can it be or not Swifambo but 
20 
Auswell Mashaba had actually been defrauded and I said, I 
wish to discuss this issue with you.  
He sent me a text message and you know the 
beauty about text messages they are on record Chair and 
we can still pull them out and say here is a fact.  He called 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 88 of 178 
 
me, I struggled to see him for months but I saw him that 
very day that I sent him a text message. 
He called me and say I am at the hotel, in Sandton 
come and see me.  I went there, when I got there, the first 
thing he did was to berate me and it is again in my 
affidavit.  How can you say these things on an SMS 
because you know, this information can be - then he said 
to me, I have received money, he confirmed that receiving 
money but I do not know whether it is part of the 
R80million, and I did not receive R80million anyway.  So if 
10 
it was part of the R80million, I did not receive all the 
money, okay. 
 And that day Chair, I left knowing part of the truth 
and that is when I said the only person who is going to 
help is Maria Gomes - at my own cost, I was invited by 
railway companies, international railway companies to 
come to Berlin to discuss railways, during the inner term, I 
was no longer at PRASA Chair, but they told me we think 
you can could help us in Africa.  
So I flew there, but I travelled not my usual route, 
20 
train for Berlin I went via London and I sent Ms Gomes, I 
said, I am on my way to Berlin can I see you?  she invited 
me…[intervene] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, and of course you have told me what 
happened there. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 89 of 178 
 
MR MONTANA:   Ja, what happened their Chair, and there 
Chair we spoke, she confirmed.  So Chair, I am saying that 
I can relay all of these things and that is why I hope the 
ANC would be, but I want to tell the country Chair, I want 
to tell this Commission, I want to tell the country. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   The Swifambo contract it is not a corrupt 
contract.  Even Judge Francis Jay – you know Chair on 
civil matters we have a problem and this will be my last 
point. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, there have been quite a few of your 
last points. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja, so this will be the last I promise 
Chair, Judge Francis J – you take that, you also take the 
Supreme Court of Appeal.  On civil matters you have courts 
making really unfortunate statements.  When somebody 
says Popo, Mr Molefe goes to Court we say that we believe 
that 
there 
was 
wrongdoing 
and 
he 
mentioned 
five 
irregularities.  
 
They may be true, they may not be true Chair and 
20 
the Courts take those irregularities and they want - I heard 
that time it was common Chair that when we deal with 
PRASA you are dealing with a big Tsotsi, Lucky Montana, 
even when it was not before Court the judgment must be as 
damning as possible, okay and Mr Soni said, with this he 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 90 of 178 
 
will accept those judgments Chair, bit a civil judgments - 
and you will see that when I go I deal with each and 
everything.  
 
It is a Swifambo front, no Chair there was no front 
here.  Did they - was there money paid?  And if there was 
money paid Chair, you know who it will be paid to?  It will 
be 
paid 
to 
members 
of 
the 
Commission 
Committee, 
Adjudication Committee, the CEO of PRASA, the Board 
Committee on procurement and the Board of PRASA. 
Then why do we not call all of these guys and deal 
10 
with that issue in that way? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let us start this – let us hold it 
there.  I am sure that later on; it would not be necessary to 
go into a lot of details on issues that you have dealt with 
now. 
MR MONTANA:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Now in fairness to the ANC Mr 
Montana at page 214.134 of SS4, Mr Mashaba says; 
“By virtue of the full grain…[intervene] 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry that is PRASA Bundle C1, 
Exhibit SS4? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, just to make sure that is always 
more convenient that you start with the bundle than one 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 91 of 178 
 
knows whether one has got the right bundles.  Okay and 
what page? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   At page 214.134. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   “By virtue of the four grand donations  
by leasing for the benefit of the ANC, never reached 
the ANC and Maria Gomes and Mr Sabela have 
unlawfully 
received 
and 
retained 
the 
sum 
of 
R9.4million and accordingly these amounts are 
refundable.” 
10 
MR MONTANA:   Well Chair, I am  happy to hear that 
Chair, I have not seen this, I am  seeing this for the first 
time but if that is the position, Chair, I think that  I am  
happy because it indicates that the noise that the ANC took 
R80million from Swifambo was false and it also tells us 
that the statement made by Popo Molefe under oath that 
the ANC received R80million Chair, was actually false and 
it did actually - he misled Judge Francis,J in this particular 
regard 
Chair, 
because 
I 
think 
some 
of 
the 
strong 
statements about corruption they even emanate from this 
20 
kind of thing Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Now, when Mr Soni - when Mr Mashaba 
says in paragraph 6 that you just read: 
“These amounts are refundable.” 
Is he talking about them being refundable to whom? 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 92 of 178 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   From Mr Sabela and Ms Gomes, in 
paragraph 5 Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Sorry, ja continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   At the section 417 inquiry Mr Sabela 
testified that he had never been a fundraiser for the ANC 
and the only part that he played in leasing was to collect 
amounts 
invoiced 
by 
SIM 
Leasing, 
where 
after 
he 
dispersed the amount to Steve, presumably into the 
account of NS as directed by Maria Gomes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   What is NS reference to again, I am 
10 
trying to look? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I do not see a reference to NS here 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because from paragraph five, it appears 
that Mr Mashaba says, GS that is Mr George Sabela? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Gave evidence at the sections 417 
inquiry to the effect that one, he had never been a 
fundraiser for the ANC, two the only part that he – NS, oh 
NS would be the law firm…[intervene] 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh the law firm, sorry Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, I think it is the law firm, E/NS played 
in leasing plus to collect amounts invoiced by Sim, what is 
Sim? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sim is Similex’s. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 93 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, Similex’s? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, that is Ms Gomes’s firm. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Entity, yes – I was to collect amounts 
invoiced by SIM for leasing.  So Similex would have sent 
invoices for leasing, that is Swifambo and so he as Mr 
Sabela - according to Mr Mashaba’s says, his role and the 
role of his firm was basically to claim from Swifambo.   
What, the amounts that appeared in invoices sent 
by Similex and where after he dispersed the amounts 
received. So he would have known how he dispersed the 
10 
amounts that he received as directed by MG, that is Ms 
Gomes.  So he would say whether he - where he directed 
monies. 
ADV SONI SC:  So what - and I am just taking the big 
picture that emerges around the flow of funds. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  There is that monies were dispersed by 
Swifambo Similex. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  There they were saying that  
20 
“I received instructions from Maria Gomez to 
pay these amounts to Similex.” 
CHAIRPERSON:  H’m. 
ADV SONI SC:  So that is the amount of R79.4 million.  But 
Mashaba is saying that that money never – because Sabelo 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 94 of 178 
 
was never a fund raiser with the ANC that money never 
reached the ANC. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  What I am more interested in is since 
Mr Sabelo says his and his law firm’s role was to collect the 
money from Swifambo that was reflected in invoices sent by 
ADV SONI SC:  Similex. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Similex to Swifambo and he says that he or 
his 
law 
firm 
would 
then 
disperse 
those 
amounts 
in 
accordance with instructions of Ms Maria Gomes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Ms Gomes yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  The next obvious thing is to say where did 
he – where was his instructed to send that to.  We do not 
know that based on this document. 
ADV SONI SC:  Not – not from this. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  Okay alright.  You want to say 
something Mr Montana? 
MR MONTANA:  If I may Chair?   
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm 
MR MONTANA:  Chair the – the – when I met Ms Gomes’s 
husband there are instances where Mr Sabelo was with them 
20 
and – then I knew that the – and that is why number 5 maybe 
Mashaba is quoting what the George Sabelo said at the 
liquidation hearing but I know for example that in those 
discussions there was no clarity that he is a member of the 
ANC Fund Raising and all of those things and in some at the 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 95 of 178 
 
initial meeting because at that point Mkhize was not there 
but – but I think that Vikas Sagar was part of those. So that 
is why I am surprised you find. 
 
The second thing Chair that I want to say is that I 
worked for PRASA and I get a salary after I have rendered 
services whether as a train driver or whatever and I use my 
salaries in a particular way the problem of course for the 
commission is to decide what is it that it is following because 
here is a flow of money tells us a story but it may not tell us 
a true story.  Unless the commission would say Swifambo 
10 
obtained – received money unlawfully and that is why this 
money was distributed.  But if Chair is saying PRASA paid 
Swifambo within a contract R2.6 billion and the bulk of that 
money – that is why I said for the commission it has to then 
make a determination whether the directors of Swifambo 
after having the – and the – you know if – if they were given 
R2.6 billion they never even delivered a single train.   
Then the commission has got legitimate interests hey 
that the – there is a problem here – we give you money to 
buy – to build houses you do not build them.  Swifambo is 
20 
paid is delivering these trains – we use all of them and later 
on we are told the trains are tall.   
Now I think the commission in my view Chair did 
come to a determination what is it that the directors of 
Swifambo are entitled – and if it says the 280 or whatever 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 96 of 178 
 
amount they – they then repaid themselves – it belongs to 
them and they bought houses they gave to the ANC that is a 
different matter.   
But it says Swifambo was involved in a corrupt deal 
and got paid monies that were not legitimately due to them 
then of course then the – the flow of money from – from Mr 
Mashaba to Similex or via George and what – and then it 
raises the question when Ms Gomez was putting money to 
the ANC is it the same money?  Is it different money?  Is the 
flow of money showing us also as the – that Sabelo also paid 
10 
the ANC from part of that money?   
Now these facts are very important because Chair 
they assist the commission to deal with – with the Terms of 
Reference corruption, fraud and as well as state capture.  
But when you do it in general we are going to have a 
situation where Lucky Montana earned the salary, he buy a 
house and we say no, no even if his salary is part of that 
corrupt thing and I do not think that we – I think we need to 
be very specific on this matter so that we can answer the 
right question in line with the Terms of Reference of the 
20 
commission.  That will be my humble submission Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  No, no that is fine.  I mean obviously I 
think what the – what the commission is doing and the 
investigators and the legal team is to keep our minds open 
that sometimes something that may look legitimate and 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 97 of 178 
 
innocuous might not be. And sometimes something that looks 
illegitimate and criminal might not be.  So it is keeping that 
mind and – and that open mind and probing and stopping 
where it looks like there is no reason to go further.  Okay Mr 
Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  Can I then ask you to turn to the same 
bundle that is Bundle C1 SS Ford Stand documents to page 
214.149.  Oh sorry before you – before we go there can I 
just keep you at 133 Mr Montana and say that according to 
paragraph 1 now and this is why the link to Swifambo is not 
10 
all that tenuous because at paragraph 1 Mr Mashaba says: 
“Shortly 
after 
leasing 
was 
awarded 
the 
tender this approach was made up.” 
I am just making the point that it – in Mr Mashaba’s mind 
certainly the award of the tender and the approach are not 
unrelated.  Whether that is correct or not I am just making 
that point.  And he is saying this on oath. 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair I would accept that.  The issue of 
course for the investigators have got an interesting job to 
find out from the Sabelo and the other person when you 
20 
approach were you – were they informed by PRASA people 
were they doing all – because we are trying to get to the 
bottom of corruption.  
ADV SONI SC:  But let me make another point you… 
CHAIRPERSON:  Of course – of course I can say and you 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 98 of 178 
 
may have been aware from the media that the commission 
had issued summons against Mr Mashaba for him to come 
and give evidence and he decided to defy the summons and 
then not come here.  His complaint was as far as I – no I 
gave instructions that the complaint be laid and I think it was 
laid with the police but that – that is just one fact you know.  
Of course there is the issue of Mr George Sabelo’s version. 
MR 
MONTANA: 
 
Chair 
on 
a 
lighter 
note 
would 
the 
commission consider – because I was also defying the 
summonses from the commission but I changed my mind.  It 
10 
is not left up to the commission to contact me to convince all 
people who are defying the commission to be also come – of 
course it will come at a fee Chair but it is something that the 
commission – I know the Terms – the time of the commission 
is coming to an end Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes but.. 
MR MONTANA:  But it is not something the commission will 
consider. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is on a lighter note.  Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  I see we are at one o’clock. 
ADV SONI SC:  Can I just finish this Chairperson? 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja that is fine. 
ADV SONI SC:  Then we will finish Mr Montana … 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 99 of 178 
 
ADV SONI SC:  Ms Ngoye’s affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:  That is fine.  That is fine.  Well I can just 
say on a lighter note Mr Montana that I thought that you 
know the commission would get very good cooperation from 
lots of people and it has got good cooperation but there are 
some who do not think that this commission is such a good 
idea.   
MR MONTANA:  Chair you do it an emergency appointment 
considering the time is coming to an end and that you cannot 
go out on tender because then we award in six months.  So 
10 
here is a candidate. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You are a sole source?  Yes Mr Soni. 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please Chairperson.  Can I now ask 
you to turn to page 214.149 page 00:09:53 on the same 
bundle B1 and this is now a continuation of the affidavit that 
under note 32 is the 00:10:06 to leasing concluding a sub-
contract 
agreement 
with 
Vosloo 
for 
the 
sale 
of 
70 
locomotives and without the knowledge of leasing and its 
consent Vosloo paid Mr Makhensa Mabunda – so the S 
Group an amount of approximately R75 million.  Are you 
20 
aware of this payment? 
MR MONTANA:  No, no Chair I was not aware until I read in 
the newspapers that Montana’s friend got paid R75 million. 
Chair I did not know – I did not know about it.  I did not know 
that – the terms but Chair I think let me say that my 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 100 of 178 
 
understanding is that when they were putting – I do not know 
when they were putting the NIP – what is it called – National 
Industrial Participation Program my understanding is that 
Swifambo then asked Mr Mabunda to help them.  I think they 
had some kind of an agreement but this one is strange 
because he is now working with them and he also worked 
with Vosloo.  I will not – I will not offer any explanation for 
that Chair but that was my understanding of the whole 
transaction. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja okay.   
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Well we know that – and I am just saying 
this to you so we finish this – that Swifambo did pay Mr 
Mabunda or the S firm several million rand – and that is 
reflected in this affidavit.  I did not refer to that and I 
purposely did not refer to that because the point you make 
Mr Montana is this that if Swifambo had engaged the 
services of the S Group for Mr Mabunda it might well be 
improper for Mr Mabunda to then receive a R75million 
payment which is the complaint that Mr Mashaba makes at 
note 32.  That is the only point I want to make. 
20 
MR MONTANA:  No, no Chair I will accept that only if the 
R75million is related to the – their contracts.  You remember 
my understanding of the – of what these guys should do – 
what Mr Mabunda was doing was actually contracted to many 
companies in Europe he was working with.  Now the first 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 101 of 178 
 
issue left to verify the R75 million linked to the Swifambo 
contract or not?  Because if it is not there is no conflict – if it 
is part of that then clearly there is a conflict Chair so we 
need to look at it in a round. 
ADV SONI SC:  Well fortunately we will not need to look at it 
it will need – it will be some other forum that will. I am just 
saying that Mr Mashaba’s mind. 
MR MONTANA:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  That is the impropriety on Mr Mabunda’s 
part. 
10 
MR MONTANA:  No not that Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  Let us take the lunch 
adjournment. 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  It is five past we will resume at five past 
two. 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:  We adjourn. 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
20 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   What happened this time, Mr Montana? 
MR MONTANA:   Sorry, Chair I was feeling a bit cold. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh. 
MR MONTANA:   And I thought I was going to go and get a 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 102 of 178 
 
vest and by the time ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   ...I realised that it was silly.  So I just 
abandoned and came back quickly ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
MR MONTANA:   ...to be on time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, okay.  No, that is fine.  Okay.  
Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chair.  Chairperson, 
you will recall when Ms Ngoye gave her evidence, she 
10 
dealt with the allegations that had been made in the 
Siyagena matter in the high court.  Since then the high 
court has announced judgment in this Siyagena matter.  So 
rather then put those allegations to Mr Montana, I would 
like to put on record what the court’s findings were in 
regard 
to 
those 
allegations 
made 
by 
Ms 
Ngoye 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  H’m. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So if – what I will do is what we did 
on a previous ...[intervenes]  
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   I assume that this means we have moved 
away from the Swifambo matter? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, the intended doctrine is 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 103 of 178 
 
just to refer to the paragraphs in which the significant 
findings were made.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  If you could start by giving 
the names of the parties and the case number. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, as you pleases. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the high – which high court and so 
forth. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  Chairperson, this is the 
judgment 
in 
the 
matter 
of 
PRASA 
v 
Siyangena 
Technologies and the retired Justice Goldstein and retired 
10 
Justice Joffe and intervening parties when -unite behind.  I 
am sorry.  In the(?) applicant and unite behind them(?).  
Now, it is a judgment of the Gauteng Court, Chairperson.  
May I just, so that we have the full facts? 
[Speaker not clear]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Do you want to read the case number 
...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Oh, sorry.  As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please, Chairperson.  It is – 
20 
the case number is 2018/14332 and 2018/11314. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And the judgment seems to have been 
handed down on the 8 t h of October 2020. 
ADV 
VAS 
SONI 
SC: 
 
 
The 
8 t h 
of 
October 
2020 
...[intervenes]  
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 104 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   ...by the full bench, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   I just need to point out that there had 
been a previous application ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   I am sorry.  And it is the Gauteng 
Division of the High Court.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It is the Gauteng Division.  As you 
please.  In Pretoria(?). 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
10 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   What had happened Chairperson is.  
And this the matter that Mr Montana, I think, has referred 
to previously.  That certain persons applied to be admitted 
or to be able to file affidavits and a full bench of the high 
court prior to this judgment had allowed them to file 
affidavits. 
 
This court, however, looking at the law in 
relation to what evidence may be taken into account 
decided that on the basis of the Maseko(?) judgment and a 
judgment of the Constitutional Court that only the relevant 
20 
parties, 
namely, 
PRASA 
and 
Siyagena 
the 
affidavits 
presented by them should be taken into account. 
 
So I just present that because it had raised an 
issue that had been raised by Mr Montana.  And you will 
recall Chairperson he also raised that in the Swifambo 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 105 of 178 
 
matter. 
 
So 
this 
judgment 
does 
not 
deal 
with 
the 
allegations or the answers that he gave in his affidavit in 
this matter(?). 
MR MONTANA:   Can I say something quickly? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But very quickly, please, Mr Montana. 
MR MONTANA:   Thank you, Chair.  No, no it is a 
fundamental matter.  Chair, I just want to put on record.  
Mr Soni is partly right.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MONTANA:   We did not apply.  PRASA went to court.  
10 
I think it has lost a couple of times in these matters.  I 
think on four times.  Now their last review application that 
they made, it was a full bench of three judges which then 
wrote that it is not in the interest of justice for allegations 
to be made against officials and they are not given an 
opportunity.  So it did not apply.  We ...[indistinct] 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I filed a detailed affidavit with a lot 
of evidence.  Two weeks before that matter, the whole 
bench was changed.  A new bench came in.  And our own 
20 
affidavit that was asked by the court to put together, we 
were told that that evidence is no longer admissible.  So 
our affidavit that were asked by the court.  So we are not 
taking anything(?).  But when you read the judgment, you 
can hear, Chair, that they, in fact, it was.  But I will not 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 106 of 178 
 
argue that.  I accept what Mr Soni is saying ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   ...for the sake of progress but I think we 
should record it properly, Chair ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   ...in that regard.  Thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  No, that is fine.  But for what it is 
worth.  It would be good, maybe, that will be in your – 
maybe that is in your affidavit, should be good to get that 
factual background that you have just outlined later on. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, this – the matter is dealt with 
indicating my ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright.  Ms Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes, as you please.  Chairperson, 
Mr Montana is right.  The – a full bench – and that is why 
there are two case numbers.  A full bench had granted the 
persons who asked to submit affidavit but this court looked 
at that and based on the principle that they did not have a 
direct and substantial interest in the proceedings that were 
before them, decided that they would not take the firms(?) 
20 
in those affidavits... [Speaker ’s voice drops – unclear] 
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair.  Can I again?  I do not want 
to disrupt Mr Soni. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MONTANA:   It must be put – we are putting on record 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 107 of 178 
 
that we never applied. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   The court ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Invited you. 
MR MONTANA:   But the second thing, Chair.  I just want 
to say Mr Soni.  I do not want to debate it but they cannot 
say the court decided to take because these guys do not 
have substantial interest.  If you say in your affidavit that 
the Siyagena was awarded the contract in a corrupt way 
and you mention people’s names and then you ask them to 
10 
come – and then you say – then, surely, Chairperson there 
is a big problem.  I just want to say that. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   But I deal with it in my affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   So I just want to emphasise.  We did not 
apply. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   The court emphasised, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   I did an affidavit and I said I want to 
assist both parties, both Siyagena and PRASA because it 
seems they are getting their facts wrong.   
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   I have provided those and said they can 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 108 of 178 
 
be used. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   But the court rule, not from any 
application. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.   
MR MONTANA:   To say it is not in the interest of justice.  
And I think that ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   ...that judgment that the three – by the 
three judges was for me it was the right decision because 
10 
it dealt with the interest of justice. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:   And I think in this particular case, of 
course I do not have an interest in ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   But if I am referred to – I do not have an 
interest in the matter.  Surely, Chair, but the interest of 
justice is being undermined.  But I think let us proceed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   I just wanted to record those facts Chair. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Mr Soni. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson, can I just finish this 
part? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   It is addressed at paragraphs 34, 35 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 109 of 178 
 
and 39 of the judgment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   On this very issue. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Mr Montana, I just want to read to 
you relevant parts of the judgment and at the end you can 
comment on it.  At paragraph 43 the court says: 
“The background facts are detailed because 
they provide insight into how the relationship 
was formed...” 
10 
 
And he is talking about the relationship between 
Siyagena persons and PRASA officials.   
“The details of the pattern of conduct show 
how increasingly the participants came to 
ignore the procurement requirements, the need 
to continuously act in good faith, taking the 
best 
technical 
outcome 
to 
meet 
the 
requirements, 
and 
at 
the 
most 
economic 
price...” 
 
Paragraph 44, it goes on: 
20 
“The 
background 
concerns 
two 
preliminary 
phases, the pilot project and an extension of 
the pilot project. 
Those phases preceded the phases presently 
an issue. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 110 of 178 
 
The phase is an issue of Phase 1, the Phase 1 
extension and Phase 2...” 
 
And paragraph 45: 
“The 
background 
reveals 
that 
initially 
a 
spearing 
and 
economic 
approach 
to 
the 
installation to the equipment and issues are 
adopted. 
The installations were intended to be effective 
and efficient and focus on the needs of 
PRASA. 
10 
The initial process, however, was abandoned 
on or shortly after the introduction of the 
respondent.  That is Siyagena. 
The 
scope, extent and cost of the work 
increased 
dramatically 
and 
the 
work 
was 
precipitously proceeded with in the absence of 
a budget or any planning and in utter disregard 
of 
the 
procurement 
process 
while 
the 
functionality of the system decreased...” 
 
Then can I refer you, Chairperson, to paragraph 
20 
forty – 53, sorry. 
“Despite the absence of a budget to pay for 
the 
work, 
concerns 
about 
the 
costs 
and 
suitability of the access gates, the intention to 
install local gates and without a procurement 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 111 of 178 
 
process 
in 
any 
prior 
assessment 
of 
recommendations, 
Mr 
Montana 
acting 
on 
behalf of the applicant, directed Mr Gansho to 
contract the respondent...” 
 
At paragraph 54, the court says: 
“The 
contents 
of 
internal 
documents 
were 
manipulated in an attempt to justify the directive, 
conceal the prior commitment to the respondent 
and use as a basis to expand on the scope of 
work...” 
10 
 
Paragraph 55, the court says: 
“In 
the 
final 
“quotation”, 
the 
respondent 
expanded on the scope of work, reduce the 
functionality 
of 
the 
existing 
work 
and 
increased price of its proposal...” 
 
And at paragraph 55.4, the court says: 
“Mr Ferreira and Mr Montana met on the same 
day 
as 
the 
final 
quotation, 
namely, 
the 
17 t h of March 2010. 
There is no record of this meeting. 
20 
Mr Ferreira required a formal acceptance of 
the proposal which exceeded R 225 million by 
no later than the 19 t h of March 2010. 
The 
respondent 
does 
not 
disclose 
the 
response from Mr Montana...” 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 112 of 178 
 
 
And paragraph 57, the court says: 
“Mr 
Montana, 
according 
to 
Mr 
Gansho, 
approved the appointment of the respondent 
and 
instructed 
the 
implementation 
of 
the 
decision...” 
 
And at paragraph 59, the court says: 
“The conduct that resulted in the awarding of 
work to the respondent became a blueprint for 
the award of work in excess of R 6 billion to 
the respondent...” 
10 
 
Then dealing with Phase 1, starting at paragraph 
60, the court says: 
“The expansion of the ISAMS System, that is 
Integrated 
Security 
Access 
Management 
System, beyond the World Cup 2010 was not 
planned by the applicant. 
There was no approval from the executive and 
the work was not budgeted for in the allocation 
of funds...” 
 
Paragraph 64: 
20 
“The perception that there was no need to 
comply with the procurement policy in regard 
to 
the 
extension 
of 
the 
work 
and 
the 
appointment 
of 
the 
respondent 
was 
established. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 113 of 178 
 
The perception in resulted in the failure to 
implement the procurement policy and manage 
the procurement process. 
Mr Gansho, instead, managed the procurement 
process...” 
 
Paragraph 67, the court says: 
“The documents provided to potential bidders 
selectively 
included 
and 
manipulated 
the 
contents of the broader more general SARCC’s 
specification to the exclusive benefit of the 
10 
respondent. 
The 
documents 
did 
not 
comply 
with 
the 
procurement policy...” 
 
In paragraph 69, in the first sentence, the court 
says: 
“The bids were not checked for compliance...” 
 
And then in the last sentence of that paragraph, 
the court continues: 
“The DEC reckoning that the bid by the 
respondent 
despite 
the 
bid 
being 
20 
approximately 60% more than the competing 
bid and he excessive rates charged by the 
respondent...” 
 
Paragraph 70 says: 
“The flaws in the procurement process were 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 114 of 178 
 
concealed, the 
minutes of the BEC were 
manipulated 
to 
remove 
irregularities 
and 
bolstered 
the 
recommendation 
of 
the 
respondent 
and 
the 
employees 
who 
were 
interviewed attempted to conceal the absence 
of an RFP....” 
 
Paragraph 71: 
“The recommendation of the BEC was rejected 
by the Group CEO and more importantly by the 
CTPC...” 
10 
 
I 
understand 
that 
to 
be 
Corporate 
Tender 
Procurement Committee. 
CHAIRPERSON:   There is some acronym that is also for – 
what cross-section or something. 
MR MONTANA:   Cross- function ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Cross-function. 
MR MONTANA:   ...sourcing ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   This is not the one? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   The C – the one ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   CTPC. 
MR MONTANA:   CTPC is the Adjudication Committee 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 115 of 178 
 
MR MONTANA:   ...of Mr Tiro Holele and Martha Ngoye. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay alright. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   But that is, of course, in the 
Swifambo matter. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair even on this one.  I will 
come ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, okay alright.  Continue. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Paragraph 72: 
“In the aftermath of the CTPC decision, there 
was a concerted effort to manipulate or create 
10 
documents 
in 
an 
attempt 
to 
conceal 
the 
decision of the CTPC and the irregularities in 
the procurement process...” 
 
And then at paragraph 73: 
“The CTPC was simply bypassed and a tender 
placed before the FCIP...” 
 
And that acronym, Chairperson, as I understand 
it 
is 
the 
Finance 
Capital 
Investment 
Procurement 
Committee. 
“...and that contained inaccurate, incomplete, 
20 
and misleading information...” 
 
At paragraph 74, the court says: 
“The tender proceeded to the board of control. 
However, there is no indication that the board 
made 
a 
decision 
to 
contract 
with 
the 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 116 of 178 
 
respondent...” 
 
Paragraph 75: 
“In order to conclude a contract, prior approval 
had to be obtained from the Minister of 
Transport and approval of the contract had to 
be obtained from the board, none of which 
occurred...” 
 
And then at paragraph 75.4, it says: 
“Mr Montana, nevertheless, signed a JPCC 
contract...” 
10 
 
And then at paragraph 76, the judgment says: 
“The flawed process was concealed and it set 
aside the basis that is made...” 
 
And then at paragraph 77, the court says: 
“As regard Phase 1.  The process that resulted 
in the awarding of work to the respondent in 
Phase 1 failed with the comply with the 
constitutional 
legislative 
and 
regular 
framework stipulated for a valid procurement 
process and contravened the applicant’s own 
20 
procurement policy...” 
 
And at paragraph 80 has regards to Phase 2, the 
court says: 
“The extension of Phase 1 and Phase 2 suffers 
from the same flaws as those found in Phase 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 117 of 178 
 
1...” 
 
Paragraph 81: 
“The method used to secure the appointment 
of 
the 
respondent 
was 
the 
same 
as 
the 
extension of the pilot project and Phase 1. 
An unsolicited bid from the respondent, the 
requirement 
for 
the 
respondent’s 
specific 
brands, the restriction of the procurement 
process, deviation from the required process, 
ignoring 
of 
adverse 
decisions, 
10 
misrepresentations, 
misinformation 
and 
concealment of the material facts...” 
 
Paragraph 83: 
“Despite the absence of any planning, an 
unsolicited offer from the respondent was 
entertained and acted upon...” 
 
And at paragraph 84, the court says: 
“The 
procurement 
process 
favoured 
the 
respondent 
and 
set 
aside 
how 
that 
was 
achieved...” 
20 
 
And at paragraph 84.7, it says: 
“The 
Group 
CEO 
is 
required 
to 
consider 
recommendation by the CTPC. 
The CTPC did not make a recommendation. 
The 
Group 
CEO, 
nevertheless, 
made 
a 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 118 of 178 
 
recommendation to the FCIP. 
The 
board 
was 
required 
to 
approved 
the 
appointment of the respondent in terms of the 
contract. 
An in subsequent variation, the board did not 
do so.   
Mr Montana did so without authority...” 
 
Paragraph 87: 
“In the course of Phase 2, extending to Phase 
1, documents were created that contained 
10 
misrepresentations, 
misinformation 
and 
concealed material facts...” 
 
And paragraph 89: 
“In the course of the Phase 2 procurement 
processes, documents were created that 
contained misrepresentation, misinformation 
and concealed material facts...” 
 
At paragraph 92, the court says: 
“There 
was 
an 
additional 
allowance 
of 
R 905 million namely for maintenance and a 
20 
warranty that was already included in the 
notes of appointment for Phase 2 were 
accepted by the respondent but not included 
in the JBEC agreement...” 
 
That, Chairperson, as I understand it is Joint 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 119 of 178 
 
Building Construction Contract...  And then at paragraph 
92.2: 
“The 
unsolicited 
offer 
was 
irregularly 
entertained 
by 
Mr 
Montana 
and 
Mr Pongola...” 
 
92.3: 
“The respondent provided a bid...” 
 
And 92.4: 
“Mr 
Montana 
signed 
the 
addendum 
agreement...” 
10 
 
93: 
“The was no procurement process...” 
 
Paragraph 94: 
“The 
contract 
and 
its 
implementation 
resulted in works which were not fit for 
purpose...” 
 
At paragraph 96, the court says: 
“The applicant, meaning PRASA, discovered 
that persons and entities connected to the 
respondent and persons within the applicant, 
20 
Mr Montana and Mr Gansho, were involved 
in various property transactions. 
In the face of it, the participants must 
explain these transactions. 
They raise serious concerns that there was 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 120 of 178 
 
wrongdoing that needs to be investigated. 
The property transactions, at the very least, 
contravened the professional and ethical 
standards 
required 
to 
be 
maintained 
in 
public administrations and those obligations 
with its all officials and other role-players in 
the 
procurement 
system, 
including 
the 
respondent, must comply in order to promote 
mutual trust and respect and an environment 
where 
business 
can 
be 
conducted 
with 
10 
integrity...” 
 
Paragraph 98: 
“Persons 
who 
are 
complicit 
in 
maladministration, impropriety or corruption 
did not be permitted to profit from an 
unlawful tender. 
They 
should 
be 
forced 
to 
make 
full 
restitution, even if this results in financial 
loss to them. 
The existence of corruption is to be inferred 
20 
from the fact that a multitude of irregularities 
exist, that there is an absence of a candid 
explanation from the tender...” 
 
And paragraph 99: 
“Fiscus aspera(?) as it did not receive fair 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 121 of 178 
 
value for what it had paid...” 
 
And then at paragraph 103, the court says: 
“Mr Montana was involved with property 
dealings which had unusual features. 
An amount of R 2 million was paid by a 
company or no apparent purpose in one of 
the transactions. 
Mr Montana did not have sufficient funds to 
purchase the holding(?) and property which 
he negotiated to buy. 
10 
It is apparent that the funds for the property 
were not to be sourced in the hands of 
Montana. 
This being so, where were they sourced? 
The inference is irresistible that the funds 
are being provided by a third party for an 
unknown reason. 
Individuals do not normally provide funding 
in the millions for no apparent reasons. 
This being so, the evidence is irresistible 
20 
that 
the 
respondent 
was 
providing 
the 
backing(?)...” 
 
And at page 104 in the middle in the third 
sentence, the judgment says: 
“Mr 
Montana 
was 
involved 
in 
numerous 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 122 of 178 
 
property dealings. 
These activities are not consistent with this 
activity 
as 
a 
senior 
employee 
of 
the 
applicant. 
In 
the 
ordinary 
course, 
the 
funding, 
a 
variable, 
should 
not 
readily 
have 
been 
available...” 
 
And then at page – at paragraph 131, the court 
says: 
“The 
discovery 
of 
corruption 
was 
also 
10 
impeded by the tyrannical manner in which 
the applicant was controlled by the erstwhile 
Group CEO, Mr Montana...” 
 
And at page – oh, sorry – paragraph 139.  
Sorry, 137.  It says: 
“We are of the considered view that although 
the delayed period of ten months may render 
the application to be inordinately delayed, 
circumstances 
under 
which 
the 
delay 
occurred, as explained by the applicant, 
20 
persuade this court to grant condonation...” 
 
And then the order, Chairperson, is set out at 
paragraph 170 and the effect of the order, Chairperson, if 
one looks at 171(a), the signing of the JGCC contract, 
dated 31 s t March 2001, is declared to be unauthorised and 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 123 of 178 
 
(c) 
the 
signing 
of 
the 
addendum 
agreement, 
dated 
19 September 2014, is the declared to be unauthorised.   
 
And at paragraph 17.3, the JBCC agreement, 
dated the 31 s t of March 2011, is set aside.  That is (a) and 
(b) is the JBCC agreement, dated the 1 s t of July, is set 
aside 
and 
(c), 
the 
addendum 
agreement, 
dated 
the 
19 t h  of September 2014, is set aside.   
 
Chairperson, just for completeness sake.  I 
should just point out that at paragraph 170.5, the – in 
terms of what was the just and equitable order, the court 
10 
said work had been done and independent engineer should 
be appointed to determine what the amount is that 
Siyagena should be allowed to redeem from the monies 
paid to it(?). 
 
That Chairperson is the judgment and it is the 
judgment of Mr Justice Le Mont concurred in by Justice 
Malunga(?) and Justice Hewes(?). 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, those were the ...[intervenes]  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   That is the ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   ...the parts that you ...[intervenes]  
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes 
CHAIRPERSON:   ...considered important to read into the 
record. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   [No audible reply]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay.  I think you had said that 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 124 of 178 
 
Mr Montana could then comment if he wish to comment. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.  Yes, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Montana, do you want to say?  I know 
you have already commented.  So I am, obviously, not 
inviting you to say the same thing but if you wish to say 
anything. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair I am just going to ask you to 
give me time to reply to this. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m.  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   When Mr Soni was reading this judgment, 
10 
part of me was sitting with anger and at some stage I was 
also laughing.  How can the judges do this Chair?  One of 
the most scandalised judgment, suspicion of wrongdoing, 
inference and all of those things.  Then just two weeks 
before we go to court, the judges find reason – the judges 
are changed, Chair, new judges are brought in and then 
our affidavits that provides on this matter, cannot be 
considered and the judgments so similar, Chair, to the 
Swifambo judgment.   
You remember I spoke about the SCA judgment?  So 
20 
the SCA judges and the judges in Pretoria think the same, 
they think that this thing was under control of this what 
was it, tyrannical Montana.  The SCA judges say the same 
thing. 
Chair, let me address this thing.  I want to address 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 125 of 178 
 
the facts and Mr Soni has raised the judgment – I do not 
have, I have not party to this matter, so I cannot take it on 
appeal and I cannot I call the judges here to cross-
examine, I wish if I had the privilege. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, just one second, before you do 
that, you have said that you had, at the invitation of the 
court, submitted a detailed affidavit, is that correct? 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, that is correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Not Montana alone. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   All the people who participated in that 
process. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   I never participated, I was a CEO. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   So I think there were eight people who 
were mentioned by Ms Ngoye in her affidavit, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Now this affidavit, I think if there is one – 
20 
who is happy with this kind of judgment?  Surely, Chair, 
that Werksmans, Ms Ngoye, Mr Molofe will be celebrating 
because they were able to get a judgment almost similar at 
the High Court, Gauteng High Court South division as well 
as in the North.   
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 126 of 178 
 
 
Chair, the changes of judges – and I do not know 
what the Judge President considered, one of the most 
scandalous things and I want to go into details, Chair, if 
you could allow me because I think …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Well, I was – the reason why I was 
referring to you having filed an affidavit was that I was 
wondering whether it would not be convenient to hear what 
you have to say after looking at such an affidavit or not but 
I assume that those affidavits, Mr Soni, even though the 
final – the ultimate court that gave this judgment excluded 
10 
them, they available somewhere.  At least his. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes.  Chairperson, let me – or are you 
looking at the affidavit? 
CHAIRPERSON:   At – particularly his affidavit that he was 
not included. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   My – part of what is in my mind is that 
he was no longer at PRASA when the litigation was 
launched, is that right? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   He was no longer at PRASA. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  He was no longer… 
CHAIRPERSON:   And yet he was a significant player in 
the transaction, is it not and affidavits were placed before 
the court by PRASA and I guess [indistinct – dropping 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 127 of 178 
 
voice] but somebody who may have known quite a lot about 
the transaction, his affidavit was not there.  I am not 
saying that it was a wrong decision or right decision to 
include or not include his affidavit, I am just thinking that, 
you know, a court is able to – not that it is able, this is 
what courts do, they decide disputes between parties, they 
are able to say well, both parties put your facts before the 
court and the court decides but an inquiry such as this one 
might go broader in terms of facts, you know? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Because it is not deciding, it is not 
litigation.  So I am just wondering – I was just wondering 
whether it might not have been convenient to listen to him 
knowing 
what 
the 
affidavit 
says 
but 
maybe 
that 
is 
something to think about and I should just give him a 
chance to comment. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson, let me suggest a way 
forward.  We were obviously bound by the court judgment 
as the evidence leaders.  Now Mr Montana says that what 
he said in his affidavit, it was presented to court but not 
20 
considered by the court, may throw a different light on 
some of the issues. 
 
Now without interfering with the court judgment, of 
course, you as Chairperson would be able to take that into 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 128 of 178 
 
account.  In your report you would say there was this 
judgment but my scope is broader.   
 
But one is looking at a legal process and I want to 
take the process forward to give you the maximum scope 
that you should exercise, be fair to Mr Montana but also 
not to cast aspersions on the judicial system. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  This the …[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   But, Chair, can I object …[intervenes] 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  No, can I please finish? 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let him finish and then I will give you a 
chance.  Let him finish him finish first. 
MR MONTANA:   Not on the substance of the matter, 
Chair? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja? 
MR MONTANA:   Because I think we have discussed 
previously and I think we need to take a decision.  Earlier 
on, Chair, I was dealing with the ANC issues.  It is time for 
me to respond to the judgment, to what the judges have 
said.  It is for the second time Mr Soni spoke about the 
20 
fact that we do not need cast aspersions. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, you want to emphasise that you 
…[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 129 of 178 
 
MR MONTANA:   But all of us, the only thing that is above 
all of us is the constitution in this country.  If I need to take 
on the judges, as long as I do not cast on a factual basis, I 
address the issues. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   I cannot have this thing put before me to 
say do not case aspersions and everything. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no, no, I will let you say what 
you want to say, let him finish first. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson, I understand, Mr 
10 
Montana’s desire to put his version in regard to the 
Siyangena because we have now had a judgment that 
seems to reflect badly on him. 
 
What we need to do, though, Chairperson, is to 
consider whether the best and efficient – or the most 
efficient use of the Commission’s time should not be along 
the following lines.  We received Montana’s affidavit, the 
one he gave to …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   To the court. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  To the courts, which is not taken into 
20 
consideration.  We know what that affidavit will say.  You 
look at the affidavit in your capacity as Chairperson.  We, 
as the legal team, look at it and then if you decide that 
there should be input, oral input on that, we set a time for 
that.  It will obviously have to be limited but that would 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 130 of 178 
 
give Mr Montana every opportunity to clear his name, if 
that is what he wants to do.   
What, 
though, 
we 
need 
to 
be 
concerned, 
Chairperson, is the limited the time we have available.  We 
spent now on this – Mr Montana’s response without 
anybody know what the response is, it is going to take the 
rest of the day. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay.  I take what you are saying to 
be to say is it not better that Mr Montana gets an 
opportunity to say what he wishes to say when we have the 
10 
affidavit and therefore know in advance what he is going to 
say?  That is what you are saying?  That is, I think, 
consistent with what I was thinking.   
 
So I must just say that – you see, as we look at 
these issues where a court has made certain findings and 
has given judgment, one needs to on the one hand bear 
that in mind but on the other hand, bear in mind that 
because of the different functions between the court and 
the Commission and as well as issues which might – for 
the court they might be narrower, for the Commission much 
20 
wider, there may be circumstances where the Commission 
might need to hear more than the court had before it.   
I think of an example that will be – that will 
resonate with you, I think.  You will remember during the 
‘80’s when labour law was in its infancy in this country that 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 131 of 178 
 
when there had been a judgment by the then Supreme 
Court on a matter affecting a dismissal, when the employee 
of a trade union went to the Industrial Court to challenge 
the fairness of the dismissal, usually you would find 
lawyers for the company, for the employer, saying no, but 
the court has decided but what the court would have 
decided is well, the dismissal was lawful or whatever and 
the Industrial Court would look at the question of whether 
the dismissal was fair.  So the Industrial Court could still 
look into the matter.   
10 
So that is what crossed my mind as I think about 
the fact that there may be situations where there is a 
judgment but because it is two different forums with a 
different scope of inquiry it may be that there may be 
circumstances 
where 
the 
Commission 
has 
to 
hear 
something that the court did not hear but one has got to 
bear in mind obviously various things, the time constraints, 
but also the issue of fairness to somebody affected, such 
as Mr Montana especially where he did not get a chance to 
his side, his facts, as he knows them, were excluded. 
20 
So it is something that one may need to tread 
carefully on but it is something that one might need to look 
at with a view to making sure that one, there is fairness 
but there is proper consideration for the time constraints 
that one is working under and then take it from there.  That 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 132 of 178 
 
is what has crossed my mind.  Does what I thought 
resonate with you resonate with you? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  I accept that fully, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But it is not a question of Commission 
not relooking at it as would have been under different 
jurisdictions of legality and unfairness. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  The only point I want to make, 
Chairperson, is we are going to base it on an affidavit that 
10 
is not before us and it would be in the public interest to 
know what was before that court that it did not take into 
account, deliberately, for good or bad reason. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But it did not take into account. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And what Mr Montana is maybe saying 
to you, not saying is, may be different from it and so we 
need to be careful that when we are determining whether 
what Mr Montana would have said in that court might have 
20 
produced a different outcome, one has the necessary facts 
and we do not have that in the absence of Mr Montana’s 
affidavit. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Mr Montana, before you – before we 
move further, let me ask the question.  In your affidavit do 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 133 of 178 
 
you deal with – or no, probably you do not deal with the 
judgment, or do you? 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, in the latest that I have 
provided I have added a paragraph. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   The affidavit that was submitted. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   And for Mr Soni’s information, one of my 
annexures is my affidavit that I tabled there, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   One of your annexures…? 
10 
MR MONTANA:   To my affidavit, it is my affidavit that I 
placed there in the High Court. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, that is – you have given that 
to the legal team or not yet? 
MR MONTANA:   Well, Chair, we – it probably there, we 
have discussed …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Previously? 
MR MONTANA:   Previously. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   But we said we are allocating tomorrow, 
20 
Chair, we are getting it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh, okay, okay. 
MR MONTANA:   So I am hoping that we will deal with the 
issue, Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay.  Well, I will tell you what I am 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 134 of 178 
 
inclined to do.  I am inclined to first see what you have to 
say and maybe it is that affidavit and whatever, whatever, 
before I let you then deal with it.  Is that fine with you? 
MR 
MONTANA: 
 
 
Chair, 
can 
I 
suggest 
a 
different 
approach? 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   The judgment has been read. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   And, you see, the issue has nothing to do 
with me. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   So I am not dealing – my entry into this 
issue has got nothing to do with me. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   There is nothing in this judgment. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   It talks about participants, it does not say 
Mr Montana did that, it infers, we believe, we think 
wrongdoing may have been done by someone and then 
mention property.  Chair, I am not here to defend. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   There is nothing to defend.  I do come to 
the Commission, Chair, I came to assist the Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   To put facts on the table.  The facts 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 135 of 178 
 
mentioned in these judgments are false, firstly. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Secondly, it is not only like Montana’s 
affidavits, all the people that were invited by the courts to 
file affidavits because the court said it is not in the interest 
of justice.  Okay, Chair?   To file – not to be given the 
opportunity to respond and of course I welcomed that 
opportunity, I said here is a court, we have been criticising 
the courts, here is a court, the judges said no but you 
cannot be making these statements, let the people – and I 
10 
responded no in each and every detail, Chair, but I filed a 
very detailed affidavit with annexures to prove that the 
allegations that were made were false.  There were seven 
other people who were asked by the court to say file 
affidavits.  They did the same, Chair.  They were admitted. 
And I want to say boldly here, Chair, it is my 
affidavit and the affidavit of the seven others who were 
admitted, they were admitted because the court has asked 
for it and then just before the hearing starts, in that court 
Werksmans come and say there is no way they can be 
20 
admitted.  Say no, no, when the court took that decision, 
the two main parties, which is Siyangena and PRASA were 
to be – they should have agreed to that decision, now it is 
a court matter, it is the rules of the court that I do not 
know.  I am not challenging that, Chair. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 136 of 178 
 
But the court has invited us and then the court – 
and, Chair, then court then says comes to a determination 
that the judges who were there before who said it is in the 
interest of justice for this people to come, they came back 
and the new judges says no, we should not.   
Chair, I want to say that there is no way the court 
would have arrived at this judgment or penned this 
judgment if they agreed to accept out …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Those affidavits. 
MR MONTANA:   Those affidavits that the court had asked 
10 
us to give.  But, Chair, I think the most - in terms of the 
way forward now, the fair process – because it is not only 
the attachment of that affidavit, it is also what I have 
written on this matter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Actually.  Now I think that irrespective of 
what that affidavit said but I have got an affidavit and we 
have agreed on a process here that if there are issues that 
I should not deal with them as well, I can then refer to 
them and deal with them now because I think, Chair, the – 
20 
you see, the problem that I have and I know that this 
Commission cannot create a platform from which judges 
are attacked and everything. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   I understand the sensitivity. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 137 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   But, Chair, I think that we also want 
robustness.  I will not go and attack judges, I am not – I 
believe myself to be someone who – who go at things 
directly.  I do not have an interest in attacking judges but 
this judgment, Chair, I want to see it and given the – 
before we even agree on the procedure, even elevate some 
of the issues that are here, Chair, you will actually be 
shocked.  The last time you gave us a bit of guidance, 
Chair, and you know one thing, I enjoyed being here the 
10 
last few days, Chair, is that when I am about to respond, 
you engage that judgment and I think that probably ten 
minutes ago I would have said things that really – just what 
you and Mr Soni were trying not to hear. 
 
But, Chair, I will tell you, this judgment, is a rotten 
judgment, I want to say that.  This judgment and the SCA 
judgment actually points …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   But I will – let me say – why do you think 
it is not right that you reserve your comments on the 
judgment until we have seen what we want to see? 
20 
MR MONTANA:   Because I, Chair, …[intervenes] 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, because [inaudible – speaking 
simultaneously] 
MR MONTANA:   No, Chair, I think I will agree with that as 
long as you deal with it at the right time. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 138 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Ja, ja.  No, no, you will get a 
chance, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  And given what I have read, Mr 
Montana, must be given a chance. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, he must be given – I am, myself, 
interested in seeing at least your affidavit.  I may be 
interested to see more of the other affidavits but your 
affidavit because you have said the facts that the court 
was given were not true or did not give the complete 
picture and if it had looked at the affidavits that were 
10 
excluded it may have come to a different conclusion. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair, I said your guidance on this matter, 
I think that is not what I said but there are seven other 
people, Chair.  I think that when you read the judgment, 
you look at what Martha Ngoye and what Werksmans said 
in that issued actually would – it should raise a big issue.  
But, Chair, I will deal with the issues at the right time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   And I want to indicate to this court, Chair, 
these issues have been read as fact are in fact false and 
20 
that is why I was prepared, without that affidavit, to just go 
into the thing to demonstrate to this Commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja. 
MR MONTANA:   And it is why I was asking how would 
honourable judges, how would they do this to us?  You 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 139 of 178 
 
know?  Chair, can I make one point. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Because I have been concerned with it for 
a while.  The judgments on PRASA, all of them, Chair, from 
judgment of Mthimkhulu, the judgment on Siyangena, you 
will actually see, Chair, maybe there is a difference of a 
comma and everything, they are one judgment and, Chair, I 
will elaborate at the right time. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   When once you have seen all of that. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
MR MONTANA:   Because I think that is where the problem 
is. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   And I will speak about this issue, ja, I will 
respect the judges, I promise you, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   But at the same time to tell the truth and 
be honest to ourselves, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no, no, no, that is fine, that is fine.  
20 
So, Mr Soni, you will take charge of the process of 
obtaining the affidavits. 
MR MONTANA:   Of Mr Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja.  Okay, alright.  At least Mr Montana’s 
one. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 140 of 178 
 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:   It may be that – I do not know, I just do 
have a recollection that the court papers in some of these 
PRASA matters go into thousands. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  They do, Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   So I am – so at least maybe the first – 
the start is to get Mr Montana’s one. 
MR MONTANA:   Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:   And then one can take it from there.  
Okay. 
10 
MR MONTANA:   Thank you, Chair. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  But, Mr Montana, you will make your 
available to [indistinct – dropping voice] tomorrow. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja.  I will do that, thank you. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright.  And if there are matters 
when we finish, Mr Montana, if there are matters that either 
the Commission has undertaken to look at, you have asked 
that they be looked at, which by that time it might not have 
looked at or come back to you, just raise them when you 
finish all your evidence, if there are things because I just 
20 
want to make sure that every issue that needs to be looked 
at is looked at.  Ja, okay.  Mr Soni? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Chairperson, then that is the last bit 
of Ms Ngoye’s contribution and I want to deal with Mr 
Oellermann’s report.  
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 141 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV 
VAS 
SONI 
SC: 
 
Which 
appears 
at 
bundle 
8.  
Chairperson, the information on which I want to put – the 
information that I want to put to Mr Montana, consists 
mainly 
of 
documents. 
 
Now 
I 
will 
just 
give 
short 
introductory excursus on what I want to do this afternoon 
in relation to this and Mr Montana know what type of 
questions I am going to ask.   
Chairperson, Mr Oellermann gave evidence on – or 
came and testified on his report and you will recall that he 
10 
dealt with four properties.  The first one is the property 
that Mr Montana owned in Parkwood which he then sold to 
Precise Trade represented by Mr van der Walt.  Then there 
was a property in Waterfall in Pretoria …[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   Waterkloof. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry, Waterkloof. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, Waterkloof, ja.   
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Waterkloof. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  Sorry.  In Pretoria and there was a 
20 
property in Sandringham in Johannesburg and then a fourth 
property in Hurlingham, also in Johannesburg.  Now most 
of the information is based – or most of the report is based 
on documents that Mr Oellermann attaches to his report.  
I just point out two other things, Chairperson.   One 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 142 of 178 
 
is, based on the documents it is quite clear that Mr 
Montana 
did 
sell 
to 
Mr 
Oellermann 
– 
I 
mean 
to 
…[intervenes] 
MR MONTANA:   Van der Walt. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:  To Precise Trade, his property in 
Parkwood and it is also clear, Chairperson, that he 
purchased the property in his own name in Hurlingham. 
 
The other two properties, Mr Montana made some 
enquiries about but those properties, although connected 
to Mr Montana indirectly in the sense that he made 
10 
approaches about them, either in relation to his children’s 
trust or himself, those properties were transferred from the 
owners to Precise Trade.   
 
Now based on that, what I want to do today is just 
to establish the relevant facts as they emerge from the 
documents and Mr Montana can, having regard to what I 
ask, can either say yes, I accept that is what is contained 
in there – obviously it is going to be important, and that’s 
where I would like to spend most of my time is what 
inference 
is 
to 
be 
drawn 
from 
the 
four 
property 
20 
transactions ...[indistinct – dropping voice]. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m okay no that’s fine.  I think because 
we starting a new topic it might be convenient that we take 
a short break. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Indeed Chief Justice. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 143 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let us just take a short break, I want to 
say five minutes, I know five minutes might be good for me 
but I don’t know whether – Mr Montana you said you were 
looking for your jersey and so on. 
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair, five minutes is fine. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Five minutes is fine. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, alright, let’s adjourn for five 
minutes. 
REGISTRAR:   All rise. 
10 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS 
INQUIRY RESUMES 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay, let’s continue.    Your mic. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Sorry Chair.  Mr Montana the first 
issue I would like to look at is the sale of the Parkwood 
property and you will find that relevant facts are set out at 
Bundle HSSAT Pages 34 to 39. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair can I suggest or rather request 
address you firstly on this issue because we go to the 
specific matters. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m, you mean in general? 
MR MONTANA:   No, no, no. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Or this particular property. 
MR MONTANA:   This report, this report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   This report, oh, okay, alright do that. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 144 of 178 
 
MR MONTANA:   Because I think there are two things 
Chair, should this report be before this Commission, I think 
let’s start there, and Chair I think you will see my affidavit 
I deal with all the properties, I am not even getting into 
that, but the Commission Chair should know what in fact he 
is trying to do.  This report it takes the views – it takes the 
positions of other people who make allegations, it is 
compiled by an investigator at the Commission, it is put as 
a report of the Commission.   Now these are untested 
allegations, I am not ...[intervenes]  
10 
CHAIRPERSON:   Let me say this because this might 
certain things might be causing confusion, before you 
proceed, 
okay 
so 
I 
see 
that 
so 
it 
is 
a 
report 
or 
investigator ’s report as opposed to being a report of the 
Commission, so I am just mentioning that so that that 
distinction is made, in other words a member of the 
investigation team assigned to look into certain matters is 
supposed to have conducted investigation and looked at 
documents and he then cuts to certain issues which I might 
accept or reject, so I just want to mention that, then you 
20 
can continue. 
MR MONTANA:   No thanks Chair, I accept that Chair and 
let me start by quoting a judgment, I think it was Judge J 
Davis ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   You see Mr Montana by coming to the 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 145 of 178 
 
Commission you might end up being a de facto lawyer. 
MR MONTANA:   Indeed Chair I think I am having that 
direction Chair, and I think Mr Soni can take me under his 
wing Chair until I also get to the level Chair, thank you 
very much.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   Chair the – Judge Davis in a matter 
involving the SABC raised two important issues, and I just 
want to quote them quickly Chair, he says firstly this is a 
matter that was between the SABC and a former Provincial 
10 
SABC news editor, Mr Charles Matlou.   He took the Joe 
Collier report on the SABC editorial independence, so 
interference 
with 
the 
SABC, 
on 
review 
and 
this 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   What report, I’m sorry? 
MR MONTANA:   This was the Joe Collier, remember Joe 
Collier. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Oh yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   He was appointed to investigate, this 
Commission to investigate the editorial independence of 
20 
the SABC. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, h’m. 
MR MONTANA:   He makes two important points Chair and 
I just want to quickly quote, the first one he says it offends 
one sense of fairness, even an investigator, and I am 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 146 of 178 
 
saying in this case, this Commission, were to only listen to 
the version of the complainant without considering the 
version 
of 
the 
accused 
before 
making 
a 
finding 
or 
recommendation.    
 
He also come and say Chair in the same judgment 
he says and this is very important, and this is my basis for 
looking at this report, he says it is equally worrying when 
an accused person hears for the first time, for the first time 
recommendations which adversely affect him when they are 
already made. 
10 
 
Chair I accept the distinction that you have made 
but this report Chair somebody in the Commission has give 
a – is going to investigate a particular area, to go and 
investigate, what he does if he does an investigation it has 
spoken to everyone that looked at all the statements, 
spoken to all the relevant people and these are my 
preliminary 
views, 
I 
want 
to 
put 
them 
before 
the 
Commission. 
 
Chair it didn’t happen, what has happened here is 
that the Commission’s investigate on PRASA when to take 
20 
allegations that were made by Mr Paul O’Sullivan in the 22 
page affidavit that he put in Brooklyn Police Station and 
the Werksmans Report, and these are now compiled into a 
preliminary report today to the Commission. 
 
Chair 
I 
will 
answer 
questions, 
any 
questions 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 147 of 178 
 
because I agreed to come and testify before you Chair, but 
this report Chair can never be, actually what is first 
because this is an investigator of the Commission, you 
know I listened Chair when this thing was happening, Mr 
Soni asked for clarification, they were clarifying and saying 
Mr Montana bought properties for R36million.   Okay, not 
true Chair, but this report says that, because it takes the 
view, you see these people who manufacture these stories 
about us, they don’t themselves come to the Commission, 
they put them as if their report is in the media thing or 
10 
something and then the Commission elevates – takes that, 
its investigators takes that and then they are channelled 
through the process because O’Sullivan doesn’t come here 
and file an affidavit on his 22 and say I believe that there 
is corruption and I write it here, then it’s a challenge, 
because Chair he says I have taken, I have used bank 
statements, I’ve used other things, I have also  used 
documents that are before Court. 
 
On the very matter we have just completed, it is not 
only the High Court that did not what I said even on these 
20 
things and my version on this issue.  The Commission 
Chair ignored, they touched, they talked about everything, 
and I still make that distinction Chair that you have made I 
just take it and use it, they take these things, they elevate 
it, it is presented before the Commission. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 148 of 178 
 
 
Chair there is no reason, if I look at the litany, I 
wrote to the Commission Chair, you will recall I even went 
to the – I wrote to the Judicial Service Commission, the 
Commission is actually breaking the very terms of that, this 
is one of the issues Chair, that I raised. 
 
Now here is the Commission where there is a 
dispute on even fact, it puts this report, it takes reports 
from other people who are ...[indistinct] they don’t file 
them, then they elevate, the Commission then enters the 
arena, in favour of particular people and then I come to the 
10 
Commission, so the questions I should be answering I am 
going 
to 
answer 
now, 
I 
should 
be 
answering 
those 
Commission during, I should have answered during the 
investigation. 
 
Now I am having a preliminary report on this issue 
okay, where myself and I have checked with other people, 
did they speak to you, the answer is no, Mr Oellerman is 
not here, so if you ask him he was able to say Mr Montana 
bought properties for R36million, okay, which is false, but 
they were presenting it as fact. 
20 
 
I also mentioned something else Chair that the 
Commission went and presented to the Chair that there is 
only report of the Public Protector and all other things 
even about how we deal with court judgments.   This report 
Chair 
the 
Commission 
should 
say 
we 
have 
got 
the 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 149 of 178 
 
information, we want to ask, we want to ask you certain 
questions and then we are also going to deal with it in that.  
This report Chair I think if we were procedurally diligence 
of earnest we deal with the issue that Judge Davis has 
said that it is quite, it is extremely worrying.  This report 
should not be accepted by this Commission, not because it 
contains the lies that it contains, but precisely because the 
process before it was tabled here Chair I should have been 
spoken to, four/five other people should have been spoken 
to, the documents that Mr Oellerman says he places 
10 
reliance on he actually ignored them Chair, Mr Oellerman 
ignored documents on a whole range of fronts on the 
PRASA issue which has put into me into dispute with the 
Commission Chair. 
 
Chair if there was time I would actually put an 
application, maybe it has not been done, applying to you 
Chair to say I am asking for this chap to be fired  because 
he has actually misled the Commission, undermined its 
mandate to reach to the truth. 
 
What he is doing sir he is fighting a battle on behalf 
20 
of particular vested interested in these matters.  Chair you 
remember I mentioned the issue about the NPA and the 
Hawkes, again the PRASA investigating team ignored the 
fact and presented the Commission with the facts that 
PRASA 
was 
fighting 
the 
Hawks 
to 
investigate 
these 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 150 of 178 
 
matters, when we know that the facts are in fact the 
opposite and in my affidavit I have attached a lot of things,    
 
Chair I wrote to the Secretary of the Commission, 
why would this Commission or rather why would the 
investigators in this Commission pursue certain things, 
align themselves with certain people and the facts that I 
put including public statement, including some of them 
under oath like the affidavits they ignored them and they 
want to pursue, so this Chair what we have before you is 
this report, it is basically Mr Paul O’Sullivan taking his 
10 
affidavit, which the police in Brooklyn they are not acted 
upon, which Werksmans says there is actually no support 
evidence for this, Werksmans said about it, but somehow 
they are getting to be investigators at the commission to 
say accept this and do not accept this, so Chair I am 
prepared to answer everything, but I am saying this report 
is not worth the paper it is written on, it should not be 
accepted by this Commission, and I think that in fact if you 
are going to deal with my properties Chair the Commission 
must have investigators to come and speak to me, prepare 
20 
a proper preliminary report, and then the facts are casted 
here. 
 
What we have is these things are elevated, the 
Commission has done work which ...[indistinct] and I am 
supposed to come here and respond to matters that the 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 151 of 178 
 
Commission should have sat with me on the side and then 
start to question me and verify the facts, so this is you are 
actually saying Chair if you accept this report, and I am not 
saying the Chair has accepted, but the fact that it is before 
us you are basically saying the Commission is coming to 
the ring, the people are making accusations, they don’t 
want to box with me, they are now putting Judge Zondo 
and the Commission to box with me, so if I hit them I still 
have people standing behind the Judge.   
 
I think Chair it is not only  unfair but it actually 
10 
fundamentally undermine the terms of reference of this 
Commission, especially cite for the truth Chair and I think 
that this is what has happened, and I take strong exception 
Chair, Mr Soni can continue asking me, but I am urging 
Chair that a report of this nature which is showing so 
partisan this report and if Mr Oellerman was writing this 
report and having his own dreams it is fine Chair, he went 
to take people that I am challenging, some of them have 
said they want to cross-examine me, he has elevated their 
version and it is elevated there, but fortunately I am here 
20 
and fortunately I am glad that you will give me the chance I 
will deal with these issues but this report Chair shouldn’t 
have been, when the country was being told Montana 
bought the R36million properties worth R36million, and m 
family asked me hey you are so loaded Montana, where do 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 152 of 178 
 
you get this money from. 
 
So these are the things that they do Chair, so Chair 
I think that I want to put it, I will answer specific questions 
that Mr Soni wants to ask. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that is fine. 
MR MONTANA:   But I do not expect this report Chair and I 
will never accept it, even tomorrow. 
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no, no Mr Soni will be able to say 
something in response if he wishes to, but what you say Mr 
Montana is you have said that this report is based on Mr 
10 
O’Sullivan’s affidavit so I am keen to see that affidavit and 
then I think you said something else also based on 
something else. 
MR MONTANA:   So in fact it is based on three things, 
which are attached, are part of my attachment that I 
discussed with you.   
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, okay. 
MR MONTANA:   The first one is the 22 page affidavit by 
O’Sullivan, Paul O’Sullivan, the second one is the report of 
Werksmans, the same matter. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   And the third one Chair there is a chap 
who worked for PRASA who worked with Mr Molefe who 
compiled and knowing the chap Chair I can see that he 
wouldn’t write an affidavit of that nature so all of them I 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 153 of 178 
 
have attached them so that the Commission can see all of 
those documents, and I have attached them Chair, I want 
us to have a look at them.  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   No, no that is fine, but also another 
point I wanted to make is one which I think I have made 
before, namely it is good that you came to participate 
because then you can raise these things and say here is 
something that is flawed as far as I am concerned, here is 
my side of the story, and with other people do that the 
Commission has been trying to say come let’s hear, it is to 
10 
afford them exactly this opportunity to say so and so is 
saying these things to me because of A, B, C, D or he is 
basing this on E, F and G you know so that we have the 
full perspective so that in the end obviously one would look 
at really what the evidence reflects, but it is good that you 
are here, you can raise your – raise those matters. 
 
Mr Soni?   
ADV VAS SONI SC:   As you please Chair.   Mr Montana I 
don’t want to enter into a dispute about – with you about 
this, I would rather ask the question.  I just make two 
20 
points, that you do not see a single reference in this report 
to Mr O’Sullivan.  Secondly you will see in reference in this 
report at many levels a Mr van der Walt and payments that 
he made in respect of these properties together with a 
bank account that his partner supplied to the Commission, 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 154 of 178 
 
so for you to say that this is Mr O’Sullivan – I have read Mr 
O’Sullivan’s affidavit or report or whatever it is, I can say 
to you that Mr Loubser ’s affidavit came last year and it was 
the first time that anybody in the country knew how 
payments for the properties were made and that was made, 
that came about because Mr van der Walt  had provided 
two letters to Mr Loubser which are part of Mr Loubser ’s 
affidavit. 
 
I just make that point.  
MR MONTANA:   No, no Chair, no, I think – I will accept 
10 
your guidance that you have given Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   That the Commission will have a look at 
that, I am glad that Mr Soni had seen the letter. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja. 
MR MONTANA:   But you will see there, or rather the 
letters and what they mention Chair, so you will see when 
you 
see 
the 
affidavit, 
the 
affidavits, 
the 
concerned 
affidavits that this has got nothing to do, I have read Mr 
Loubser ’s affidavit and I have read also the affidavit of Mr 
20 
Andre Wagner, which the Commission by the way Chair let 
me mention before we proceed. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m? 
MR MONTANA:   You see Chair the Commission engages 
with someone, Mr Oellerman he goes and interviews 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 155 of 178 
 
somebody, and this is Mr Andre Wagner, the man who is 
involved in a partnership with me through a company called 
Midtown Brace, he files an affidavit, he says this is my 
money, I have a partnership for development of property or 
properties with Mr Montana, okay and he explains, he was 
interviewed, I think he spoke to the Commission, he 
explained and he filed an affidavit Chair, he signed it, this 
affidavit he doesn’t support it in this preliminary report in 
respect of this property – one of the properties we are 
talking about. 
10 
 
What happened?  We saw Sally de Beer, Ms de 
Beer was here, we saw Louis Green who in fact was in my 
view, I subjected ...[indistinct] who was here because he 
contradicted what was said, and Chair, and Chair Mr 
Wagner was not even brought here because he says I don’t 
do tenders with government, I am not involved with PRASA, 
I have got a property deal with Mr Montana, and it is a 
good property deal, okay, and what do they say?   No, no, 
no we don’t need you, because you are not articulating this 
version that we want, so Mr Soni with due respect I hear 
20 
what you are saying, but this report Chair once you have 
seen for yourself the affidavit of Mr Paul O’Sullivan and the 
first affidavit comes from Mr I think he is called Mr 
Philemon Mamaholo, Paka Mamaholo.   
 
Chair the enormous lies but fortunately I am here, I 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 156 of 178 
 
am going to confront the lies Chair and deal with them one 
by one, we are here, but the Commission can’t be – it 
belongs to all of us, it cannot be abused by people, if Mr 
O’Sullivan he will only go to Brooklyn, he must file an 
affidavit here and defend it and make those accusations 
and be open to cross-examination. 
 
Now 
it 
is 
hidden 
under 
the 
Commission’s 
investigator, now what do they do, do they cross-examine 
each other and statements that are made to the nation, a 
preliminary report Chair, a few days it was a full report, 
10 
then we got a thing that is now a preliminary report.  The 
damage that was done now I must come afterwards to 
respond 
to 
lies 
but 
it 
has 
been 
dealt 
with 
at 
the 
Commission in this particular way Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:   H’m. 
MR MONTANA:  Now I am going to leave it at that Chair 
because you have ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   No, no that is fine, yes, yes. 
MR MONTANA:   Let’s go into the issue but the principle of 
it I don’t want  us to be cracks over cracks, put plaster 
20 
over cracks this thing was wrong in a very fundamental 
way, if I say it was unfair it is an understatement Chair. 
 
The conduct of this chap, this investigator by the 
Commission was unlawful Chair and if the Chair had known 
probably a few months ago I would have written and asked 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 157 of 178 
 
for this chap to be fired because now I have been made to 
believe it is the position of the Commission, but now it is 
quite clear that the – here is someone who is going – I 
asked the question, how was this chap appointed, I had to 
ask that question Chair because I have never seen an 
investigator at this Commission who aligns himself with the 
version he wants to put on the table Chair. 
 
Chair the reason why I didn’t come for two years 
here is because I have been fighting to say no, no, no, it 
cannot be done, I said either you deal with the truth or I 
10 
won’t 
come 
and 
testify 
but 
I 
am 
glad 
I 
am 
here 
...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, ja ...[intervenes]  
MR MONTANA:   Maybe we proceed, and I want I think Mr 
Soni should not defend it but should note my view until we 
have now confirmed that with the affidavits that are there. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Ja, no that is fine, I wanted to say 
something about Mr Wagner I think, I don’t remember that 
name but I do recall that on one of the occasions when you 
were appearing here you did refer to a witness and I think 
20 
it was in the context of the property, of the issues of the 
properties that you said as I understood you had deposed 
to an affidavit or had said something that you said were – 
did not accord or support a certain narrative, and I think ou 
said he was not called to give evidence. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 158 of 178 
 
 
Subsequent to hearing you saying that I did ask I 
think I hope I am not mistaken, I did raise it with the legal 
team to say follow up on this, what is Mr Montana is talking 
about, because it may be that sometimes somebody 
expects a certain witness to be called and the witness is 
not called for reason A, but when that person sees that this 
witness is not being he or she thinks it is reason B, you 
know, sometimes there is a good reason but when you 
know there is not communication and discussion it is easy 
to think differently, so I am just saying that when you 
10 
previously mentioned something like that I raised it with 
the legal team to say they must look into that. 
 
Mr Soni did I raise it with you?  
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes no you did Chairperson, I am 
going to address it. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Yes, yes, I do recall that you told me I 
think a certain answer, ja. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes.   Mr Montana can I ask you to 
please look at  - we are still dealing with Bundle H, please 
look at page 198. 
20 
MR MONTANA:   198? 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
MR MONTANA:   I am there. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   So paragraph 24 the report says: 
“One of the directors of Midtown Brace, Mr Andre 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 159 of 178 
 
Wagner, has undertaken to provide an affidavit 
setting out how it came about that the R11.5million 
in respect of the Hurlingham property came about.” 
It is referred to in paragraph 23 and at paragraph 24 the 
report continues: 
“At the time this report was compiled the affidavit 
had not been furnished to the Commission.” 
So that is the answer. 
MR MONTANA:   Ja, I must ...[intervenes]  
CHAIRPERSON:   Well you must read the last sentence as 
10 
well, I think it is important. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Yes. 
“Once it is submitted a decision will be made 
whether to supplement this report.” 
Now Chairperson can I – can I make Mr Andre Wagner ’s 
affidavit available to all of us. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   To understand why no decision was 
made to supplement the report. 
CHAIRPERSON:   Okay. 
20 
ADV VAS SONI SC:   Chairperson this is the affidavit that 
Mr Wagner eventually submitted to the Commission, now 
he deals with the, in paragraph 3 with the Hurlingham 
property, well firstly he says: 
“he is a representative of Midtown Brace, it is a 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 160 of 178 
 
company 
registered 
in 
Botswana 
and 
then 
in 
paragraph 3 dealing with the Hurlingham property h 
he says Mr Riaan van der Walt and I have known 
each other since 1992, we are good friends.  We 
have engaged in joint venture agreements during 
this time, The Elements Golf Estate and property in 
Keurboom Strand.   Riaan van der Walt introduced 
me to M L Montana which presented a property 
development proposal.   I have never met Mr 
Montana prior to this introduction.   The parties 
10 
Midtown Brace and Mr Montana agreed to the terms 
and conditions of such a development and entered 
into an agreement during 2015.  The development 
encountered 
several 
obstacles 
that 
resulted 
in 
delays and redirection of the original development 
and agreement   The company is satisfied with the 
current 
agreements 
in 
place 
to 
secure 
its 
investment.   
To cover the company against any losses we have 
issued summons against Mr Montana and awaiting 
20 
default judgment if he defaults again. 
I further confirm that the full investment amount 
was 
paid 
over 
to 
Mr 
Montana 
totalling 
R11 500 000.” 
Then he deals with Midtown Brace and what its dealings 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 161 of 178 
 
are.  He says Midtown Brace was a shareholder in 
Wetlands Country Retreat, Midtown Brace sold its shares 
in Wetlands to TMM during 2014 as per a sale of share 
agreement and in terms of the shareholders agreement.  
This was my only dealings with Mr Mario Ferreira, the sale 
of share agreement, preparation and receipt of payments 
was handled by Mr Riaan van der Walt through an Investec 
account, you will see two things here does not annex the 
agreements when he refers to agreements his agreement 
with Mr Montana and his agreement with Mr Ferreira that – 
10 
those agreements are not there but what also emerges is 
there was in fact now a legal dispute between him or his firm 
and Mr Montana.   
Now nothing in the report because when I go through 
the Hurlingham property Chairperson you will see that that is 
exactly what he says that mid-town brace aid the R11.5 
million in respect of the property.  This is what Mr Van Der 
Walt said in his letter.  So based on that and I was one of 
the decision makers thought that it was not necessary 
because it does not take the matter any further in relation to 
20 
the report itself and throwing any further light on the 
purchase of the Hurlingham property. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  The – the agreement – well 
the agreements he refers to in 3.1 or 3.2 must be 
agreements. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 162 of 178 
 
ADV SONI SC:  With Mr Van Der Walt. 
CHAIRPERSON:  With Mr Van Der Walt. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes.  It is 3.5 that the agreement with Mr 
Montana. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, okay, alright.  Yes okay.  Mr Montana 
do you – I think Mr – what Mr Soni was doing was just to 
explain why Mr Wagner was not called but the affidavit is 
here.  Do you want to say something on that? 
MR MONTANA:  Yes Chair I want to say two quick things. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MR MONTANA:  In fact this affidavit remember why – why 
are we here?  Why are we discussing these issues?  This 
commission – the commission investigated property.  They 
did not investigate all my properties.  It investigated certain 
properties where allegations of wrongdoing were in.  Okay.  
Now they mentioned four and I am glad it seems you are 
making progress.   
His affidavit okay says no, no, no I am 00:02:55 I am 
not involved in that and that I have entered into a property 
transaction with Mr Montana.  I gave him R11 million – R11.5 
20 
million.  He had to put and advertise by the way for your 
information Chair the agreement I have attached as part of 
my – to my affidavit.   
Now we are looking at properties that Mr Montana all 
properties for R36 million according to this report.  Okay.   
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 163 of 178 
 
Now this affidavit by Mr Wagner he has proved that 
Chair.  It confirms the fact that me and him had a property 
development and he says I knew Riaan Van Der Walt and I 
knew Mario Ferreira there but I have got a transaction with 
Mr Montana and I am not involved in PRASA – I am not 
involved in anything.   
Now when Chair you are – you asking me Mr Soni 
confirmed Montana bought properties from stolen money 
effectively that was being said.  He has an affidavit Chair I 
am not dealing with – I will deal with – we are coming to the 
10 
others.  We are dealing with – here is an affidavit it tells us 
that someone who is involved in farming, in mining get 
involved in a property deal with me – we buy a property 
Chair and I will explain the details of that transaction.  Okay.   
Now by association when they find that ay this guy 
knows somebody else they say no the money for buying this 
thing should come from that side is the relationship that we 
set up to pay Montana corruptly.  And Chair the reason why – 
because you want to hear both sides – you want to hear 
when I am accused that I bought properties.   
20 
But here is the man who is saying to the commission 
I am deposing to an affidavit and I am saying that the 
allegation that I brought I bought a property with Montana as 
part of a corrupt deal.  It is false I am not even involved in 
those – in those kind of transactions.  Chair there is no – the 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 164 of 178 
 
commission interested in the truth there is no way that it will 
invite Ms De Beer and ignore – because the biggest – 
probably one of the biggest pro – monies in that R36million 
comes from Mr Wagner and I wanted the commission to 
pursue and say we want to – who draws Mr Wagner Chair it 
is Mr O’Sullivan okay.   
Now – now today we are told that this thing does not 
add value.  This thing add value.  You know what the value it 
adds Chair it says the narrative about all these properties is 
actually false.  There it is Chair.   
10 
And so – and so Chair I want us to go into detail.  I 
am raising this principle that when the commission says 
there is no need to pursue okay no I want to prove Chair that 
the story about R36 million worth of houses bought by 
Montana is so false it is in the preliminary report and that is 
why I even looked at the accounts Chair what one of the 
things that O’Sullivan did was to provide the accounts and 
you will see that this R36million how that – it does not come 
from anywhere else – it does not come from an independent 
investigation by this commission.   
20 
Someone was trying to extort money from me I 
refused again it is in my affidavit and then they decided to 
go to me and they created a story and I am simply saying 
Chair that – that this affidavit if somebody makes an 
accusation that Montana stole money and bought properties 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 165 of 178 
 
it must also be this affidavit that says no, no, no Montana did 
not steal money he entered into a property development with 
me.  His contribution to that – I mean when you look at this 
report Chair let me read the last – the last thing.   
The last sentence there.  Not the last sentence – the 
one before – the one before where they are mentioning that 
– oh no there it is Chair it says: 
“This man paid R11.5 million and Mr Montana 
did not even pay a cent.  That – that money 
the R2 million was paid by Mr Riaan Van Der 
10 
Walt.” 
Chair it is false.  So here we deal we stand in front of the 
nation some of us who wake up in the early hours of the 
morning to go and work for this country they are then being 
tarnished that we are thieves.  I enter into a property deal I 
put – I sell one of my – one property I put the money into 
another property okay.  This guy if he had – if he had come 
and inves – and interviewed me Chair or he probably the 
other people he would have realised that Montana sold 
property X he did not take that money he paid the bank and I 
20 
instructed Van Der Walt.   
The balance of that money it must go as a deposit 
into that property or pay for that property that is what I will 
demonstrate here today Chair.  So this story about Montana 
being rich, stealing from PRASA and buying R36 million 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 166 of 178 
 
worth of properties and I think we must deal with it and I 
think Mr Soni you said you are going to deal with – you want 
to deal with the facts I want to assist you with the facts.. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  But these things that we have before us it is 
not a fact it is fiction Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Now Mr Soni or Mr Montana in your 
affidavit that is saying that in terms of the annexures is there 
a distinct 
section 
where 
you 
deal 
with the issue of 
properties? 
10 
MR MONTANA:  No, no Chair in great detail. 
CHAIRPERSON:  In great detail. 
MR MONTANA:  I know this is one of the accusations that 
have been made against me in public. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  I would not come to this commission and not 
talk about my properties. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair I deal with each and every property 
how each of – each one of them was funded. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  Precisely because I wanted to put this lie to 
rest for the last time we do not deal with it Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  You know what I am thinking Mr Soni it 
may be convenient that Mr Montana gets questioned on the 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 167 of 178 
 
properties when one has seen what he has to say about each 
of the allegations connected with all his properties because 
without that he might spend – we might spent a lot of time 
because one he is not looking at what he has already written 
and we could take maybe half the time if we were to do it 
that way. 
ADV SONI SC:  No I agree. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.   
MR MONTANA:  Chair I have got – I have got everything I 
have written on this thing it is a… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  If the commission asks me to read them into 
record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  I can do that now Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  No I think I would prefer to read it before 
you give evidence because then… 
MR MONTANA:  Okay Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Then I would be in a position and Mr Soni 
would be in a position too – I would be in a position to say in 
20 
the light of your response the only issues are really ABCD.  
So let us focus on those issues then we do not have to 
spend too much time. 
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson may I augment that and that we 
must do because Mr Montana must be entitled to (inaudible). 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 168 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  One of the purposes of the 10.6 directive 
was to say tell us what you admit and what you do not?  So 
if I am just giving an – that is in addition to what you said 
Chairperson. 
CHAIRPERSON:   A background. 
ADV SONI SC:  It will shorten things a lot more.  If I could 
just take and I am doing it for Mr Montana’s sake at page 34 
if we are – that is of SS18 Bundle H.  Because it says  
MR MONTANA:  34? 
10 
ADV SONI SC:  Page 34.  Paragraph 2 says Mr Montana 
purchased the Parkwood property on the 4t h of July for R1.85 
million.  Mr Montana can say yes or no.  So one then knows 
that when one is dealing with the – and those are just facts. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  I am not asking him to deal with the 
inference. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  Just the facts.  Then we say that in 
paragraph 3 there – there is a – an email from Mr Montana’s 
20 
private banker which says the property is valued at R3.5 
million.   It does not mean he accepts the valuation it merely 
says yes I accept that that is what my client (inaudible).  
Then at paragraph 4 we say Precise Trade and Mr Montana 
entered into a purchase and sale contract whereby the 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 169 of 178 
 
property was sold.  So that would just eliminate all the 
factual disputes and we will get into the real disputes as to 
where did the money come from. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  Mr Montana’s explanation being sought.  So 
it is not amending what you are saying it is augmenting 
Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  So – so for example – I mean you said 
already you have got this story.  You have your – what you 
have to say in your affidavit.  So when one has regard to 
10 
whatever the documents say here and what you have to say 
one ought to be able to say there is no disputes in terms of 
facts on the following issues.  The disputes are only in 
regard to ABCD. 
ADV SONI SC:  Correct. 
CHAIRPERSON:  And… 
ADV SONI SC:  And it will save us plenty of time. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes.  So – ja you want to say something. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair I have accepted your guidance. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, ja.   
20 
MR MONTANA:  But I also do not want because we are going 
to now lose purpose – you see Mr Soni – Chair we must not 
forget what we are dealing with. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Hm. 
MR MONTANA:  The investigators know that the property in 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 170 of 178 
 
Parkwood was bought by me was paid for by me. I do not 
want to go into detail about it.  And – and they are talking 
about an evaluate – they are talking about the valuation 
when I bought the property they are not talking about when I 
bought the – when I sold the property.  Okay.  Now – now 
Chair and I think – I think that – I think that the issue while 
we are discussing the private – the Parkwood property let us 
remember why we are discussing it it is because they are 
saying I sold it for R6.8 million above the valuation.  They 
are not telling you what the valuation – the valuation was – 
10 
they are taking the valuation that I got when I bought the 
property because the bank had to finance me so it did a 
valuation of the property and it says no we can finance it 
because the value of the property it is far above the value of 
the bond you are requesting.   
So the grant – they give me a bond but to – that story 
is created that no Montana he sold it for R6.8 this property is 
worth R3.3 or R4 million okay.  They are not telling you Chair 
that the property was – I am not being asked how did he 
develop this property?  How much did you spend on it and 
20 
everything?   
Chair I have got pictures fortunately I have got 
pictures of this property then and now.  I bought a wreck 
Chair.  The bank financed us because of its location it is far 
above that.  I modernised the property.  What these people 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 171 of 178 
 
want Chair you do not even evaluation – they said they 
heard their neighbour saying this property should be R4. - a 
neighbour who has not even been inside my house he knows 
the value of this property.   
And then Chair they are saying he sold it for R6.8.  
You know what the R6.8 is saying?  So they are saying 
between the R3.3 that the bank evaluated when I bought the 
property and when I sold it they then say it is a bribe from 
Riaan Van Der Walt.  Okay Chair so I do not want us to deal 
with this thing as if – as if… 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  No, no I – that is important.  In the end – 
in the end you are right to say to the extent that this is on 
the basis of suspicion that it is a bribe this is my answer.  It 
is not or it cannot be because of these facts.  So – so we 
must not forget that – that is important. 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair I will keep on reminding the 
commission 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  Respecting progress and I think Mr Soni 
and I agreed. 
20 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  That we must move with speed. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.   
MR MONTANA:  But Chair again Mr Soni when he augment 
he said Regulation 10.6 Chair I do not want to go back.  I 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 172 of 178 
 
have said it on record. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja.  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  Chair and I have said to the commission I 
wrote a – to the commission you as a commission issuing a 
10.6 against me you are going to the Chair to ask for a 
00:16:52 2.6.  You know it is unlawful to ask the chairman to 
do that because I have already agreed – I have already put a 
draft affidavit and so Chair go back my first draft I gave to 
this commission in 2019 – August 2019 I am already writing 
about my properties.   
10 
I never Chair I am not hiding anything.  The 
commission was trying to manipulate things and I said no I 
stick my ground I refused and that is why Chair when he look 
back and I spoke to some people within the commission I 
asked how do you after I have given a draft and make a 
commitment respond to all Rule 3.3 Notices and all the 
allegations that have been made against me why would you 
go and ask the Chair to issue a 10.6?    
And I said we are going to fight because I am not 
going to accept it and actually I know what you guys are – 
20 
because Chair the commission’s legal and investigating 
teams they were trying to impose – and they were trying to 
get certain things that they want for this commission in 
respect of me.  And that I want 00:17:55 Chair was to refuse 
I say we are going to put the total picture so I want to 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 173 of 178 
 
answer these questions okay but I am going to at various 
stops – stages ask the Chair with your permission Chair 
(speaking in vernacular).  
Chair can I come in there because I am giving this 
example Chair if you listen to people like Montana has been 
paid a bribe I want to put before the Chair this property when 
I bought it the wreck it was and the value by the bank – what 
work I did and what was the end product and then ask.   
But if I am told I do not even know which neighbour 
tells Paul O’Sullivan that I bought a property – that this 
10 
property should have been R4.8 the neighbour who cannot 
even develop his own property yet he can – he can provide 
an opinion on the value of my property then this commission 
come and ask me and say no, your property should have 
been R3.3.  Chair it is shocking.  But I leave it at that – 
answer the questions. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  And then Chair as long as you are admit me 
where I feel very strongly on these things. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. No, no that is fine. 
20 
MR MONTANA:  And then you can correct the facts you allow 
me to come in. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  In that respect. 
CHAIRPERSON:  How far – how far are you and the legal 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 174 of 178 
 
team to finalising the annexures for the affidavit? 
MR MONTANA:  No, no tomorrow Chair.  I think we have now 
– we have even identified areas that the commission should 
focus on. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  So Chair I think we are one – I think the 
fight is  gone. 
CHAIRPERSON:  ja. 
MR MONTANA:  We are no longer fighting – I am here. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
10 
MR MONTANA:  I will testify Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
MR MONTANA:  So tomorrow I give them all the evidence. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
MR MONTANA:  And then we move forth on that basis Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The reason I ask Mr Soni you remember 
that – and Mr Montana would remember that I did say 
previously what we will do with the affidavit once it has – it 
is ready it is something we decide – that I will decide then 
because of the time constraints.   
20 
Now if Mr Montana’s assessment that tomorrow 
whatever is left we finalise – should be finalised if that is 
correct then it may be that all we need is that it gets 
finalised tomorrow and then one can look at it with special 
reference to the section relating to the properties and then 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 175 of 178 
 
take it from there.   
It may well be that when his response to the issues of 
properties is looked at is considered it may well be that it 
might be necessary to maybe do some further limited 
investigation of some issues. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I do not know.  Or it may be that it is not 
necessary.  But certainly in relation to properties I – it is 
going to be important that or I hear what he has to say and 
as I say I want to hear when there is something in writing 
10 
and then what one does with the balance of the affidavit 
might also be something to look at.   
If the position is that the section on the properties is 
– has got to be dealt with because that is part of what he 
was asked to respond on but maybe he is not going to get a 
chance to give all the evidence about other matters that has 
– the affidavit it may well be that – you might consider 
whether there should be a separate affidavit that just 
extracts from the – from his affidavit the section that deals 
with properties you know.   
20 
So – so it seems to me that – but let me find out is it 
your understanding too that tomorrow the issue of annexures 
and whatever in regard to his affidavit might be sorted out? 
ADV SONI SC:  Chairperson let me say I have for various 
reasons have not involved myself. 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 176 of 178 
 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja. 
ADV SONI SC:  In dealings with Mr Montana outside the 
commission. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  Ms Gatanga is … 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes do you want to find… 
ADV SONI SC:  Is – they have arranged that already. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. 
ADV SONI SC:  It was supposed to happen on Friday it did 
not.  As I understand it that is the arrangement for tomorrow. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  Oh but in terms of whether it can be 
finalised the process can be finalised tomorrow?  Is she in 
agreement as well? 
ADV SONI SC:  She thinks by Wednesday Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  By Wednesday.  Okay.  In any event that is 
quite close. 
ADV SONI SC:  Quite close. 
CHAIRPERSON:  I think ja.  So I think therefore what we 
should do is not move forward on the issue of properties for 
now. 
20 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please Chair. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Let us get that part sorted out and then 
once I have seen what he has got to say on the properties 
then we can take it from there.  Okay.  Is that fine Mr 
Montana? 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 177 of 178 
 
MR MONTANA:  No Chair I think it is fair I am happy with 
that. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Ja it is fine.  Ja.  I think what – what the 
effect of that arrangement for present purposes is therefore I 
guess that if there are other matters but I think the – you 
know the Oellermann document was the last. 
ADV SONI SC:  It is yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  The one that you wanted – ja so from your 
point of view you have nothing further. 
ADV SONI SC:  No nothing further Chair. 
10 
CHAIRPERSON:  For today. 
ADV SONI SC:  No. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.  And I guess that to the extent that 
Mr Montana has throughout indicated that he deals with 
certain things in his affidavit – in his affidavit we cannot deal 
with those either because the affidavit must still be finalised 
in terms of annexures. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  So that being the case I think it would 
mean we should adjourn on the understanding that soon 
20 
another date will be given maybe another evening and then 
we take it from there.  Is that alright? 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  We are at seventeen minutes 
past four so I think let us adjourn then and then we will 
03 MAY 2021 – DAY 387 
 
Page 178 of 178 
 
arrange a date but the sooner the process of sorting out the 
annexures to his affidavit is finalised the better. 
ADV SONI SC:  Yes. 
CHAIRPERSON:  Okay alright.  I think we adjourn.  Ja.  
Okay we are going to adjourn for the day.  We do not have 
an evening session today.  We were going to probably have 
it if we were continuing with Mr Montana.  Tomorrow for the 
benefit of the public I will be hearing Mr Koko’s evidence in 
regard to Eskom.  Ja.  Okay alright.  We adjourn. 
ADV SONI SC:  As you please Chair. 
10 
REGISTRAR:  All rise. 
INQUIRY ADJOURNS TO 4 MAY 2021 
